development . moreover , vba has not increased the number of payments using these new software products beyond the 10 original claims that it had pilot tested in february 2001 . in addition , it continues to lack an integrated project plan and schedule that incorporate all of the critical areas of this system development activity . further , vba still has not obtained essential support from the field office staff that will be required to use the new software , and requirements for the new software have not yet been validated . these deficiencies are significant , given that the software application that vba developed to assist veterans service representatives in rating benefits claims ( rating board automation 2000 ) did not meet users' needs and achieved less timely claims processing results . at this time , vba also is without a project manager to oversee the project . progress made early in 2000 toward creating a project control board to manage the c&p replacement was curtailed when the project manager departed last april . until vba provides appropriate management and oversight for all aspects of the project's development and implementation , it will not be positioned to ensure that this project will deliver a cost - effective solution with measurable and specific program - related benefits . further , the schedule for implementing the replacement system continues to undergo change , resulting in additional delays . last april , vba had planned to deploy vetsnet in all of its 58 regional offices in july 2002 . however , vba officials have since modified the deployment time frame twice , with its latest proposal being to deploy each of the five applications separately over 2 years , beginning in june 2003 . vba management has not yet approved this latest strategy . last year , the secretary expressed concerns about the vetsnet project and called for an independent audit of the c&p replacement system to facilitate his decision on whether to continue the initiative . accordingly , a contractor was hired in may 2001 to assess ( 1 ) whether the system architecture will be capable of supporting vba's projected future workload , and ( 2 ) whether the system being developed will meet future functional , performance , and security needs . the contractor reported last september that the system architecture would be able to process vba's projected future workload . however , the contractor neither assessed nor reported on whether the system will meet future functional business needs , and the scope of its review did not generate sufficient information to fully evaluate and make an informed decision on whether the project should proceed . the review focused primarily on the system's ability to perform efficiently under a heavy workload , and did not include user acceptance or the functional testing that is needed to ensure that the system can fully satisfy user requirements and that deployed software can be used without significant errors . further , the review did not fully address the security requirements for the new system . va's department - level cio agreed that the scope of the contractor's review had been limited to a technical review of whether vetsnet could handle the anticipated workload .