there are three variants . the f - 35a conventional takeoff and landing ( ctol ) variant will provide air - to - ground attack capabilities to replace the air force's f - 16 fighting falcon and the a - 10 thunderbolt ii aircraft , and will complement the f - 22a raptor . the f - 35b short takeoff and vertical landing ( stovl ) aircraft will be a multi - role strike fighter to replace the marine corps' f / a - 18c / d hornet and av - 8b harrier aircraft . the f - 35c carrier - suitable variant ( cv ) will provide the navy and marine corps a multi - role , stealthy strike aircraft to complement the f / a - 18e / f super hornet . the jsf is dod's largest cooperative program . our international partners are providing about $5.1 billion toward development , and foreign firms are part of the industrial base producing aircraft . dod's funding requirements for the jsf assume economic benefits from partner purchases in reducing unit costs for u.s. aircraft . jsf concept development began in november 1996 with a 5-year competition between contractors to determine the most capable and affordable preliminary aircraft design . lockheed martin won the competition and the jsf program entered system development and demonstration in october 2001 . pratt and whitney is the primary engine manufacturer , while general electric has been developing a potential second source for the engine . system integration efforts and a preliminary design review then revealed significant airframe weight problems impacting key performance requirements . in march 2004 , dod rebaselined the program , adding time and money for development and delaying key milestones . the navy and marine corps also reduced their planned procurement by 409 jets , reducing the total u.s. buy to the current 2,457 quantity . the program was again rebaselined in march 2007 to reflect additional cost increases and schedule slips and the procurement period was extended by 7 years to 2034 with reduction in annual quantities . because of continuing problems and poor outcomes , the secretary of defense announced another comprehensive restructuring of the jsf program in february 2010 . the restructuring followed an extensive department - wide review initiated in 2009 and considered the findings and recommendations from three independent groups chartered to assess the program: the joint estimating team ( jet ) evaluated program execution and resource requirements ; the independent manufacturing review team ( imrt ) assessed contractor capabilities and plans for ramping - up and sustaining production at maximum rates ; and the joint assessment team ( jat ) reviewed engine costs and affordability initiatives . key restructuring actions included adding $2.8 billion for development , extending flight testing by 13 months , adding flight test resources ( one new test jet and use of 3 production jets ) , reduced near - term procurement by 122 aircraft , and review of the military services' capability need dates .