system categorization . different methodologies are used to categorize the impact level of the information contained in non - national security systems and national security systems . for non - national security systems , sp 800- 53 applies the concept of a high - water mark for categorizing the impact level of the system , as defined in fips 199 . this means that the system is categorized according to the worst - case potential impact of a loss of confidentiality , integrity , or availability of information or an information system . for example , if loss of confidentiality was deemed to be high impact , but loss of integrity and availability were deemed to be moderate impact , the system would be considered a high - impact system . as a result , sp 800-53 contains three recommended baselines ( starting points ) for control selection — low , moderate , and high . by contrast , while national security systems will use the controls in sp 800-53 , the impact level will be determined using cnssi - 1253 , not fips 199 . cnssi - 1253 uses a more granular structure in which the potential impact levels of loss of confidentiality , integrity , and availability are individually used to select categorizations . for non - national security systems , omb requires that nist guidance be implemented within 1 year of its publication . the civilian community has been using previous versions of sp 800-53 since february 2005 ; thus many of the controls have already been available for use for non - national security systems . however , while plans for implementing the harmonized information system guidance within dod and the intelligence community have begun , full implementation may take years to complete . while dod officials have stated that the concepts and content in the harmonized security guidance are similar to those in existing dod directives and instructions , the implementation process will require substantial time and effort . officials said that transitioning to the new security controls will require in - depth planning and additional resources , implementation will be incremental , and it will take a number of years to complete . for example , systems that are currently in development may be transitioned to the harmonized guidance , while systems that are already deployed may be transitioned only if the system undergoes a major change before its next scheduled security evaluation or review . in order for dod to transition to the new harmonized guidance , it plans to first revise its existing 8500 series of guidance . this process includes upcoming revisions to the information security policy documented in its directive 8500.01 and instruction 8500.2 , the certification and accreditation process contained in dod 8510.01 , as well as various additional instructions and guidance . the first major step is to release the revised dod 8500.01 and 8500.2 , based on the harmonized joint task force guidance . as seen in table 2 , the estimated release date for these revisions is december 2010 . after this occurs , dod plans to develop additional implementation and assessment guidance , technical instructions , and other information .