incentives . the fraud risk framework discusses creating incentives to help ensure effective implementation of the antifraud strategy once it is developed . currently , some incentives within stakeholder relationships may complicate cms's antifraud efforts . among contractors , cms encourages information sharing through conferences and workshops ; however , competition for cms business among contractors can be a disincentive to information sharing . cms officials acknowledged this concern and said that they expect contractors to share information related to fraud schemes , outcomes of investigations , and tips for addressing fraud , but not proprietary information such as algorithms to risk - score providers . without developing and documenting an antifraud strategy based on a fraud risk assessment , as called for in the design and implement component of the fraud risk framework , cms cannot ensure that it has a coordinated approach to address the range of fraud risks and to appropriately target and allocate resources for the most - significant risks . considering fraud risks to which medicare is most vulnerable , in light of the malicious intent of those who aim to exploit the programs , would help cms to examine its current control activities and potentially design new ones with recognition of fraudulent behavior it aims to prevent . this focus on fraud is distinct from a broader view of program integrity and improper payments by considering the intentions and incentives of those who aim to deceive rather than well - intentioned providers who make mistakes . also , continued growth of the program , such as growth of medicare part c , calls for consideration of preventive fraud control activities across the entire network of entities involved . furthermore , considering the large size and complexity of medicare and the extensive stakeholder network involved in managing fraud in the program , a strategic approach to managing fraud risks within the programs is essential to ensure that a number of existing control activities and numerous stakeholder relationships and incentives are being aligned to produce desired results . once developed , an antifraud strategy that is clearly articulated to various cms stakeholders would help cms to address fraud risks in a more coordinated and deliberate fashion . thinking strategically about existing control activities , resources , tools , and information systems could help cms to leverage resources while continuing to integrate medicare program - integrity efforts along functional lines . a strategic approach grounded in a comprehensive assessment of fraud risks could also help cms to identify future enhancements for existing control activities , such as new preventive capabilities for its fraud prevention system ( fps ) or additional fraud factors in provider enrollment and revalidation , such as provider risk - scoring , to stay in step with evolving fraud risks . cms has established monitoring and evaluation mechanisms that could inform a risk - based antifraud strategy for medicare the evaluate and adapt component of the fraud risk framework calls for federal managers to evaluate outcomes using a risk - based approach and adapt activities to improve fraud risk management . furthermore , according to federal internal control standards , managers should establish and operate monitoring activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results , which may be compared against an established baseline .