( see fig . based on a review of studies , va established a baseline panel size of 1,200 patients at any given time for a full - time primary care physician provider . the primary care services office adjusts the baseline panel size for each facility based on a model va officials said they developed in 2003 that uses data reported by facilities — including data on the number of fte providers , support staff , and exam rooms — and projections on the average number of primary care visits . these projections are based on patient characteristics , such as the proportion of patients with chronic conditions . va refers to the adjusted baseline for each facility as the “modeled panel size,” which in fiscal year 2014 ranged from 1,140 to 1,338 across va's facilities . va generally updates the modeled panel size annually for each facility . va's handbook on primary care management requires that facilities record and report primary care data using the primary care management module ( pcmm ) software . these data include the number of patients , fte providers , support staff , and exam rooms , and the reported and modeled panel size . each facility maintains its own pcmm software and is required to update its panel size data on an ongoing basis in pcmm , which electronically reports facilities' data to a separate national database maintained by the veterans support service center . this national database allows the primary care operations office and va's networks to review the data . an encounter is a professional contact between a patient and a provider who has the primary responsibility for diagnosing , evaluating , and treating the patient's condition . in addition to individual office visits , there are other types of encounters , such as telephone visits and group visits . each facility identifies and tracks all of its expenditures associated with primary care encounters . facilities transmit their encounter and expenditure data using the decision support system , which is maintained by the office of finance . this office is responsible for collecting and maintaining financial information for va's cost accounting — which identifies and assesses the costs of programs at the national , network , and facility levels — and for budgetary purposes . we found that va lacks reliable data on primary care panel sizes across its facilities because the data that facilities record and report to va central office and networks are sometimes inaccurate . because reliable reported panel sizes were not available for all facilities , we calculated actual panel sizes at six of seven selected facilities and compared them to each facility's modeled panel size for fiscal year 2014 . our analysis is not generalizable beyond the facilities we reviewed . in addition , we assessed oversight activities across the networks we reviewed and for va central office in the context of federal internal control standards for control environment , information and communication , and monitoring . while va planned to address some of the data reliability issues through new software to help va facilities record data more accurately , development of this software is currently on hold , and va could not provide any estimates of when the software would be implemented at its facilities .