dhs concurred with our recommendation . in september 2010 , we reported that the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) was simultaneously engaged in the research and development phase while planning for the acquisition phase of its cargo advanced automated radiography system to detect certain nuclear materials in vehicles and containers at ports . dndo pursued the deployment of the cargo advanced automated radiography system without fully understanding the physical requirements of incorporating the system in existing inspection lanes at ports of entry . we reported that this occurred because , during the first year or more of the program , dndo and cbp had few discussions about operating requirements for primary inspection lanes at ports of entry . dhs spent $113 million on the program since 2005 and canceled the development phase of the program in 2007 . in may 2010 , we reported that not all of the secure border initiative network ( sbinet ) operational requirements that pertain to block 1 were achievable , verifiable , unambiguous , and complete . for example , a november 2007 dhs assessment found problems with 19 operational requirements , which form the basis for the lower - level requirements used to design and build the system . as a result , we recommended that the block 1 requirements , including key performance parameters , be independently validated as complete , verifiable , and affordable and any limitations found in the requirements be addressed . dhs agreed with these recommendations and cbp program officials told us that they recognized the difficulties they experienced with requirements development practices with the sbinet program . in january 2011 , the secretary of homeland security announced her decision to end the program as originally conceived because it did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards . in october 2009 , we reported that tsa passenger screening checkpoint technologies were delayed because tsa had not consistently communicated clear requirements for testing the technologies . we recommended that tsa evaluate whether current passenger screening procedures should be revised to require the use of appropriate screening procedures until tsa determined that existing emerging technologies meet its functional requirements in an operational environment . tsa agreed with this recommendation and reported taking actions to address it . our prior work has also identified that failure to resolve problems discovered during testing can sometimes lead to costly redesign and rework at a later date and that addressing such problems during the testing and evaluation phase before moving to the acquisition phase can help agencies avoid future cost overruns . specifically: in march 2011 , we reported that the independent testing and evaluation of sbinet's block 1 capability to determine its operational effectiveness and suitability was not complete at the time dhs reached its decision regarding the future of sbinet or requested fiscal year 2012 funding to deploy the new alternative ( southwest ) border technology . the remaining edss are configured to detect explosives at 1998 levels . when tsa established the 2005 requirements , it did not have a plan with the appropriate time frames needed to deploy edss to meet the requirements .