income individuals . nemt programs and ride scheduling procedures vary from state to state . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the administrator of fta , the secretaries of the department of transportation , hhs , va , and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . medicaid programs , which are administered by each state subject to the oversight of cms , are required to assure that program beneficiaries — such as low - income children , people with disabilities , and older adults , among others — have access to necessary medicaid providers when the beneficiaries cannot transport themselves to these providers . under federal regulations , va also provides transportation to medical services for those veterans who have service connected injuries or disabilities and meet certain eligibility criteria . our past work on transportation - disadvantaged populations has found that federal coordination has the potential to reduce federal transportation program costs by clustering passengers ; using fewer one - way trips ; and sharing the use of personnel , equipment , and facilities . federal efforts to coordinate transportation for the disadvantaged , including older adults , began in 1986 when dot and hhs formed what is now known as the coordinating council . the coordinating council is chaired by the secretary of transportation and is charged with improving the efficiency and effectiveness of human service transportation by coordinating related programs at the federal level and promoting the maximum feasible coordination at the state and local levels . in 2003 , the coordinating council launched the “united we ride” initiative to act as a forum for interagency communication and to help states and communities overcome obstacles to coordination . the coordinating council's actions have included issuing publications such as policy statements and progress reports on efforts taken . however , our june 2012 report on transportation - disadvantaged populations concluded that insufficient federal leadership and a lack of guidance for furthering collaborative efforts might hinder coordination efforts among state and local providers . to promote and enhance federal coordination efforts , we therefore recommended in 2012 that the secretary of transportation , as the chair of the coordinating council , along with the council's 11 member agencies , should meet and complete and publish a strategic plan outlining agency roles and responsibilities and articulate a strategy to help strengthen interagency collaboration and communication . in response to our recommendations , the coordinating council's member agencies issued a strategic plan for 2011 to 2013 , which established agency roles and responsibilities and identified a shared strategy to reinforce cooperation . our prior work has shown that coordination can lead to improved quality and cost - effectiveness of transportation - disadvantaged services . in addition , we have previously identified key features and issues to consider when federal agencies collaborate and implement collaborative mechanisms , such as an interagency group or council . these key features include defining outcomes ; monitoring progress to show accountability ; establishing clear leadership ; and determining key resources , such as funding .