gao - 13-296 . washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2013 . i lists the ci sectors and their ssas ) . ppd - 21 directs dhs to , among other things , coordinate the overall federal effort to promote the security and resilience of the nation's critical infrastructure . ppd - 21 also recognizes that dhs , in carrying out its responsibilities under the homeland security act , evaluates national capabilities , opportunities , and challenges in protecting critical infrastructure ; analyzes threats to , vulnerabilities of , and potential consequences from all hazards on critical infrastructure ; identifies security and resilience functions that are necessary for effective public - private engagement with all critical infrastructure sectors ; and integrates and coordinates federal cross - sector security and resilience activities and identify and analyze key interdependencies among critical infrastructure sectors . within dhs , nppd's ip is responsible for various activities intended to enhance ci protection and resilience across a number of sectors . while other entities may possess and exercise regulatory authority over ci to address security , such as for the chemical , transportation , and nuclear sectors , ip generally relies on voluntary efforts to secure ci because , in general , dhs has limited authority to directly regulate ci . in carrying out its responsibilities , ip leads and coordinates national programs and policies on critical infrastructure issues and , among other things , conducts and facilitates security surveys and vulnerability assessments to help ci owners and operators and state , local , tribal , and territorial partners understand and address risks . in so doing , ip is responsible for working with public and private sector ci partners in the 16 sectors and leads the coordinated national effort to mitigate risk to the nation's ci through the development and implementation of ci protection and resilience programs . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , the under secretary for the national protection programs directorate , and interested congressional committees . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or caldwells@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix provides information on the 16 critical infrastructure ( ci ) sectors and the federal agencies responsible for sector security . the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) outlines the roles and responsibilities of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and its partners — including other federal agencies . within the nipp framework , dhs is responsible for leading and coordinating the overall national effort to enhance protection via 16 critical infrastructure sectors . the nipp and presidential decision directive / ppd - 21 assign responsibility for critical infrastructure sectors to sector - specific agencies ( ssa ) . as an ssa , dhs has direct responsibility for leading , integrating , and coordinating efforts of sector partners to protect 10 of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors .