we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment . ( see table 1. ) the five data sources do not provide nationally representative information on hais in ascs . in order to provide a basis for a nationwide estimate of risks of hais in ascs , a data source would need to collect its data from a nationally representative random sample . a key feature of nhsn is that it collects clinically sophisticated and standardized data on hai outcomes . facilities that participate in nhsn , including ascs , agree to collect and submit information on hai outcomes , such as ssis , according to defined protocols and standardized definitions . cdc developed detailed protocols for nhsn that specify the medical record and laboratory data needed to identify and categorize hais in accordance with cdc's standardized definitions . these protocols are widely accepted by infection control professionals because they make the data in nhsn clinically relevant and comparable across the facilities submitting data to nhsn . cms and cdc officials reported that they intended to separately analyze the results of the pilot study , each agency having a different focus . because nhsn uses voluntary and mandatory selection procedures , the selection of ascs for participation in nhsn is nonrandom . this lack of random selection precludes a projection of its results to any ascs that do not participate and generalization to the national population of ascs . the asc pilot study examined the potential for using cms's standard surveys to collect information on ascs' implementation of specific infection control practices . under the pilot study , cms modified the standard survey process by introducing two innovations — the incorporation of a cdc - developed infection control assessment tool and direct observation by the surveyor of a single patient's care from start to finish of the patient's stay . cdc officials also provided training for state surveyors on using the tool and developed plans to analyze the infection control data obtained with the tool . a cms official told us that cms would consider making changes to cms's standard survey process for ascs after reviewing planned cms and cdc analyses of the pilot study results . the surveys conducted under the pilot study collected more detailed information on practices that affect the risk of hais in ascs than have previous surveys of ascs . cms's current survey process requires surveyors to ascertain whether an asc's written policies and procedures address certain general topics pertaining to infection control . none of the five data sources does so , and therefore it is not possible to generalize from their results to the nationwide population of ascs or patients that they treat . consequently , each of these data sources provides information only about the facilities that actually submit data to it and cannot reliably be used to describe other facilities . in terms of their coverage across ascs , each of these data sources collects information on hais from a relatively small proportion of the 5,100 ascs in the united states . the coverage ranges from the 26 ascs that most recently reported data to the state of missouri to about 650 ascs reporting to the ambulatory surgery center association's database .