in addition to the contact named above , mark a . little , assistant director ; vijaykumar barnabas ; susan ditto ; jason jackson ; arthur james ; richard johnson ; oscar mardis ; patricia mcclure ; jacqueline snead mccoll ; anthony paras ; charles perdue ; and karen thornton made major contributions to this report . this delay could increase the costs and time to respond . other organizations expressed similar concerns about the exemptions preempting federal or state authority . the opponents also noted that the exemptions were not needed , as rcra contains national security provisions allowing the president to exempt dod facilities from any statutory or regulatory authority on a case - by - case basis . however , dod has not invoked this case - by - case exemption for training or readiness - related activities . copies will be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . dod officials said the department is concerned that the firing of munitions on operational ranges could be considered a “release” under cercla , which could then trigger cercla requirements that would require removal or remedial actions on operational ranges . however , dod officials could not provide any examples of when this had actually occurred . on the contrary , dod officials told us that epa and the states generally do not seek to regulate the use of munitions on operational ranges under rcra or cercla . cognizant epa officials also told us that epa generally did not impose regulatory requirements on operational ranges . further , epa , in written comments to the office of management and budget on dod's 2004 legislative proposals for the national defense authorization act , stated that it had been judicious in the use of the various authorities it has over operational ranges . opponents from states and ngos such as cpeo , nrdc , and peer , have similar concerns with dod's proposed exemption from cercla as they do with the rcra exemption discussed previously . they contend that granting dod the exemptions could weaken federal and state oversight and may delay any remediation action . they also note that the proposed exemption is not needed , as cercla contains a case - by - case exemption , which has not been invoked by dod . in addition , similar concerns were expressed by epa in its written comments to the office of management and budget on dod's 2004 legislative proposals for the national defense authorization act . because dod has not provided any specific examples to support assertions that its training activities have been hindered by the requirements of the clean air act , rcra , or cercla , congress lacks a sound basis for assessing the need to enact these three remaining exemptions . also , dod has not demonstrated that it considered any other options that could provide the benefits it desires . nor has the department provided any data related to the expected costs and risks — financial , environmental , or otherwise — of the proposed exemptions .