fema . fema is responsible for operating , maintaining , and administering access to ipaws , including managing the application process . as discussed earlier , public safety agencies that wish to use ipaws must apply to fema to become approved alerting authorities . fema , in consultation and coordination with fcc , must carry out various actions to modernize and implement ipaws . for example , fema must ensure ipaws can send alerts to a specific geographic location and to multiple communications systems and technologies , educate government users of ipaws and provide training opportunities to them , and conduct nationwide tests of ipaws , among other things . legislation was enacted that expands fema's responsibilities for ipaws . fcc . fcc creates the rules for eas and wea , the two primary alerting pathways authorities use to send public alerts through ipaws . fcc establishes the technical standards , procedures , and testing protocols for eas participants . fcc also manages an online system used to collect and analyze results of nationwide eas tests . fcc establishes technical requirements participating wireless carriers must follow for delivering wea messages to wea - capable mobile devices . federal alerting authorities . authorized federal alerting authorities may create alerts and use ipaws to send alerts to the public . for example , the national weather service ( nws ) , within noaa , uses software nws developed to issue weas for severe weather risks such as flash floods and tornadoes . usgs intends to send earthquake - related alerts through ipaws but as of september 2019 , had yet to send such an alert through ipaws . usgs has partnered with washington , oregon , and california to test and implement a west coast earthquake early warning system called “shakealert” that is intended to send wea messages to mobile devices several seconds after the initiation of an earthquake . state , territorial , tribal , and local alerting authorities . according to fema policy , state , territorial , tribal , and local government agencies first complete fema's application process to gain access to ipaws and obtain the proper authorization to issue alerts for specific geographic jurisdictions . as discussed earlier , government agencies that issue alerts through ipaws can include emergency management or law enforcement agencies at the state , county , or city government level . non - governmental organizations such as a local emergency management association may be granted an authority to issue alerts through ipaws with approval from fema or an alerting authority . for information on fema's ipaws application process , see figure 2 below . industry . industry develops and owns the infrastructure that enables alerts to be created , authenticated , and delivered to the public . alerting software companies provide software tools that allow alerting authorities to create and send alert messages via the internet to ipaws . alerting software companies also provide “opt - in” or subscription - based alerting services to public safety agencies that allow the public to sign up to receive alerts . eas participants that transmit eas messages include radio and television broadcasters , cable operators , wireline video service providers , satellite radio providers , and direct broadcast satellite providers .