pub . 113-76 , 128 stat . exempt from federal taxes on income from puerto rico sources.differences contribute to puerto rico and its residents receiving fewer federal payments , and paying less in federal tax , than residents of the states on a per capita basis , as shown in figure 1 . historically , trends in puerto rico's economy have tended to follow those in the rest of united states . however , puerto rico's latest economic downturn has been longer and more extreme than the mainland u.s. downturn . specifically , the u.s. economy entered into a recession in december 2007 , which ended in june 2009 , according to the business cycle dating committee of the national bureau of economic research . in contrast , puerto rico's recession began in the fourth quarter of 2006 , and the economy contracted every fiscal year from 2007 to 2011 . after growth of 0.1 percent in fiscal year 2012 , the economy is projected to have contracted in fiscal year 2013 by 0.4 percent , according to the government development bank for puerto rico . recently , puerto rico's government has faced various fiscal challenges , including an imbalance between its general fund revenues and expenditures . in fiscal year 2009 , puerto rico's fiscal deficit reached a high of $2.9 billion — based on $7.8 billion in revenues and $10.7 billion of expenditures . persistent deficits have resulted in an increase in puerto rico's public debt , which represents a much larger share of personal income than in any of the states . in february 2014 , puerto rico's general obligation bonds were downgraded to speculative — noninvestment — grade by three ratings agencies . recently , puerto rico has taken steps to improve its fiscal position . beginning in 2007 , puerto rico began to reduce the size of its government workforce . for example , between 2007 and 2009 , government employment declined almost 10 percent . however , as of july 2012 , government employment still accounted for a larger share of overall employment in puerto rico when compared to the states ( although , government employment as a share of the population older than 15 in puerto rico was similar to that in the states ) . in 2009 , a fiscal stabilization plan was put into effect that reduced government spending and increased tax revenues . in april 2013 , puerto rico enacted comprehensive reform of its largest public employee retirement system , which is funded primarily with budget appropriations from the government's general fund . the reform was intended to address the retirement system's deteriorating solvency . through measures like these , puerto rico has reduced its annual deficits . however , the fiscal year 2013 deficit was approximately $1.3 billion , based on projected expenditures of approximately $10 billion . as the government development bank for puerto rico notes in its financial information and operating data report from october 2013 , puerto rico's ability to continue to reduce its deficit will depend in part on its ability to continue increasing revenues and reducing expenditures , which in turn depends on a number of factors , including improvements in economic conditions .