our work is preliminary . however , according to our analysis of coast guard records and statements from officials , the coast guard seems to have conducted facility compliance exams annually at most — but not all — facilities . redirection of staff to a higher - priority mission , such as hurricane katrina emergency operations , may have accounted for some facilities not having received an annual exam . for the purposes of its analysis , cbo assumed that the cost of acquiring , installing , and maintaining systems necessary to comply with the 100 percent scanning requirement would be borne by foreign ports to maintain trade with the united states . however , foreign government officials we have spoken to expressed concerns regarding the cost of equipment . they also stated that the process for procuring scanning equipment may take years and can be difficult when trying to comply with changing u.s. requirements . these officials also expressed concern regarding the cost of additional personnel necessary to ( 1 ) operate new scanning equipment , ( 2 ) view scanned images and transmit them to the united states , and ( 3 ) resolve false alarms . an official from one country with whom we met told us that while his country does not scan 100 percent of exports , modernizing its customs service to focus more on exports required a 50 percent increase in personnel , and other countries trying to implement the 100 percent scanning requirement would likely have to increase the size of their customs administrations by at least as much . use and ownership of data have not been determined . the 9 / 11 act does not specify who will be responsible for managing the data collected through 100 percent scanning of u.s. - bound containers at foreign seaports . however , the safe port act specifies that scanning equipment outputs from sfi will be available for review by u.s. government officials either at the foreign seaport or in the united states . it is not clear who would be responsible for collecting , maintaining , disseminating , viewing or analyzing scanning equipment outputs under the new requirement . other questions to be resolved include ownership of data , how proprietary information would be treated , and how privacy concerns would be addressed . cbp officials have indicated they are aware that challenges exist . they also stated that the sfi will allow the agency to determine whether these challenges can be overcome . according to senior officials from cbp and international organizations we contacted , 100 percent scanning of containers may divert resources , causing containers that are truly high risk to not receive adequate scrutiny due to the sheer volume of scanning outputs that must be analyzed . these officials also expressed concerns that 100 percent scanning of u.s. - bound containers could hinder trade , leading to long lines and burdens on staff responsible for viewing images . however , given that the sfi pilot program has only recently begun , it is too soon to determine how the 100 percent scanning requirement will be implemented and its overall impact on security . we provided a draft of the information in this testimony to dhs .