gao - 12-937 . rus lacked adequate controls to ensure the reliability of the data . usda's oig recommended that rus revise the bcas guidance for awardees and staff and provide detailed and clear instructions on the entry and review of bip performance data in bcas . in response to this recommendation , according to a senior rus official and usda oig officials , rus is developing guidance and anticipates this corrective action will be implemented in june 2014 . this could improve the reliability of subsequent reports . in addition , rus does not track subscribership by rural area and , as a result , is not able to show the impact of the bip program on rural broadband availability . the oig previously found that rus's performance information makes it impossible to measure bip's impact in rural areas because the information was not collected by rural area . the recovery act required that bip service areas be at least 75 percent rural without sufficient access to high - speed broadband service to facilitate economic development . the rest of the project area may not be rural . according to a rus official , very little of projects' service areas were non - rural . despite this , bip awardees may potentially attract subscribers disproportionately in the non - rural areas of the service area . therefore , bip's subscribership measures do not indicate the extent to which recovery act funding was used to deploy broadband access in rural areas . to address this gap , oig recommended that rus report performance data that directly measure the impact of each award on the expansion of broadband service in rural areas . in its response to oig , rus reported it that cannot report this level of detailed information because it was not specified that way in rus's agreements with its awardees . rus further indicated that since bip is a one - time program , it does not believe using taxpayers' funding to make substantial changes to its reporting system in order to collect subscribership information in rural areas would be appropriate . in response , usda's oig accepted rus's management decision . in addition , usda has missed opportunities to report on bip's impact . this appropriation represented an unprecedented level of federal investment in expanding broadband . the $7.2 billion included $2.5 billion for the broadband initiatives program ( bip ) of the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) rural utilities service ( rus ) , to provide loans , grants , and loan and grant combinations for broadband infrastructure projects primarily in rural areas . in 2010 , rus awarded over $3.5 billion to awardees for 320 bip projects , primarily for projects expected to provide broadband service directly to end users in rural areas , including critical community facilities such as hospitals , libraries , and schools . this review responds to your request that we assess the results and impact of bip to assist congress in its ongoing oversight of recovery act broadband programs . this report also builds on our previous work on bip .