we disagree . our review found that military service level portfolio reviews , including air force and navy reviews closely linked to their budget processes , did not always contain key portfolio review elements or were not consistently conducted . we continue to believe that updating or developing policies to require the services to conduct annual portfolio reviews incorporating information from the requirements , acquisition , and budget processes would help ensure the services conduct regular , integrated reviews , which in turn should yield benefits , such as prioritizing the most important investments and selecting the optimum investment mix . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . our objectives were to assess the extent to which ( 1 ) the department of defense ( dod ) uses portfolio management to optimize its weapon system investments , ( 2 ) dod conducts integrated portfolio reviews at the enterprise level to optimize their weapon system investments , and ( 3 ) the military services conduct integrated portfolio reviews to optimize their weapon system investments and their experiences offer potential lessons for dod . to address our first objective , we reviewed commercial portfolio management best practices from gao - 07-388 best practices: an integrated portfolio management approach to weapon system investments could improve dod's acquisition outcomes and reviewed portfolio management - related literature from peer reviewed journals , books , and trade publications to determine which , if any , additional practices should be added . based on this review , we determined that no changes to the previously identified practices were needed . we compared these best practices with dod's weapon system investment processes , which include the requirements , acquisition , and budget processes . we analyzed relevant dod policies and statutes , including: dod's portfolio management policy , dod directive 7045.20 capability portfolio management ; requirements policies , including chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3170.01i joint capabilities integration and development system and the manual for the operation of the joint capabilities integration and development system ; acquisition policies , including dod directive 5000.01 the defense acquisition system and dod instruction 5000.02 operation of the defense acquisition system ; the budget policy , dod directive 7045.14 the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution ( ppbe ) process ; and relevant sections of title 10 of the united states code .