the concentration measures that we used are imperfect . on the one h we used the number of sellers at the city terminal , a measure of concentration at the city level that does not measure market share , only market participation . there were seven mergers that met these criteria . we used data from ihs herold and the oil price information service ( opis ) to id these mergers and then had ftc review the list . in addition to the impact of mergers and market concentratio includes other important variables that may influence the price of gasoline . volume of inventory of gasoline relative to the volume of sales of gaso this could affect the availability of gasoline at the wholesale level and hence affect prices . note that because we have time dummies control for crude oil because these variables would be co dummies . i , have been shown to be endogenous , so we tested for en squares when appropriate , using merger events and economic activity as instruments . it is also possibl events themselves were endogenous , but in our wor exogenous or predetermined , primarily because we to provide instruments for the seven separate merge dogeneity and used two - stage least other measures of e that the merger k , we treated them had insufficient da rs . we estimated the model with inventory - sales ratio utilization rate as endogenous . in general , our results for the effect of market concentration and mergers were not substantively aff y whether these were treated as exogenous or endogenous . some of our results for the inventory positive relationship with respect to price , an outcome that was contrary to our expectations . it is possible that either the inventory - sales ratio is misspecified in our model or there may be a complex dynamic relationshi that describes how inventories affect prices and vice versa , conditions could negate the direction of this relationship . - sales ratio showed a significant we estimated separate models for unbranded prices and branded prices . our gasoline data were selected so as to ge nerally reflect the type of asoline that would be sold in a city , given the local fuel regulations . in g most cases we were able to assign prices accordingly , but in some cases other types of fuel were used in the data . in our regression models , we control for whatever fuel type we did use . we used monthly data for prices and most of our control variables . state - level personal income data were available only quarterly and were app to the appropriate months for that quarter . the inventory - sales ratio and capacity utilization rate were at the padd level , so we assigned the data observation according to which padd the city was located in . similarly , we used state - level data for personal income growth , employment growth , and the unemployment rate , and we assigned the data observations according to the state in which the city was located . our analysis was performed at the city level , but some of our data were available only at more aggregated geographic levels .