issued for children . we excluded claimants younger than 18 at the date of the initial application . we also excluded claimants with missing or invalid age values . from fiscal years 2007 through 2015 , 492,158 claims ( 8 percent of all claims ) were for people under 18 or with missing or invalid age values . we excluded child cases from our analysis because they involve different evaluation criteria . regional chief judges we spoke with generally found “how mi doing ? ” to be a helpful tool , although ssa does not track judges' usage and has not formally evaluated its effectiveness . in addition , ssa established the electronic bench book ( ebb ) , which is designed to assist users with documenting , analyzing , and making consistent and accurate decisions on hearings - level adult disability cases . however , the ssa oig recently recommended that ssa evaluate ebb and determine whether to continue it . regional chief judges we spoke with provided mixed feedback on the use of ebb and its usefulness for aljs . in fiscal year 2016 , nearly 500 aljs ( about one - third ) used ebb . in june 2017 , ssa officials said that while no formal evaluation of ebb was conducted , they recently received approval to proceed with plans to replace ebb with a similar tool as part of updates to ssa's case management system . ssa also addresses identified issues with the accuracy and consistency of hearings decisions by taking disciplinary actions , as needed . ssa can take non - disciplinary or disciplinary action to address performance concerns . non - disciplinary actions include training and counseling ( known as “collegial conversations” ) . another non - disciplinary action is a written directive , which ssa can issue to individual judges to improve performance on workload , scheduling or policy compliance . from 2007 through 2016 , ssa issued about 1,330 such directives . nearly all ( 95 percent ) were issued to improve timeliness , while about 2 percent were issued to improve policy compliance . if an alj's conduct or performance does not change or becomes more egregious , ssa continues with progressive discipline including reprimand or seeking disciplinary action from the merit systems protection board , such as short - or long - term suspension or removal . from 2007 through 2016 , there were 98 reprimands , 34 proposed suspensions , and 16 proposed removals , according to ssa . ssa conducts various quality assurance reviews to improve accuracy and consistency . ssa officials stated that the agency has been enhancing its quality review efforts since 2009 . since then , it has added five types of quality assurance reviews that are conducted by three additional offices within ssa ( see fig . ssa added quality assurance reviews for various reasons . for example , in 2009 , ssa's regional staff under the office of the chief administrative law judge began conducting regional inline quality reviews , which involve assessing the extent to which hearing office staff are processing cases and preparing them for hearings in accordance with ssa policy , as well as the policy compliance and legal sufficiency of the draft decision .