underreporting . adverse events may not always be reported . ( see app . i for additional information on medical device reporting requirements. ) in addition to adverse event reporting , fda conducts other postmarket surveillance activities to obtain information about devices after they are on the market . for example , fda may order a manufacturer to conduct a postmarket surveillance study if failure of a class ii or class iii device would be reasonably likely to have serious adverse health consequences . fda documentation shows the agency cleared 25 510 ( k ) submissions for power morcellators to be marketed in the united states between 1991 and 2014 . in clearing the first of the 25 power morcellators in 1991 , fda determined the new device was substantially equivalent to an electromechanical system for cutting tissue during minimally invasive surgeries performed on joints , known as an arthroscopic surgical system . ( for more information on this predicate device , see app . ii. ) fda determined the other 24 power morcellators — the most recent of which was cleared in may 2014 — were substantially equivalent to at least one previously cleared power morcellator . we also found that for most power morcellators the documentation we reviewed referenced more than one predicate device . as shown in table 1 , the additional devices referenced by manufacturers included other previously marketed devices , such as manual morcellators , forceps , and various accessories used for laparoscopic surgeries . fda officials stated that the additional devices referenced likely informed fda's decision - making for all 25 power morcellators . however , fda's determinations of substantial equivalence were based on only one predicate device , the arthroscopic surgical system for the first power morcellator cleared and a previously cleared power morcellator for the other 24 devices , according to agency officials . ( for more information on each of the 25 power morcellators cleared by fda , see app . iii. ) among the 25 cleared morcellators , we found that fda determined that all had the same intended use and 19 had the same technological characteristics as their predicate devices ; the agency also reviewed performance data for 11 of them . ( see fig . in our review of the fda documentation for power morcellators , we found that the agency determined that all 25 devices had the same intended use as their predicate devices . in making this determination , fda also determined that 4 power morcellators had different indication statements compared to the predicate devices , but the differences did not alter the intended use of each device . in general , the indication statements for the 4 power morcellators identified new or fewer procedures during which the devices were to be used compared to the predicates . for example , the indication statement for a power morcellator fda cleared in 2000 specifically identified use in hysterectomies where the predicate's indication statement only identified myomectomies . in another example , the indication statement of a power morcellator cleared in 2011 only identified use in gynecological procedures where the predicate identified general surgical and urological procedures , in addition to gynecological .