stephens , and william trancucci . 1 for ranking of all 29 agencies ) . we also examined the management practices at the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , where managers' reported use of performance information increased significantly over a seven - year period . both omb and congress can send strong messages to agencies that results matter by articulating expectations for individual agency performance and following up to ensure that performance goals are achieved . at the same time , they also need to address performance problems in the areas of government that require the concerted efforts of multiple agencies and programs . increasingly , many of the outcomes we look for — such as prevention of terrorist attacks , reduction in incidence of infectious diseases , or improved response to natural disasters — go beyond the scope of any one single agency . in these cases , agencies must work closely together to achieve desired results . the president can send a signal to federal managers that using performance information is critical for achieving results and maximizing the return on federal funds invested by selecting and focusing his attention on achieving certain critical goals , such as creating or retaining jobs through investments under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 . as a first step , omb has begun to issue guidance to agencies on identifying a limited number of high - priority performance goals , with the explicit message that performance planning is a key element of the president's agenda to build a high - performing government . with this recent guidance , omb has also put agencies on notice that the executive - branch leadership is paying attention to their performance , by establishing regular reviews of the progress agencies are making to improve results in these high - priority areas . as the primary focal point for overall management in the federal government , omb can support agency efforts to use performance information by encouraging agencies to invest in training , identifying and disseminating leading practices among agency managers , and assisting agencies in adopting these practices where appropriate . as we previously reported , our survey results showed a positive relationship between managers who reported receiving training and development on setting program performance goals and those who report using performance information when setting or revising performance goals . however , as we testified in july 2008 , while our survey found a significant increase in training since 1997 , only about half of our survey respondents in 2007 reported receiving any training that would assist in analyzing and making use of performance information . we previously recommended that omb ensure that agencies are making adequate investments in training on performance planning and measurement , with a particular emphasis on how to use performance information to improve program performance . although the agency has not yet implemented this recommendation , an official who oversees omb's management initiatives said that omb has recently launched a collaborative wiki page for federal agencies .