we disagree . the departments acknowledge elsewhere in their response that more work is needed to establish common performance measures and recent meetings with department officials have indicated that agreement on common measures has not yet been obtained . in commenting on this report , the departments expressed concerns that our report ( 1 ) did not give the departments enough credit for the progress they have made to increase their fire - fighting capacity under the national fire plan ; ( 2 ) suggests that by simply updating fire management plans , fire managers will then be allowed to implement “let burn” decisions ; and ( 3 ) infers that allowing more fires to burn naturally will automatically provide greater public and fire fighter safety . with respect to the first issue , we acknowledge the difficulty of the departments' tasks under the national fire plan and , as noted in the report , recognize that the agencies have made progress in increasing their fire - fighting preparedness needs . we also agree it is important to look at results under the plan to place in proper perspective the issue of accountability in fire - fighting preparedness . however , 1 year after receiving $830 million in additional preparedness funding under the national fire plan in fiscal year 2001 , the agencies are still putting out the same percentage of fires at initial attack . to us , it is reasonable to expect that with the substantial increase in preparedness funds and the increased resources that these funds allowed the agencies to acquire , the results achieved would have been greater than they were in the past year . second , the departments stated that the full range of fire fighting options outlined in a local unit's fire management plan , including a “let burn” option , can only be used when the overall land management plan provides for them . in this regard , they noted that in many cases land management plans have not been updated to reflect the full range of fire - fighting options as outlined in fire management plans . as a result , they contend that until the land management plans are updated , the fire management plans that are out of date cannot be revised to include all fire - fighting options , such as a “let burn” option . however , according to the 2001 update to the national fire policy , “the existence of obsolete land management plans should not be reason for failure to complete or update fire management plans.” third , the departments stated that our report appears to state that allowing more fires to burn naturally will automatically provide greater public and fire fighter safety . we disagree . our report states that fire management plans provide fire managers with direction on the level of suppression needed and whether a fire should be allowed to burn as a natural event to regenerate ecosystems or reduce fuel loading in areas with large amounts of underbrush and other vegetative fuels . where appropriate , we have incorporated the departments' position on the different issues discussed in the report . the departments' comments appear in appendix ii .