the information was provided by consular officials at post . four cases were still pending . the 71 cases yielded an average completion time of 67 days . this estimate is accurate to within plus or minus 17 days at the 95 percent level of confidence . we assessed the reliability of the sample data provided by state by tracing a statistically random sample of data to source documents . we determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . state created its own two randomly selected samples of visas mantis cases . however , based on the documentation of how these records were selected , gao was not able to determine whether these were scientifically valid samples whose results project to the entire population of all science student and scholar visa applications . as such , results reported by the agency from these application records should be treated as testimonial information from a judgmental sample rather than data from a probability sample . we conducted fieldwork at seven visa - issuing posts in three countries — china , india , and russia . we chose these countries because they are leading places of origin for international science students and scholars visiting the united states . we limited our review to nonimmigrant visa applicants . during our visits at all of these posts , we observed visa operations , reviewed selected visas mantis data , and interviewed consular staff about visa adjudication procedures . in china , we met with consular officers at the u.s. embassy in beijing and the consulates in shanghai and guangzhou . we also met with the deputy chief of mission , as well as officers from the office of environment , science , technology , and health in beijing . the federal bureau of investigation did not comment on our recommendation . the fbi acknowledged that the visa program was overwhelmed in the summer of 2002 . however , the fbi believes that it is now processing the name checks more quickly and today only a few applicants encounter a significant wait for the fbi to complete the security review process . the fbi indicated that it is working closely with state and other agencies to improve the visas mantis process . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date . at that time we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees and to the secretary of state , the director of the fbi , and the secretary of homeland security . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 . additional gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix vii .