( see fig . 1 for a depiction of the claims review process. ) in these cases , the racs requested that providers submit the associated medical records for review . if the rac found an improper payment , it notified the provider and the medicare claims administration contractor responsible for recouping the overpayments or repaying an underpayments . providers could appeal rac determinations through the established medicare appeals process , which included a first - level review conducted by the medicare claims administration contractors . two years into the demonstration project , cms initiated a series of vulnerability calls , conference calls between the racs and the medicare claims administration contractors . these calls enabled the racs to provide information about the vulnerabilities they identified that resulted in improper payments and to highlight situations where corrective action might be needed . although a cms official told us it was not required , the medicare claims administration contractors could consider rac - identified vulnerabilities when developing their strategies to reduce improper payments . if a medicare claims administration contractor determined that a rac - identified vulnerability was widespread in its region , it could choose to take several corrective actions . a medicare claims administration contractor could: ( 1 ) conduct provider outreach and education , ( 2 ) develop or revise local coverage determinations to clarify what services were reasonable and necessary in that jurisdiction , and ( 3 ) initiate additional service - specific prepayment edits in its local claims processing system . in addition , cms could initiate a nationwide corrective action , such as implementing a national system edit , reissue instructions for coding a claim , or develop a national coverage determination . cms also could provide outreach and education on critical issues to providers directly through its special open door forums teleconferences , and presentations at national meetings . in its june 2008 evaluation report , cms stated that the demonstration project corrected $1.02 billion in improper payments from the three claim racs — $980.0 million in overpayments and $37.8 million in underpayments — as of march 27 , 2008 , and returned $693.6 million to the medicare trust funds . the demonstration project ended in march 2008 . cms initially provided the racs with 4 years of claims data in their jurisdictions , followed by an additional 3 months of claims each quarter for the rest of the demonstration project . cms gave the demonstration racs a total of 1.2 billion claims that they could review . to prevent the racs from auditing those claims that previously underwent complex review by a medicare claims administration contractor or other contractor , cms established a data warehouse that contained information on which claims were unavailable for rac review . these three associations also discussed in greater detail concerns that they continue to have with the rac program , such as the many appeals still in process from the rac demonstration project . during the demonstration project , the racs were required to use automated and complex review processes using the same medicare policies and regulations as cms's medicare claims administration contractors to identify improper payments . the racs used their own software to analyze paid claims and identify those that were or could have been paid improperly .