operational events . cybercom used both simulated and real - world operational events on networks to support the certification of cmf teams . for example , cybercom officials told us that cyber knight is a training event offered periodically by cybercom for cmf teams to exercise national and non - national mission sets . cyber flag and cyber guard , also conducted by cybercom on a periodic basis , utilize a dynamic joint cyber training environment and , according to cybercom officials train all types of cmf teams . in addition to using simulated events through exercises , cybercom and military service officials said that teams were allowed to use real - world operations to meet phase three collective training requirements . the military services and cybercom plan to continue to use existing resources , such as the service school houses , for new and continuous training into the future . for example , as part of their training transition plan , marine corps officials reported that they have a contract in place with navy's space and naval warfare systems command to provide additional training to marine corps cmf personnel after they complete the phase two foundational training progression . additionally , the army cyber school , which provides cmf - specific training for the army , currently trains marine corps personnel as well . the army and marine corps have training agreements in place to continue this arrangement . figure 4 below shows a member of the national guard participating in a cyber training exercise . we found that many of the cmf teams for which dod has reported achieving full operational capability actually require further training , for varying reasons . for example , officials from many key organizations across the dod cyber enterprise told us that the services moved some personnel among teams , reducing the readiness for teams from which personnel were transferred . officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , joint staff , and the military services cited other challenges affecting cmf team readiness levels as well , including the long time frames needed to obtain the appropriate clearances for cmf personnel and the high pace of operations for the teams , leaving little time for training . the same officials from across dod's cyber enterprise affirmed that , taken together , these actions and circumstances have had a negative effect on cmf team resource readiness levels . in april 2018 , the commander of cybercom acknowledged in testimony that “much works remains to be done to make the personnel proficient at their duties and the whole team ready and able to perform whatever missions might be directed.” the cmf teams were not fully trained and had lower readiness levels because cybercom and the military services focused primarily on the teams' achieving full operational capability by october 1 , 2018 , rather than on building operational readiness . building operational readiness requires the teams to simultaneously have the appropriate number of sufficiently trained personnel across the force . according to the cmf training transition plan , cybercom's senior leadership directed the command to achieve full operational capability , and it designated that effort as a higher priority than operational readiness .