2 in app . as a result , in march 1999 , irs started deferring collection action on billions of dollars in delinquencies . by the end of fiscal year 2002 , irs had deferred collection action on about $15 billion , and , as of may 2003 , was deferring action on about one of every three collection cases . furthermore , irs's collection staffing has declined overall comparing 1996 to 2003 ( see fig . 3 in app . i ) despite irs's efforts to increase collection staffing in its budget requests since 2001 . as we previously reported , irs officials have said that collection staffing declines and delays in hiring have been caused by increased workload in other essential operations ( such as as processing returns , issuing refunds , and answering taxpayer mail ) , other priorities ( such as taxpayer service ) , and unbudgeted cost increases ( such as rent and pay increases ) . according to statements by the previous and current irs commissioners , irs's growing workload has outpaced its resources . the former irs commissioner's report to the irs oversight board during september 2002 made a case for additional staff to check tax compliance and collect taxes owed . the commissioner recognized that irs needed to improve the productive use of its current resources , but also cited a need for an annual 2 percent staffing increase over 5 years to help reverse the trends . according to the commissioner , irs would require 5,450 new full - time collection staff . irs officials said that the pca program proposal was undertaken because it is unlikely that irs will receive funding adequate to handle the growing collection workload . since current law requires irs to collect tax debts , legislation has been proposed to authorize irs to use pcas to collect simpler tax debts under defined activities — including locating taxpayers , requesting full payment of the tax debt or offering taxpayers an installment agreement if full payment cannot be made , and obtaining financial information from taxpayers . given the limited authorities proposed for pcas , irs would refer those cases that are simplest to collect and have no need for irs enforcement action , including cases in which ( 1 ) taxpayers filed a tax return showing taxes due but that have not been paid and ( 2 ) taxpayers made three or more voluntary payments to satisfy an additional tax assessed by irs but have stopped the payments . in 1996 , congress directed irs to test the use of pcas , earmarking $13 million for that purpose . irs canceled the pilot project in 1997 , in part , because it resulted in significantly lower amounts of collections and contacted significantly fewer taxpayers than expected ( about 14,000 of 153,000 taxpayers ) . irs reported that through january 1997 , this program accounted for about $3.1 million in collections and about $4.1 million in expenses ( $3.1 million in design , start - up , administrative expenses , and about $1 million in pca payments ) . irs also reported lost opportunity costs of about $17 million because irs collection staff shifted from collecting taxes to helping with the pilot .