if so , how would they be financed ? processes for change: what role should congress , the prc , usps , employees , and customers , including business mailers and the public , have in decisions on postal policy issues ? what incentives and oversight mechanisms are needed as part of congressional actions to assure an appropriate balance between providing usps with more flexibility and assuring sufficient transparency , oversight , and accountability ? we have discussed several options that congress and usps could consider in a report we issued last april , and are currently conducting a congressionally requested review of usps's 5-day delivery proposal . what would be the impact on the federal budget ? delivery: should the long - standing requirement for saturday delivery be dropped so usps can implement its proposal to reduce delivery frequency to 5 days a week ? what would be the specific effects on operations , costs , workforce mix , employees , service , competition , the value of mail , mail volume , and revenue ? how would shifting to 5-day delivery affect customers including business mailers and the public ? post office closings: should usps have greater flexibility to rightsize its retail networks and workforce , which may involve closing post offices and moving retail services to alternative commercial locations that are often open more days and longer hours than postal facilities ? or should usps retain its retail facilities and provide new nonpostal products and services ? nonpostal products: should usps be allowed to offer new nonpostal products and services that compete with private - sector firms ? if so , how should fair competition be assured ? would it need additional capital for such initiatives ? in this testimony , we will highlight some options related to three areas that are also addressed by s. 3831 — compensation and benefits , rightsizing networks and workforce , and expanding nonpostal activities . s. 3831 addresses key retiree health and pension benefit issues . specifically , it requires opm to recalculate usps's csrs pension obligation in a way expected to make the federal government responsible for a greater share of usps's csrs pension obligation . the bill also authorizes the usps board of governors to transfer any part of a resulting pension surplus to the postal service retiree health benefits fund . the sponsor of s. 3831 has estimated that these legislative changes could result in an increase in the government's pension obligations of approximately $50 billion . such an increase could impact the federal budget deficit and require funding over time . usps has said it cannot afford its required prefunding payments to the retiree health benefit fund on the basis of its significant volume and revenue declines , large losses , debt nearing its limit , and limited cost - cutting opportunities under its current authority . we have reported that congress should consider providing financial relief to usps , including modifying its retiree health benefit cost structure in a fiscally responsible manner . several legislative proposals have been made to defer costs by revising statutory requirements , including extending and revising prefunding payments to the retiree health benefits fund , with smaller payment amounts in the short term followed by larger amounts later .