enforcement . enforcement techniques by state and local law enforcement agencies may include aggressive enforcement by routine patrols , “saturation” patrols that increase the number of officers on patrol in a specific area , and stationary checkpoints along roadsides . states and local agencies may use traffic safety grant funds administered by nhtsa through their state highway safety office to provide the increased level of enforcement . postcampaign evaluation . data are collected by states and local agencies after the campaign in the same manner as the precampaign evaluations and compared with precampaign data to identify changes in awareness of the enforcement effort , measure progress toward campaign goals , and measure the impact on traffic safety . campaigns that were held prior to 2003 — often referred to as selective traffic enforcement programs — typically relied on earned media such as unpaid television and radio news stories to advertise the campaigns ; however , since 2003 , congress has funded nationwide paid advertising for safety belt and impaired - driving campaigns . the use of paid media allows advertisements to be placed at optimal times with high - quality messages so the campaign can better reach its target audiences and maximize the probability that the audience will pay attention to the advertisements , whereas earned media placement and frequency are usually controlled by station managers and may not be placed at optimal times . nhtsa used funds authorized under tea - 21 for activities such as developing and producing broadcast and print advertisements and providing media technical assistance to the states . although tea - 21 , when enacted , did not authorize funding to purchase national advertising for the campaigns , congress appropriated funding of $19 million in 2003 and $24 million in 2004 and 2005 for nhtsa to provide paid national advertising for both campaigns . in 2005 , safetea - lu authorized $29 million in each of fiscal years 2006 through 2009 for nhtsa to conduct a nationwide hve program . the program requirements included developing and disseminating advertisements , coordinating with states , and annually evaluating the effectiveness of the program . nhtsa uses available funding to purchase national media time and conduct evaluations for the campaigns ( see table 1 ) . nhtsa also uses funding from other highway safety programs to develop the advertising and includes campaign coordination efforts as a part of the agency's ongoing coordination efforts with states for other highway safety programs . nhtsa officials report that the increase in funding authorized by safetea - lu — $5 million above the annual funding level immediately prior to safetea - lu — has allowed them to increase the visibility and frequency of advertising for the two enforcement campaigns during memorial day and labor day , as well as allowed them to provide additional national advertising for the impaired - driving campaign during the december holiday season . states have used federal traffic safety grants authorized in tea - 21 and safetea - lu — such as state and community highway safety grants , safety belt use grants , and alcohol - impaired driving countermeasures grants — to fund state and local campaign activities .