royalties . royalties comprised the majority of the revenue from federal coal leases — nearly two - thirds of the total revenue over the period from fiscal years 2003 to 2012 . royalty rates for coal depend on the mine type and are generally calculated based on a proportion of sales value , less allowable deductions , such as transportation and processing allowances . blm generally sets royalty rates at 12.5 percent for surface mines , the required minimum royalty rate , and 8 percent for underground mines , the rate prescribed by regulation . in total , royalties generated from federal coal leases have more than doubled since fiscal year 1990 , from $392 million to $796 million in fiscal year 2012 ( see fig . in addition , as with coal production from federal leases , royalties generated from the sale of coal from federal leases in wyoming comprise an increasing proportion of the royalty stream ranging from 50 percent of total royalties in 1990 to 80 percent in 2012 ( see fig . coal prices have been a major driver of the increases in royalty revenues . for instance , from fiscal years 1990 to 2000 , royalty revenues remained relatively steady even though production of federal coal increased over this period related to a decline in coal prices . since then , coal royalty revenues have steadily increased , even with a recent decline in production . specifically , from fiscal years 2008 to 2012 the amount of coal produced from federal leases declined by about 41 million tons of coal ( or 8 percent ) ; however the reported sales value of this coal increased 15 percent from $6.7 billion to $7.7 billion , reflecting growth in coal prices . the effective royalty rate — the rate actually paid by lessees after processing and transportation allowances have been factored in along with any royalty rate reductions – – generated from coal produced from federal leases has remained on average at about 11 percent since fiscal year 1990 . royalty rate reductions may be approved by blm in cases where a reduction is needed to promote mining development . for example , blm officials told us they may approve royalty rate reductions to enable continued operations in cases where mining conditions may be particularly challenging and costly , or to enable expanded recovery of federal coal . the effective royalty rate varies by state due to differences in mine type and other factors . for example , the effective royalty rate is higher in wyoming and montana where most coal is extracted using surface mining . in fiscal year 2012 , the effective royalty rates for the top federal coal producing states were: wyoming ( 12.2 percent ) , montana ( 11.6 percent ) , utah ( 6.9 percent ) , and colorado ( 5.6 percent ) . bonus bids . bonus bids are generally expressed in cents per ton of coal that is recoverable from the lease tract . the total bonus bid paid is the cents per ton multiplied by the estimated recoverable tons of coal from the lease tract .