iii ) . state also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report as appropriate . in its comments , state said that the report is a fair and accurate representation of the issue and welcomed our recommendations . ii and app . state said it would update the long - range overseas buildings plan to achieve concurrent construction to the maximum extent and coordinate with usaid to consider incorporating usaid space into single office buildings in future compounds where appropriate if the capital security cost - sharing program is implemented . however , our recommendations and matter for consideration are designed to bring about concurrent construction to the maximum extent regardless of the implementation of the capital security cost - sharing program . in its comments , usaid said the report successfully attempts to address the rationale as well as many of the difficulties in achieving the goal of concurrent construction of new embassy compounds and facilities to be occupied by usaid employees on those compounds . usaid said it agreed with both our recommendations and provided information to support the recommendations and explain its requirements . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the administrator of usaid . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 . another gao contact and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv . to examine state's efforts to incorporate office space for the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) into the construction of new embassy compounds and to assess the cost and security implications of its approach , we reviewed the state department's bureau of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) construction documents and the long - range overseas buildings plans for fiscal years 2002 to 2007 , years 2003 to 2008 , and 2004 to 2009 ; interviewed state department and usaid officials regarding completed , ongoing , and planned new embassy compound projects that include a separate annex for usaid , including operational , cost , and security issues arising from nonconcurrent construction and the issues involved in housing usaid in separate buildings ; interviewed officials from several u.s. construction firms experienced in building new embassy projects regarding the costs of obo construction scheduling practices ; and analyzed obo estimates of the cost differentials between concurrent and nonconcurrent construction . further , we visited two field locations — in nairobi , kenya , and kampala , uganda — where we discussed with state and usaid officers at each post the implications of construction sequencing to the embassies and usaid . to analyze the cost impacts of different usaid annex construction scheduling , we developed a cost model enabling us to extrapolate from state data the aggregate and annual costs for both concurrent or nonconcurrent construction projects for usaid annexes . our model is based on cost estimate data provided by obo for 26 projects .