the other audits were desk audits . examples of the audit findings include the following: written hfa policies conflicted with the requirements in the code or treasury regulations . in addition , the cdfi fund contracted with the urban institute to conduct a formal evaluation of the new markets tax credit program , focusing on program design , execution , outputs , and outcomes . while multiple federal agencies administer housing - related programs , hud is the lead federal agency for providing affordable rental housing . hud's fiscal year 2013 annual performance report and 2015 annual performance plan reported that it funded about 5.5 million occupied affordable rental units through its rental assistance programs . much like lihtc , hud's rental housing programs rely on state and local housing agencies ( including hfas ) to implement programs . hud is responsible for overseeing these agencies , including reviewing state and local consolidated plans for the home and community development block grant ( cdbg ) programs — large grant programs that hud oversees and that also are used to fund lihtc projects . hud has experience in directly overseeing hfas in their roles as contract administrators for project - based section 8 rental assistance . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . the hfa failed to submit form 8823 as required to report lihtc noncompliance . physical inspections and tenant file reviews were not completed as required and notifications to owners were not conducted as required . all but one audit was closed at the time of our review . irs cited multiple reasons for not conducting regular reviews of qaps and audits of hfas . first , irs officials stated that they did not regard a regular review of qaps as a part of their compliance responsibilities . second , irs officials stated that because of other priorities the agency does not have a sufficient number of lihtc staff or other assigned resources to conduct more audits of hfas . irs has statutory authority to collect up to a $100 annual penalty from each hfa failing to file a timely , accurate annual report . however , irs officials said the agency concluded that penalty collection would not be cost - effective because more resources would be needed to collect the penalty than would be gained through collection and that increasing the penalty amount would require statutory change . third , irs officials stated that they had considered involving irs field office staff to conduct more hfa audits over the years , but due to competing demands at irs , this did not occur . the lack of qap reviews and audits of hfas means that irs is unable to determine the extent to which hfas meet requirements for awarding tax credits and monitoring project compliance . irs has conducted some audits of taxpayers claiming lihtcs , but does not have detailed information on these audits . in a 1997 report , we found that irs did not have an estimate of taxpayer compliance for the lihtc program and recommended that irs explore alternative ways to evaluate compliance with the requirements of the code by taxpayers .