contributions can be financial or nonfinancial . for example , turkey's system development and demonstration contribution was all cash . denmark contributed $110 million in cash , and also the use of an f - 16 aircraft and related support equipment for future jsf flight tests and the use of north atlantic treaty organization command and control assets for a jsf interoperability study , which were valued to be worth an additional $15 million to the program . in addition , u.s. industry cooperation with aerospace suppliers in partner countries is expected to benefit the jsf program because of the specific advanced design and manufacturing capabilities available from those suppliers . for example , british industry has a significant presence in the program with bae systems as a teammate to lockheed martin and rolls royce as a major engine subcontractor . in addition , fokker aerostructures in the netherlands is under contract to develop composite flight doors for the jsf airframe . partner governments expect to benefit financially by leveraging significant u.s. resources and inventory requirements to obtain an advanced tactical aircraft they could not afford to develop on their own . from a government perspective , level i and ii partners have been guaranteed waivers of nonrecurring aircraft costs ; level iii partners will be considered for a similar waiver . all partners are also eligible to receive potential levies collected on future foreign military sales of aircraft to nonpartner customers . in addition , and in most cases more importantly , partners have identified industrial return to in - country suppliers as vital to their participation in the program . in a recent study assessing the financial impact of the jsf program on international suppliers , dod reported that partners could potentially earn between $5 and $40 of revenue in return for each dollar contributed to the program . through government and industrial participation , partner countries also expect to benefit from the technology transferred from u.s. to partner industry through jsf contract awards . partners expect that early participation in the jsf program will improve their defense industrial capability through increased access to design , technical , and manufacturing data and through the ability to perform advanced planning for operation and support of the jsf once it is delivered in their respective countries . involvement in the early phases of the jsf program has provided partners with information on the development of aircraft requirements , program costs and schedules , and logistics concepts . international partners have access to program and technology information through participation on senior - level management decision - making bodies , representation in the jsf program office , and involvement on program integrated product teams . partner program office personnel , regardless of participation level , have equal access to most information . partner staff can request information from integrated product teams on which they have no membership , as long as the information is not restricted from being released to their countries . international program participants have significant expectations regarding government and industry return based on their contributions . as such , the jsf program office and lockheed martin are faced with balancing these expectations against other program goals .