gao - 08-739r . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2008 . this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that members of the committee may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or stanar@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . in addition to the contact named above , susan quinlan , assistant director , and jeanette espínola , analyst - in - charge , managed this assignment . sylvia bascopé , burns chamberlain , katherine davis , jeremy rothgerber , and erin smith made significant contributions to the work . secure border initiative: fiscal year 2008 expenditure plan shows improvement , but deficiencies limit congressional oversight and dhs accountability . department of homeland security: better planning and oversight needed to improve complex service acquisition outcomes . gao - 08-765t . washington , d.c.: may 8 , 2008 . department of homeland security: better planning and assessment needed to improve outcomes for complex service acquisitions . gao - 08-263 . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2008 . secure border initiative: observations on the importance of applying lessons learned to future projects . gao - 08-508t . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2008 . secure border initiative: observations on selected aspects of sbinet program implementation . gao - 08-131t . washington , d.c.: october 24 , 2007 . secure border initiative: sbinet planning and management improvements needed to control risks . gao - 07-504t . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2007 . secure border initiative: sbinet expenditure plan needs to better support oversight and accountability . gao - 07-309 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2007 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . elements of sbi will be carried out by several organizations within dhs . despite these performance shortfalls , agents in the tucson sector continue to use project 28 technology capabilities while waiting for the sbinet technology deployment . in addition , in april 2008 , we completed a report on sbinet as part of a broader review of dhs's use of performance - based services acquisition , an acquisition method structured around the results to be achieved instead of the manner by which the service should be performed . moreover , during our visit we observed the agents' difficulties in logging on to the wireless network and maintaining the connection from the vehicle - mounted mobile data terminal . project 28 is the only available technology in the tucson - 1 project area of the tucson sector , compared to the ajo - 1 project area , which does not have any technology .