( see fig . ex - im bank financed 474 fossil fuel projects over the period , with the number falling from 91 in 1990 to 15 in 1999 , before rising slightly in 2000 and 2001 . the total value financed for fossil fuel projects over the period was about $25.7 billion , with annual values ranging from $546 million in 1999 to more than $3.6 billion in both 1993 and 1995 . ex - im bank established the renewable energy exports advisory committee to help expand its support of u.s. renewable energy exporters in may 2002 . the reports were further divided by sub sectors , which included fossil fuel extraction , transport and processing , fossil fuel power generation , renewable energy , and nuclear energy . ex - im bank also provided similar reports for applications submitted but not supported by ex - im bank for loans and guarantees by various sub sectors . ex - im bank did not provide applications data for insurance or working capital guarantees . applications data were reported in the fiscal years in which they were received , while project data were reported in the fiscal years in which they were financed . we analyzed these reports to identify trends in the number and values financed for energy sector projects as well as the number and value of energy sector applications submitted . we did not focus on nuclear energy projects because they are outside the scope of our request and comprise only a small percentage of ex - im bank's energy sector portfolio . the report , however , notes that nuclear energy projects account for the balance of energy sector projects financed when combined with fossil fuel and renewable energy projects . ex - im bank officials noted concerns over the reliability and completeness of some of the data , particularly insurance transactions . reliability issues occur because insurance transactions often include multi - buyer policies that cover many products and services . government support has been an important factor in the growth of renewable energy . foreign government support , for example , is seen as critical to rapid growth in the international wind and photovoltaic markets . several european countries and japan have used various strategies and financial incentives for increasing renewable energy in their domestic markets . ex - im bank officials also note that insurance records prior to 1992 were not readily available we chose to focus our principal findings on the loans and guarantees programs because of these concerns and because loans and guarantees account for 89 percent of the value of energy sector projects financed by ex - im bank . we discuss trends in the number and values financed for insurance and working capital guarantees in appendix ii . we also focused on loans and guarantees because ex - im bank provided data for both the applications submitted and projects financed for the period 1990 to 2001 . we compared this data to data used in other ex - im bank reports to assess its reliability and found them to be consistent . to address the second objective , we reviewed the 1989 legislation that established the ex - im bank renewable energy - financing target and reporting requirement .