the same assessment was echoed in the 1997 state of the lakes report . meanwhile the ijc agreed that the nine desired outcome areas recommended by the task force would help assess overall progress . it recommended that solec , during the conference in 2000 , establish environmental indicators that would allow the ijc to evaluate what had been accomplished and what needed to be done for three of the nine indicators — the public's ability to eat the fish , drink the water , and swim in the water without any restrictions . this agreement was the basis for a program to protect and restore this ecosystem . the implementation of this strategy has resulted in improvements in habitat restoration and aquatic life , such as increased forested buffer zone and shad population . several organizations have developed strategies for the basin at the binational , federal , or state levels that address either the entire basin or the specific problems in the great lakes . epa's great lakes strategy 2002 , developed by a committee of federal and state officials , is the most recent of these strategies . while this strategy identified restoration objectives and planned actions by various federal and state agencies , it is largely a description of existing program activity relating to basin restoration . state officials told us that the states had already planned the actions described in it , but that these actions were contingent on funding for specific environmental programs . the strategy included a statement that it should not be construed as a commitment for additional funding or resources , and it did not provide a basis for prioritizing activities . in addition , we identified other strategies that addressed particular contaminants , restoration of individual lakes , or cleanup of contaminated areas . other governmental and nongovernmental organizations fund restoration activities . for example , individual municipalities , township governments , counties , and conservation districts are involved in various restoration activities . to improve coordination of great lakes activities and ensure that federal dollars are effectively spent , we recommended that the administrator , epa , ensure that glnpo fulfills its responsibility for coordinating programs within the great lakes basin ; charge glnpo with developing , in consultation with the governors of the great lakes states , federal agencies , and other organizations , an overarching strategy that , clearly defines the roles and responsibilities for coordinating and prioritizing funding for projects ; and submit a time - phased funding requirement proposal to the congress necessary to implement the strategy . the great lakes water quality agreement , as amended in 1987 , calls for establishing a monitoring system to measure restoration progress and assess the degree that the united states and canada are complying with the goals and objectives of the agreement . however , implementation of this provision has not progressed to the point that overall restoration progress can be measured or determined based on quantitative information . recent assessments of overall progress , which rely on a mix of quantitative data and subjective judgments , do not provide an adequate basis for making an overall assessment .