omb circular no . a - 21 establishes the principles for determining the types of direct and indirect costs that are allowed to be claimed and the methods for allocating such costs to federally funded research at educational institutions , including the establishment and use of indirect cost rates . indirect costs are divided into two main components , facilities costs and administrative costs . facilities costs include operations and maintenance expenses , such as for utilities ; allowances for depreciation and use of buildings and equipment ; interest on debt associated with building and equipment ; and library expenses , such as for the use of the library and library materials purchased for research use . general administration expenses , such as the costs associated with executive functions like financial management ; departmental administration expenses , including clerical staff and supplies for academic departments ; sponsored projects' administration expenses , which are the costs associated with the office responsible for administering projects and awards funded by external sources ; and student administration and services expenses , such as the administration of the student health clinic . because indirect costs cannot be specifically attributed to a particular research grant , they are charged via an indirect cost rate that serves as the mechanism for determining the proportion of indirect costs that may be charged to federally funded research awards . omb circular no . a - 21 outlines the process for establishing an indirect cost rate for universities performing federally funded research . each university develops a proposed indirect cost rate that is based on university cost data from prior years , which is subsequently negotiated with the federal government to arrive at a final indirect cost rate , in compliance with the principles of omb circular a - 21 . to calculate a university's indirect cost rate , a percentage of each indirect cost component is allocated to the university's research function on the basis of benefits received from that component by the research function . for example , a university can measure the square footage of floor space used for research and use this measure to allocate the amount of costs it claims for operating and using the space as a component in its indirect cost rate proposal . each indirect cost component allocated to research is applied to a modified set of direct costs referred to as “modified total direct costs” ( mtdc ) to obtain an individual rate for each component . mtdc includes the salaries and wages of those conducting the research , fringe benefits ( eg , pensions ) , materials and supplies , travel , and the first $25,000 of each subaward . mtdc excludes costs such as equipment costs , capital expenditures , tuition remission , equipment or space rental costs , and the portion of each subaward in excess of $25,000 . ( see fig . universities use a standard format , also known as the long form , for submitting their indirect cost rate proposals to their cognizant rate - setting agency . however , universities whose total direct costs on federal awards do not exceed $10 million in a fiscal year may use a simplified method for determining the indirect cost rate applicable to all federal awards .