omb agreed with the recommendations . we have also recently reported on three key areas of agency's it spending portfolio: data center consolidation , software licensing , and mobile devices . data center consolidation: concerned about the size of the federal data center inventory and recognizing the potential to improve the efficiency , performance , and environmental footprint of federal data center activities , omb , under the leadership of the federal cio , established the federal data center consolidation initiative in february 2010 . in a series of reports , we found that , while data center consolidation could potentially save the federal government billions of dollars , weaknesses existed in the execution and oversight of the initiative . most recently , we reported that , as of may 2014 , agencies collectively reported that they had a total of 9,658 data centers ; 2015 , they had closed 1,236 data centers and were planning to close an additional 2,607 — for a total of 3,843 — by the end of september 2015 . we also noted that between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , agencies reported planning a total of about $5.3 billion in cost savings and avoidances due to the consolidation of federal data centers . in correspondence subsequent to the publication of our report , dod's office of the cio identified an additional $2.1 billion in savings to be realized beyond fiscal year 2017 , which increased the total savings across the federal government to about $7.4 billion . as of february table 2 below provides a summary of agencies' total data center cost savings and cost avoidances between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , as well as dod cost savings and cost avoidances to be realized beyond 2017 . however , we noted that planned savings may be understated because of difficulties agencies encountered when calculating savings and communicating their estimates to omb . we concluded that it was important for omb to continue to provide leadership and guidance on this initiative , and we made recommendations to ensure the initiative improves governmental efficiency and achieves cost savings . most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment . software licensing: an additional area of concern is agencies' management of their software licenses . we recently reported on federal agencies' management of software licenses and determined that better management was needed to achieve significant savings government - wide . in particular , 22 of the 24 major agencies identified in the chief financial officers act of 1990 did not have comprehensive license policies , and only 2 had comprehensive license inventories . as a result , agencies' oversight of software license spending was limited or lacking , and thus they may miss out on savings . the potential savings could be significant considering that , in fiscal year 2012 , one major federal agency reported saving approximately $181 million by consolidating its enterprise license agreements , even though its oversight process was ad hoc . we recommended that omb issue needed guidance to agencies and made more than 130 recommendations to the agencies to improve their policies and practices for managing software licenses . omb disagreed with the need for guidance .