gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . defense acquisitions: fundamental changes are needed to improve weapon program outcomes . gao - 08-1159t . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2008 . we have increasingly called for dod to be more strategic in how it uses contractors . gao - 08-467sp . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2008 . at the departmentwide level , dod has yet to conduct the type of fundamental reexamination of its reliance on contractors that we called for in 2008 . for example , in november 2006 , we reported that dod lacked a proactive strategic approach to managing services acquisitions and needed to determine , among other things , areas of specific risks that were inherent when acquiring services and that should be managed with greater attention . a list of these products is provided in appendix ii . this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since fiscal year 2000 , dod has significantly increased the number of major defense acquisition programs and its overall investment in them . during this same time period , acquisition outcomes have not improved . for example , in last year's assessment of selected dod weapon programs , we found that total acquisition costs for the fiscal year 2007 portfolio of major defense acquisition programs increased 26 percent and development costs increased by 40 percent from first estimates — both of which are higher than the corresponding increases in dod's fiscal year 2000 portfolio . in most cases , the programs we assessed failed to deliver capabilities when promised — often forcing warfighters to spend additional funds on maintaining legacy systems . our analysis showed that current programs experienced , on average , a 21-month delay in delivering initial capabilities to the warfighter , a 5-month increase over fiscal year 2000 programs as shown in table 1 . continued cost growth results in less funding being available for other dod priorities and programs , while continued failure to deliver weapon systems on time delays providing critical capabilities to the warfighter . we are currently updating our analysis and intend to issue our assessment of dod's current portfolio in march . several underlying systemic problems at the strategic level and at the program level continue to contribute to poor weapon system program outcomes . at the strategic level , dod does not prioritize weapon system investments and the department's processes for matching warfighter needs with resources are fragmented and broken . dod largely continues to define warfighting needs and make investment decisions on a service - by - service basis and assess these requirements and their funding implications under separate decision - making processes .