these challenges are daunting . while dod's recent initiatives may improve how the department plans service acquisitions at a strategic level , these efforts will not payoff unless dod's leadership can translate its vision into changes in frontline practices . at this point , dod does not know how well its services acquisition processes are working and whether it is obtaining the services it needs while protecting dod's and the taxpayer's interests . while dod has generally agreed with our recommendations intended to improve contract management , much remains to be done . for example: in the near term , dod must act forcefully to implement new procedures and processes in a sustained , consistent , and effective manner across the department . doing so will require continued , sustained commitment by senior dod leadership to translate policy into practice and to hold decision makers accountable . at the same time , while the department and its components have taken or plan to take actions to further address contract management challenges , many of these actions , such as the army's efforts to increase its acquisition workforce , will not be fully implemented for several years . dod will need to monitor such efforts to ensure that intended outcomes are achieved . at the departmentwide level , dod has yet to conduct the type of fundamental reexamination of its reliance on contractors that we called for in 2008 . without understanding the depth and breadth of contractor support , the department will be unable to determine if it has the appropriate mix of military personnel , dod civilians , and contractors . as a result , dod may not be totally aware of the risks it faces and will therefore be unable to mitigate those risks in the most cost - effective and efficient manner . the implementation of existing and emerging policy , monitoring of the department's actions , and the comprehensive assessment of what should and should not be contracted for are not easy tasks , but they are essential if dod is to place itself in a better position to deliver goods and services to the warfighters . moreover , with an expected increase of forces in afghanistan , the urgency for action is heightened to help the department avoid the same risks of fraud , waste , and abuse it has experienced using contractors in support of operation iraqi freedom . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes our testimony . we would be happy to answer any questions you might have . for further information about this testimony , please contact john hutton , director , acquisition and sourcing management , on ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov or william solis , director , defense capabilities and management , on ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . other key contributors to this testimony include carole coffey , timothy dinapoli , justin jaynes , john krump , christopher mulkins , james a. reynolds , karen thornton , thomas twambly , and anthony wysocki . high - risk series: an update . gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 .