for one another . the results of our survey of experts indicated that the actions that faa , osha , airports , or airlines could take with greatest potential of preventing ramp accidents , considering costs , technological feasibility , and operational changes , included promoting a safety culture , standardizing airport ramp markings , improving or increasing training of ramp workers , increasing the supervision of ramp workers , and developing safer equipment designs ( see table 6 ) . could be taken ? and ( 2 ) what factors affect progress in improving ramp safety and what is being done by faa and others to address those factors ? to answer these questions , we reviewed data on runway and ramp safety incidents and accidents from faa , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , and the department of labor's occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) and bureau of labor statistics ; relevant laws , regulations , and agency policies ; and federal government and aviation industry efforts to address runway and ramp safety , including the development of new technology . we also looked at how taxiways affect runway safety . in addition , we interviewed faa , ntsb , osha , airport , and aviation trade organization officials reflecting various segments of the industry , as well as pilots , air traffic controllers , and ramp workers and their union representatives . we also surveyed experts on the causes of runway and ramp incidents and accidents , the effectiveness of measures that are being taken to address them , and what additional measures could be taken . a majority of the experts was selected with the assistance of the national academy of sciences , and we identified additional experts during our review . the individuals were selected on the basis of their expertise in areas such as technology and procedures used to address runway incursions , overruns , and ramp accidents ; international aviation safety practices ; human factors issues ; general aviation ; airports ; and ground operations . we report the survey results in terms of actions that are most effective or future actions that have the greatest potential . through our analyses , the actions that we report as being most effective or having the greatest potential were ones that a majority of respondents indicated were very or extremely effective for the effectiveness questions or great or very great potential for the questions asking about potential . because we asked the experts to answer questions only within their areas of expertise , a different number of responses were received for various survey questions . based on interviews with officials knowledgeable about the data contained in this report , we determined that runway and ramp safety data were sufficiently reliable for the types of analyses that we performed for this report such as trends in runway incursions , the incidence of fatalities in airport ramp areas , and frequency of air traffic controller overtime . we conducted our work in atlanta , ga ; atlantic city , nj ; boston , ma ; burbank , long beach , los angeles , and san diego , ca ; newark , nj ; seattle and spokane , wa ; and washington , d.c .