iii. ) as previously discussed , in 1994 , at the very end of ops's standard inspection phase , ops issued 42 administrative actions and 95 enforcement actions . from 1995 through 1998 , during its partnering phase , ops increased its use of administrative actions , while decreasing its use of civil penalties and other enforcement actions . 7 in app . after 1998 , ops's use of administrative actions decreased . in 2000 , when ops initiated its “tough but fair” phase , its use of enforcement actions started to rise . long - term trends in the numbers of serious pipeline accidents and in the accident rate for interstate hazardous liquid pipelines do not appear to be associated with trends in ops's enforcement and administrative actions . as discussed earlier in this report , trends in the numbers of serious accidents for interstate natural gas and hazardous liquid pipelines were mixed from 1994 through 2003 . ( see figs . these trends do not parallel the wide fluctuations in the numbers of enforcement and administrative actions that ops took during the same period . over this same period , the accident rate for interstate hazardous liquid pipelines — that is , the number of serious accidents per billion ton - miles of hazardous liquids shipped — decreased , while the numbers of ops enforcement and administrative actions fluctuated . for the number of all pipeline accidents per 10,000 miles of pipeline ( where volume of products supported is not included ) , there appears to be some association between the number of accidents per 10,000 miles of pipeline and ops's enforcement actions but no association between the number of accidents per 10,000 miles of pipeline and ops's administrative actions . ( see fig . this metric , like the standard inspections that ops conducted from 1990 through 1994 , does not take risk into account ; it considers only the mileage of pipelines in place , not the amounts of products shipped — or , by implication , the risks involved in shipping them . the number of accidents per 10,000 miles of pipeline increased somewhat steadily during the period of our review , growing by almost 50 percent , from about 2.2 accidents per 10,000 miles of interstate pipeline in 1994 to 3.3 such accidents in 2002 ( latest data available ) . at least through 2000 , the number of accidents per 10,000 miles of interstate pipeline and the number of ops enforcement actions moved together . this parallel movement might suggest , if all else were equal , that ops primarily took enforcement actions when serious accidents occurred . however , most ops enforcement actions were the result of its routine inspections — not as a result of accident investigations . the number of accidents per 10,000 miles of interstate pipeline does not appear to coincide with the number of ops administrative actions during this period .