gao - 16-523 . they receive inaccurate scra information from dod . in addition , if servicemembers have private student loans , their loan servicer is not required to use the automatic eligibility check to identify them . we used multiple methodologies to conduct this study . to obtain information on servicemembers receiving the scra cap , we used data from the 10 federal student loan servicers , the department of education ( education ) , and six private student lenders . to identify challenges servicemembers face obtaining the cap and assess the extent to which federal agencies oversee implementation of the rate cap , we interviewed officials and reviewed documentation from the department of defense ( dod ) , education , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , and the department of justice ( doj ) . we also interviewed representatives of the 10 student loan servicers who are contracted by education to service federal student loans , from four advocacy groups that represent servicemembers , and from one trade group representing servicers . in addition , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . we conducted this audit from may 2015 through november 2016 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to describe how many servicemembers received the scra interest rate cap on their student loans , we analyzed record - level data from the 10 federal student loan servicers — the companies contracted to service loans owned by education — on borrowers with federal loans or commercial federal family education loans ( ffel ) for the period october 2008 ( the beginning of the first full fiscal year that scra was applied to student loans owned by education ) through december 2015 ( the most recent available data ) . the 10 federal loan servicers as of december 31 , 2015 , were: cornerstone , edfinancial , granite state , great lakes , missouri higher education loan authority , navient , nelnet , oklahoma student loan authority servicing , pennsylvania higher education assistance agency / fedloan , and the vermont student assistance corporation federal loans . specifically , for borrowers who received the cap on at least one of their loans , we analyzed data provided by the 10 loan servicers to determine ( 1 ) whether the cap was applied on the basis of a written notification of eligibility from the servicemember or on the automatic eligibility check ; ( 2 ) the type of loan ( i.e. we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . , federal or commercial ffel ) ; ( 3 ) the duration of the cap ; ( 4 ) loan interest rates prior to borrowers receiving the cap ; and ( 5 ) loan disbursement amounts . we also used these analyses to examine how the scra interest rate cap may affect total loan costs for servicemembers .