we proceeded to phone the marketplaces . however , as shown in figure 2 , the california marketplace did not continue to process one of our medicaid applications . in this case , our fictitious phone applicant declined to provide what was a valid social security number , citing privacy concerns . a marketplace representative told us that , to apply , the applicant must provide a social security number . the representative suggested that as an alternative , we could apply for medicaid in person with the local county office or a certified enrollment counselor . after we discussed the results of our undercover testing with california officials , they told us their system requires applicants to provide either a social security number or an individual taxpayer - identification number to process an application . as a result , because our fictitious applicant declined to provide a social security number , our application could not be processed . for the four medicaid applications submitted to the federal marketplace , we were told that we may be eligible for medicaid but that the respective medicaid state offices might require more information . for three of the four applications , federal marketplace representatives told us we would be contacted by the medicaid state offices within 30 days . however , the medicaid offices did not notify us within 30 days for any of the applications . as a result , we subsequently contacted the state medicaid offices and the federal marketplace to follow up on the status of our applications . for the two new jersey medicaid applications , we periodically called the state medicaid offices over approximately 4 months , attempting to determine the status of our applications . in these calls , new jersey representatives generally told us they had not yet received medicaid information from the federal marketplace and , on several occasions , said they expected to receive it shortly . after our calls to new jersey medicaid offices , we phoned the federal marketplace to determine the status of our medicaid applications . in one case , the federal marketplace representative told us new jersey determined that our applicant did not qualify for medicaid . as a result , the phone representative stated that we were then eligible for qualified health - plan coverage . we subsequently applied for coverage and were approved for an advance premium tax credit plus the cost - sharing reduction subsidy . in the other case , the federal marketplace representative told us the marketplace system did not indicate whether new jersey received the application or processed it . the representative advised we phone the new jersey medicaid agency . later on that same day , we phoned the federal marketplace again and falsely claimed that the new jersey medicaid office denied our medicaid application . based on this claim , the representative said we were eligible for qualified health - plan coverage . we subsequently applied for coverage and were approved for an advance premium tax credit plus the cost - sharing reduction subsidy . the federal marketplace did not ask us to submit documentation substantiating our medicaid denial from new jersey .