we support these actions . yet , to further minimize the vulnerabilities in our aviation security system , more needs to be done . aviation security has truly become a national security issue , and as we will discuss today , responsibility for screening may no longer appropriately rest with air carriers . it has been observed that previous tragedies have resulted in congressional hearings , studies , recommendations , and debates , but little long - term resolve to correct flaws in the system as the memory of the crisis recedes . the future of aviation security hinges in large part on overcoming this cycle of limited action that has too often characterized the response to aviation security concerns . some context for my remarks is appropriate . the threat of terrorism was significant throughout the 1990s ; a plot to destroy 12 u.s. airliners was discovered and thwarted in 1995 , for instance . yet the task of providing security to the nation's aviation system is unquestionably daunting , and we must reluctantly acknowledge that any form of travel can never be made totally secure . the enormous size of u.s. airspace alone defies easy protection . furthermore , given this country's hundreds of airports , thousands of planes , tens of thousands of daily flights , and the seemingly limitless ways terrorists or criminals can devise to attack the system , aviation security must be enforced on several fronts . safeguarding airplanes and passengers requires , at the least , ensuring that perpetrators are kept from breaching security checkpoints or gaining access to ramps and doorways leading to aircraft . faa has developed several mechanisms to prevent criminal acts against aircraft , such as adopting technology to detect explosives and establishing procedures to ensure that passengers are positively identified before boarding a flight . still , in recent years , we and others have often demonstrated that significant weaknesses continue to plague the nation's aviation security . the current aviation security structure and its policies , requirements , and practices have evolved since the early 1960s and were heavily influenced by a series of high - profile aviation security incidents . historically , the federal government has maintained that providing security is the responsibility of air carriers and airports as part of their cost of doing business . beginning in 1972 , air carriers were required to provide screening personnel , and airport operators were required to provide law enforcement support . however , with the rise in air piracy and terrorist activities that threatened not only commercial aviation but also national security , discussions began to emerge as to who should have the responsibility for providing security at our nation's airports . with the events of the last week , concerns have arisen again as to who should be responsible for security and screening passengers at our nation's airports . this issue has evoked many discussions through the years and just as many options concerning who should provide security at our nation's airports and how security should be handled . but as pointed out in a 1998 faa study , there was no consensus among the various aviation - related entities .