pub . 108-173 , § 231 , 117 stat . 2066 , 2207 ( 2003 ) ( codified , as amended , at 42 u.s.c . § 1395w - 21 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ) . snps , including d - snps , have been reauthorized several times since their establishment was first authorized in 2003 . within medicare , enrollment in managed care is always voluntary , whereas state medicaid programs can require enrollment in managed care in certain situations . in medicare , beneficiaries — including dual - eligible beneficiaries — are enrolled in ffs unless they select an ma plan . in general , beneficiaries may select an ma plan voluntarily when they first become eligible for medicare , during an annual coordinated election period , or during special election periods , such as when an ma plan's contract is terminated or discontinued in the area where a beneficiary lives or when cms determines that beneficiaries meet exceptional conditions . cms has created a special election period for dual - eligible beneficiaries , and accordingly , they may opt into ma or ffs or change ma plans at any time . they generally may select any ma plan , including d - snps , that serves the area where they live , though the number of plans available varies by area . ma plans may limit the providers from whom medicare beneficiaries , including dual - eligible beneficiaries , may receive covered services , whereas beneficiaries in medicare ffs may receive covered services from any provider enrolled in medicare . in contrast , a medicaid beneficiary's ability to choose to remain in ffs or enroll in managed care depends on how the state structures its medicaid program . as an alternative to ffs , states can structure their medicaid programs to require enrollment in managed care , or allow beneficiaries to choose between the two payment systems . unlike in medicare , states can mandatorily enroll beneficiaries , including dual - eligible beneficiaries , into medicaid managed care with cms approval of a section 1115 demonstration waiver or section 1915 ( b ) waiver . states mandating enrollment into a managed care plan generally must provide beneficiaries a choice of at least two plans , except in specific circumstances , such as in rural areas . otherwise , similar to medicare , the number of available medicaid managed care plans varies , depending on how many plans are offered where the beneficiary lives . subject to the terms and conditions of the waiver , medicaid managed care plans can generally limit beneficiaries , including dual - eligible beneficiaries , to the plan's provider network , whereas beneficiaries in medicaid ffs may receive covered services from any qualified medicaid provider . cms officials informed us , however , that for dual - eligible beneficiaries , the agency does not have the authority to allow states to limit the beneficiary's choice of provider for medicare covered benefits when mandatorily enrolling them into medicaid managed care plans . state requirements vary with respect to medicaid enrollment into ffs or managed care and for choice between plans if beneficiaries enroll in managed care .