implemented and sustained . gao - 09-321 . washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2009 . nuclear weapons: nnsa and dod need to more effectively manage the stockpile life extension program . gao - 09-385 . washington , d.c.: march 2 , 2009 . nuclear nonproliferation: doe's program to assist weapons scientists in russia and other countries needs to be reassessed . gao - 08-189 . washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2007 . nuclear and worker safety: actions needed to determine the effectiveness of safety improvement efforts at nnsa's weapons laboratories . gao - 08-73 . washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2007 . securing u.s. nuclear material: doe has made little progress consolidating and disposing of special nuclear material . gao - 08-72 . washington , d.c.: october 4 , 2007 . nuclear nonproliferation: progress made in improving security at russian nuclear sites , but the long - term sustainability of u.s. - funded security upgrades is uncertain . gao - 07-404 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2007 . national nuclear security administration: additional actions needed to improve management of the nation's nuclear programs . gao - 07-36 . washington , d.c.: january 19 , 2007 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . nnsa disagreed with our recommendations . however , it has taken some actions to address them including compiling an initial inventory of u.s. - origin heu overseas and developing a more systematic process for identifying and prioritizing future protection visits . we have also identified challenges in another element of dnn's mission — improving the capabilities of other countries to detect , deter and interdict smuggled nuclear material . the second line of defense program — including the megaports initiative , which was consolidated into second line of defense in 2014 — is essential to this effort . in october 2012 , we issued a report examining the megaports initiative and found that the continuity and sustainability of the megaports program could be a concern going forward . we found that nnsa had not finalized a long - term plan for ensuring the sustainability of the megaports initiative and recommended that nnsa finalize a sustainability plan for ensuring ongoing operations after nnsa transfers all equipment , maintenance , operations , and related financial responsibilities to partner countries . we also found that the initiative's performance measures did not provide sufficient information for decision making because they did not evaluate the program's impact and effectiveness . we recommended that nnsa develop and maintain useful and reliable measures to assess the performance of the initiative . nnsa agreed with our recommendations and , in fiscal year 2014 , added a new metric that tracks the cumulative number of sites that are being maintained by the host country .