fema did not specifically comment on our recommendations . fema's comments are reproduced in appendix i and discussed in more detail below . fema expressed the need for further clarification on several of our comments and findings on the ( 1 ) level of documentation contained in claim files and ( 2 ) policies and procedures / methodologies used for calculating losses . fema stated that it believes guidance and procedures necessary to support claims determination are present and are in use . our evaluation of fema's comments follows . the plan was to burn up to 900 acres . on may 5 , 2000 , the prescribed burn exceeded the capabilities of the national park service , spread to other federal and nonfederal land , and was characterized as a wildfire . by may 7 , 2000 , the fire had grown in size and caused evacuations in and around los alamos , new mexico . on may 13 , 2000 , the president issued a major disaster declaration , and subsequent to it , the secretary of the interior and the national park service assumed responsibility for the fire and the subsequent loss of federal , state , local , tribal , and private property . the fire , known as the cerro grande fire , burned approximately 48,000 acres in four counties and two indian pueblos , destroyed over 200 residential structures , and forced the evacuation of more than 18,000 residents . on july 13 , 2000 , the president signed the cgfaa into law . under the cgfaa , each claimant is entitled to be compensated by the united states government for certain injuries and damages that resulted from the cerro grande fire . the congress appropriated $455 million to the fema for the payment of such claims and $45 million for the administration of the cerro grande program . the act requires that gao conduct annual audits on the payment of all claims made and annually report the results of the audits to the congress by july 13 , beginning in fiscal year 2001 . the act also requires that our report include a review of all subrogation claims for which insurance companies have been paid or are seeking payment as subrogees under this act . fema is also required to annually submit a report to congress that provides information about claims submitted under the act . this report is to include the amounts claimed , a description of the nature of the claims , and a status or disposition of the claims , including the amounts paid . fema's first report is to be issued by august 28 , 2001 , based on the issuance of the program rules as discussed below . the cgfaa required fema to promulgate and publish implementing regulations for the cerro grande program within 45 days of enactment of the law . on august 28 , 2000 , fema published the disaster assistance: cerro grande fire assistance ; interim final rule in the federal register ( interim final rules ) . fema followed the interim rule with a set of implementing policies and procedures on november 13 , 2000 . fema updated these policies and procedures in january and march 2001 .