( app . iii contains additional details about the budget. ) the s&t community controls the budget for basic research , applied research , and advanced technology development . the budget category of advanced component development and prototypes involves testing and evaluating prototypes of systems or subsystems in a high - fidelity or realistic environment before product development starts . dod officials say it is assumed that either the s&t community or the acquisition community could carry out this work , but traditionally the acquisition side prevails . after this point , additional technology - related activities are completed as part of product development under the authority of the acquisition community , namely , the program manager for a weapon system . prior gao reports have said that dod launches new weapon programs with immature technology . we found this inability to mature the technology before the start of product development to be a major contributor to weapon system cost and schedule growth . in our march 2006 review of 52 major dod weapon programs , we found that 90 percent of the programs started with immature technologies . more than half of the programs were working with immature technologies at design review , when dod acquisition policy expects the design to be stable . and by the time production began , one - third of programs still did not have mature technologies . not surprisingly , we found that dod research , development , test , and evaluation cost estimates increased dramatically for programs having immature technologies at program start . figure 2 shows the average cost growth of dod programs we reviewed when technologies were mature and immature at program start . design components matured late in development , contributing to research , development , test , and evaluation cost growth and four nunn - mccurdy unit cost breaches . instead of purchasing five satellites , the air force now plans to buy three at a program acquisition unit cost of about $3.4 billion , a 315 percent increase . to successfully develop and transition technologies from their labs to their product lines , leading commercial companies depend on three key techniques: strategic planning at the corporate level ; a gated management review process that ensures a technology's relevancy , feasibility , and transition readiness ; and effective tools to solidify commitment , address transition issues , and gauge project progress and process effectiveness . overall , corporations are incentivized to follow these critical techniques because the opportunity cost of not meeting customer demand is late delivery and lost revenues and market share for the company . through rigorous adherence to these practices , leading companies increase chances of eventual success because the strategy for developing the technology fits the company's objectives , commitment is strong for incorporating the technology , and only after the technology is considered mature enough for use in a certain product does product development begin . because the cost of developing new and breakthrough technologies can be high , funding typically comes from the corporate level rather than from a single product line unit , enabling the company's product lines to manage only product development risk , not technology risk as well .