we also visited ports that had been assessed . at the ports , we interviewed local coast guard personnel as well as numerous stakeholders to determine how the assessment process was carried out . for part of the history of the program , we also relied on our previous work . from this analysis , 55 ports out of 361 ports were chosen to be the first to receive port security assessments . in april 2002 , the coast guard selected a contractor to perform the assessments . under this arrangement , the contractor was responsible for developing an approach ( which the coast guard calls “version 1” ) to assess vulnerabilities of port assets and systems such as cargo facilities , manufacturing facilities , passenger terminals , power generation and fuelling facilities , as well as other infrastructure such as public access areas and bridges . the assessment was to identify the relationships between selected assets to port systems , identify the vulnerabilities of those assets to terrorist attacks , and recommend actions to mitigate the vulnerabilities . with oversight from the coast guard , the contractor had primary responsibility for conducting key activities of each assessment , such as identifying which assets should be assessed , collecting data from stakeholders , making on - site visits , and analyzing the data collected . the final product was to be a comprehensive written report of the findings identified during the assessment . primary customers for this work were the local coast guard captain of the port and port stakeholders serving on area maritime security committees , who could use it in such security planning efforts as the development of an area maritime security plan . the first assessments began in august 2002 ; the coast guard's goal was to complete them at all 55 ports by the end of 2004 . to further refine the approach before assessing “megaports” such as new york / new jersey or los angeles / long beach , as well as to give the program a chance to build additional assessment teams to perform the work , the coast guard decided to try out the approach at medium - sized ports first such as san diego and boston . under the time frame the coast guard adopted , officials expected to conduct assessments of 8 ports in 2002 , 18 in 2003 , and 24 in 2004 . several actions taken by port stakeholders led to substantial changes in the approach . one of these developments was that many port stakeholders were starting or completing assessments on their own . stakeholders , such as port authorities , and owners and operators of facilities and vessels began conducting assessments in order to identify security vulnerabilities of their assets or to meet application requirements for federal grants . in some cases , initial assessments were performed shortly after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and were followed by more comprehensive assessments conducted either on their own or by contractors . requirements such as these could be important in ensuring that the system will deliver what users need .