justice officials agreed with this assessment . although the eo's requirements have not been amended or revoked since 1988 , the four agencies' implementation of some of its key provisions has changed over time because of subsequent guidance provided by omb . for example , the agencies no longer prepare annual compilations of just compensation awards or account for these awards in their budget documents because omb issued guidance in 1994 advising agencies that this information is no longer required . according to omb , this information is not needed because the number and amount of these awards is small and the awards are paid from the department of the treasury's judgment fund , rather than from the agencies' appropriations . each of the four agencies has designated an official — typically the chief counsel , general counsel , or solicitor — to be responsible for ensuring the agency's compliance with the eo . finally , the four agencies told us that they fully consider the potential takings implications of their planned regulatory actions , but provided us with limited documentary evidence to support this claim . the eo requires each executive branch agency to submit annually to omb and justice an itemized compilation report of all just compensation awards entered against the united states for regulatory takings related to the agencies' activities . the eo also requires that agencies include information on these awards in their annual budget submissions . dolan v. city of tigard , 512 u.s. 374 ( 1994 ) issue: the court stated that it granted certiorari to resolve a question left open by its decision in nollan v. california coastal commission ( discussed below ) : what is the required degree of connection between the exactions imposed by the city and the projected impacts of the proposed development ? penn central transportation co. v. city of new york , 438 u.s. 104 ( 1978 ) issue: did the city's use of a historic preservation ordinance to block construction of an office tower atop a designated historic landmark cause a taking ? however , at present , the agencies are not complying with these provisions because of guidance provided by omb . regarding annual compilations of just compensation awards , omb first provided guidance on the form and content of compilations in its circular a - 11 , issued in june 1988 . however , in a subsequent version of this circular issued in july 1994 , omb advised agencies that the submission of this information is no longer necessary . according to omb officials , this information is not needed because just compensation awards or settlements related to regulatory takings cases do not affect agency budgets but are paid from the department of the treasury's judgment fund . furthermore , omb and justice officials said that because the number of just compensation awards and settlements paid by the federal government annually and the total dollar amount of these payments are relatively small , the overall budget implications for the government are small . hence , these officials said the annual reporting of just compensation awards was unnecessary . omb officials offered similar reasons for not requiring agencies to include information on just compensation awards in their annual budget documents .