these key efforts are discussed here . until all agencies properly document and implement policies and procedures , they may not be able to effectively reduce risks to their information and information systems , and the information security practices that are driven by these policies and procedures may be applied inconsistently . cybersecurity cross - agency priority goals: initiated in 2012 , the cybersecurity cross - agency priority ( cap ) goals are an effort intended to focus federal agencies' cybersecurity activity on the most effective controls . for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , these goals included: trusted internet connections: trusted internet connections ( tic ) aims to improve the federal government's security posture through the consolidation of external telecommunication connections by establishing a set of baseline security capabilities through enhanced monitoring and situational awareness of all external network connections . omb established fiscal year 2014 targets of 95 percent for tic consolidation and 100 percent for implementing tic capabilities . omb reported that agencies had achieved 95 and 92 percent implementation , respectively , for these tic goals in fiscal year 2014 . continuous monitoring: intended to provide near real - time security status and remediation , increasing visibility into system operations and helping security personnel make risk management decisions based on increased situational awareness . omb established a fiscal year 2014 target of 95 percent implementation for continuous monitoring and reported that the agencies had achieved 92 percent implementation . strong authentication: intended to increase the use of federal smartcard credentials , such as personal identity verification and common access cards that provide multifactor authentication and digital signature and encryption capabilities . strong authentication can provide a higher level of assurance when authorizing users' access to federal information systems . omb established a fiscal year 2014 target of 75 percent implementation for strong authentication . in its report on fiscal year 2014 fisma implementation , omb indicated that the 24 federal agencies covered by the cfo act had achieved a combined 72 percent implementation of these requirements , but this number dropped to only 41 percent implementation for the 23 civilian agencies when excluding dod . in fiscal year 2015 , the administration added the anti - phishing and malware defense as a new goal for the cap initiative . the national cybersecurity protection system ( ncps ) : ncps is a system of systems ( also known as einstein ) that is intended to deliver a range of capabilities including intrusion detection and prevention , analytics , and information sharing . the goal of einstein is to provide the federal government with an early warning system , improved situational awareness of intrusion threats , near real - time identification , and prevention of malicious cyber activity . this system was created in 2003 by us - cert to help reduce and prevent computer network vulnerabilities across the federal government . the capabilities of ncps are to include network “flow,” intrusion detection , and intrusion prevention functions , as described in table 2 . the continuous diagnostics and mitigation ( cdm ) program: cdm is intended to provide federal departments and agencies with a basic set of tools to support the continuous monitoring of information systems .