need to improve management and governance . faa has embarked on an initiative to restructure a number of organizations within the agency . we have previously reported on problems with faa's management and oversight of nextgen acquisitions and implementation . specifically , faa plans to abolish and merge a number of committees to improve decision making and reduce time requirements of senior faa executives . it also plans to make the nextgen organization the responsibility of the deputy administrator and to create a new head of program management for nextgen - related programs to ensure improved oversight of nextgen implementation . further , the air traffic organization will be divided into two branches: operations and nextgen program management . operations will focus on the day - to - day management of the national air space and the program management branch will be responsible for developing and implementing programs while working with operations to ensure proper integration . while elimination of duplicative committees and focus on accountability for nextgen implementation is a positive step , it remains to be seen whether this latest reorganization will produce the desired results . chairman petri , ranking member costello , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . need to address environmental impacts of nextgen . need to address human factors and training issues . under nextgen , pilots and air traffic controllers will rely to a greater extent on automation , which will change their roles and responsibilities in ways that will necessitate an understanding of the human factors issues involved and require that training be provided on the new automated systems . faa and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) — the primary agencies responsible for integrating human factors issues into nextgen — must ensure that human factors issues are addressed so that controllers , pilots , and others will operate nextgen components in a safe and efficient manner . failure to do so could delay implementation of nextgen . we recently reported that faa has not fully integrated human factors into the development of some aviation systems . stakeholders have proposed various equipage incentives . for example , one such proposal is for a private equity fund , backed by federal guarantees , to provide loans or other financial assistance to operators to help them equip , with payback of the loans dependent on faa meeting its schedule commitments to implement capabilities that will produce benefits for operators . in addition , the nextgen advisory committee has begun to identify the specific avionics requirements for particular nextgen capabilities through the midterm , as well as identifying who — in terms of which parts of the fleet operating in which regions — should be targeted for additional incentives to equip . our past and ongoing work examining aspects of nextgen have highlighted several other challenges facing faa in achieving timely and successful implementation .