111-8 , div . nara finalized its plan in november 2008 . it stated that , in the event that records could not be ingested into eop in a timely manner , nara intended to acquire hardware and software to replicate the systems containing the data and use them to retrieve requested records . we recommended that , to improve the utility of information provided to congress , nara include summary measures of project performance against era cost and schedule estimates in its monthly reports . in july 2008 , nara began including this information as an appendix to its monthly reports to congress . however , during our review , we found methodological weaknesses that could limit nara's ability to accurately report on program cost , schedule , and performance . we made four observations related to the era program and fiscal year cost , schedule , and performance data in the expenditure plan do not provide a clear picture of era system progress . the plan does not specifically identify whether completed increments included all previously planned functionality or what functionality will be provided in future increments . for example , the plan does not specify what outcomes nara expects to achieve with the remainder of its fiscal year 2009 funding . in december 2008 , nara issued an assessment that detailed the results of an evaluation of the security features associated with the era system . this assessment identified weaknesses related to all 10 of the contingency planning control activities , which were attributed to the system not having the required contingency plans . omb guidancerequires that when an agency identifies security weaknesses , it must also develop a plan of action to address the identified weaknesses , including the resources required to fix the weaknesses , the scheduled completion date of each fix , and the current status of the mitigation . accordingly , nara developed a plan of action and milestone document which was to detail all the primary risk elements present in the system and the corresponding plan of actions to mitigate or correct identified deficiencies before the era system reached ioc . however , while the initial plan of action and milestones discussed fixes for eight contingency planning control activities , it did not address two others — contingency planning policies and procedures and telecommunications services . for those eight control activities mentioned in the document , no timetable was provided for completion to address the identified issues . a subsequent planning document was developed that provided further detail on the identified risks . nara implemented one of the recommendations we made last year , and partially implemented the other: we recommended that nara develop a risk mitigation plan to ensure indexing and searching of records from the bush administration in the event that the eop system was not complete in time for the january 2009 presidential transition . nara finalized its plan in november 2008 . it stated that , in the event that records could not be ingested into eop in a timely manner , nara intended to acquire hardware and software to replicate the systems containing the data and use them to retrieve requested records .