attorneys . according to the oig's investigative manual , if the oig determines that a case should be referred to a u.s. attorney's office , a formal presentation normally occurs after the oig has completed its investigation . the oig expects its agents to establish and maintain working relationships with u.s. attorneys' offices , and expects them to consult as soon as they have information that indicates that an investigation may corroborate an allegation . according to the oig , early consultation allows the oig to focus its investigative efforts on and support prosecutive potential . if early consultation results in acceptance of a case for prosecution , the oig is to provide the prosecutor with a preliminary investigation report . reporting to state or local prosecutors . if a case is declined by u.s . attorneys , the oig may refer the case to state or local prosecutors . under the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended , the oig is required to report its activities and accomplishments ( including those related to fraud and abuse ) to congress semiannually , and the agency is required to submit a response to each semiannual report . the oig may also prepare reports in response to requests from other federal agencies ( including gao ) or from congressional committees or members . the oig may notify multiple carriers of suspected fraud or abuse and may share information about potential fraud and abuse through participation in interagency health care fraud task forces or other fraud detection and prevention organizations . consistent with the health insurance portability and accountability act , which encourages coordination and information sharing between federal , state , and local law enforcement programs to control health care fraud and the sharing of related information with the private sector,shares information with several antifraud entities: the oig participates as a law enforcement liaison to the national health care anti - fraud association ( nhcaa ) . according to oig officials , the oig works with the nhcaa and its members ( which include many fehbp carriers ) on training , education , and sharing information about trends in health care fraud and participates in nhcaa - sponsored training and conferences , and the oig liaison to the nhcaa participates on nhcaa committees and meets with the nhcaa on a regular basis . the oig organizes and operates an fehbp carrier task force that includes the oig and representatives of the largest fehbp carriers . there is no minimum profit . for experience - rated carriers , opm negotiates the plan's profit rate by determining a service charge using a process outlined in regulation that takes the plan's the service charge ( or profit ) for performance into consideration . experience - rated carriers may not exceed 1.1 percent of the plan's projected claims and administrative fees . for community - rated carriers , profits reflect the difference between the premiums and the actual costs . because they are not capped at a percentage of projected costs , profits for community - rated carriers may be greater than profits for experience - rated carriers .