( see fig . according to the strategy , dhs and usda now work together to address national biodefense issues and carry out the mission of the plum island animal disease center as follows: dhs is responsible for coordinating the overall national effort to enhance the protection of agriculture , which the president has defined as a critical infrastructure sector . at plum island , dhs's science and technology directorate is working to advance the development of vaccines and disease prophylactics based on ars's basic research . also , dhs has established a bioforensics laboratory at plum island and is working to conduct forensic analysis of evidence from suspected biocrimes and terrorism involving a foreign animal disease attack . usda / ars scientists at plum island are responsible for basic research on foreign livestock diseases and for early discovery of countermeasures , such as evaluating countermeasures for rapid induction of immunity in livestock . usda / aphis scientists are responsible for diagnosing livestock diseases . also , aphis conducts diagnostic training sessions several times a year to give veterinary health professionals the opportunity to study the clinical signs of animal diseases found in other countries , such as fmd . currently , in addition to visiting scientists and fellows , there are approximately 70 federal research scientists , veterinarians , microbiologists , laboratory technicians , and support staff working at plum island . dhs and usda's combined annual operating funds at plum island , based on fiscal year 2005 allocations and other funds , is about $60 million — usda's funding is about $8 million , and dhs's is about $51 million ( see fig . prior to the transfer of plum island to dhs , ars and aphis shared responsibility for operating costs , although ars had primary responsibility for the facility . according to agency officials , both agencies received appropriations to execute their research and diagnostic missions , out of which operations and maintenance costs had to be funded . neither ars nor aphis received a specific appropriation for operations and maintenance activities . now , dhs is responsible for operations and maintenance costs as well as programmatic costs that dhs incurs directly . ars and aphis continue to receive funding from usda to support their own programmatic activities at the island . dhs's and usda's efforts to coordinate research and diagnostic programs at plum island have been largely successful because of the agencies' early efforts to work together to bring structure to their interaction at the island . for example , the agencies developed a joint strategy that outlines how they will pursue their shared mission at plum island . they also developed formal mechanisms for coordination , and they rely on frequent informal communication among scientists at plum island . the scientists also attribute effective coordination and resolution of transition difficulties to skilled management at plum island . our review shows a largely positive experience thus far in the coordination of dhs and usda activities at plum island . additional details about our scope and methodology are presented in appendix i . we performed our work from march 2005 to december 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .