( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . these incentives have the potential to increase shipbuilder profitability . as outlined in the ffg ( x ) draft detail design and construction request for proposal and confirmed by program officials , each frigate will have a guaranty period that commences at ship delivery and is expected to end 18 months after delivery . navy officials stated the guaranty is intended to formalize a period of responsibility during which the shipbuilder must correct defects , with the cost to the government and the contractor based on the contract terms ( cost shareline and price ceiling ) associated with the ship . during the guaranty period , the shipbuilder would be required to correct all defects for which it is responsible , with proposals required to include a minimum limitation of liability of $5 million per ship . once the total cost to correct identified defects reaches $5 million , the government would pay the full cost to correct any additional guaranty period defects . the $5 million minimum limitation of liability planned for ffg ( x ) has a higher dollar value and covers a longer period of time than other recent shipbuilding programs . for example , we previously found that for the navy's lpd 25 amphibious transport dock construction , the contract initially included a $1 million limitation of liability . navy officials stated that the final request for proposal also will include a provision allowing industry to propose a higher liability limit , up to and including no limitation of liability . navy officials said that any additional liability amount proposed beyond the $5 million guaranty will be assessed as part of the technical evaluation criteria used to select the winning ffg ( x ) design . we found in march 2016 that the use of a guaranty did not help improve cost or quality outcomes for the navy and coast guard ships we reviewed . we also found that commercial ship buyers and coast guard officials stated that warranties foster quality performance because the shipbuilder's profit erodes as it spends money to correct deficiencies after delivery , during the warranty period . the target cost generally informs the shareline and price ceiling . given the unknowns associated with design and construction , the navy plans to account for these unresolved risks by assuming responsibility for cost growth above dod recommended guidance . as we reported in march 2017 , when the navy assumes a greater share of cost overruns above the target cost , accepts a higher price ceiling , or both , the fixed - price incentive elements may not provide sufficient motivation for the shipbuilders to control costs . although this ship does not have the size and advanced systems planned for ffg ( x ) , it serves to demonstrate the potential value to the government presented by the use of warranties . the coast guard also used a fixed - price incentive contract with a warranty on its offshore patrol cutter — a ship of comparable size to ffg ( x ) . the first offshore patrol cutter has a 2-year warranty , and follow - on ships will have 1-year warranties .