the ailerons were also purchased as a commercial item . for a commercial item , price reasonableness is established based on an analysis of prices and sales data for the same or similar commercial items . for the awacs spare parts purchases we reviewed , dcma provided technical assistance to the air force by analyzing labor hours , material and overhead costs , and contract prices . dcaa provided auditing and cost accounting services . dcma and dcaa analyses were submitted to the air force prior to contract negotiations for the respective purchases . since late 2001 , the air force has negotiated and awarded contracts to boeing for the purchase of outboard ailerons , cowlings , and radomes totaling over $23 million . specifically , the air force purchased three ailerons for about $1.4 million , 12 right - hand cowlings and 12 left - hand cowlings for about $7.9 million , and three radomes for about $5.9 million . the air force paid an additional $8.1 million in costs as part of the initial radome contract to move equipment and establish manufacturing capabilities in a new location ( see table 1 ) . the most recent per unit cost of each part represents a substantial increase from prior purchases . in january 2003 , dcaa reported that the proposed price was “unsupported” and that boeing did not comply with the boeing estimating system manual , which requires support for commercial item prices . further , the report said that boeing must submit cost information and supporting documentation . boeing aerospace operations , midwest city , oklahoma , had contract management responsibility for the purchases . figure 2 shows the unit price increases , including adjustments for inflation , for ailerons , cowlings , and radomes . the air force and boeing cited a number of additional factors that may have contributed to higher prices . for all the parts , the air force purchased limited quantities , which generally results in higher unit prices . for the ailerons , which had not been purchased since 1986 , boeing officials told us that some of the price increase was attributable to production inefficiencies that would result from working with older technical drawings , developing prototype manufacturing methods , and using different materials in the manufacturing process . the unit price of the cowlings included costs for the purchase of new tools required to manufacture the cowlings in - house — which boeing decided to do rather than have vendors manufacture the cowlings , as had been done in the past . the new tools included items such as large production jigs , used to shape and fabricate sheet metal . regarding radomes , the air force paid boeing to relocate tooling and equipment from seattle , washington , to tulsa , oklahoma , and develop manufacturing capabilities at the tulsa facility to produce and repair radomes . boeing had initially decided to discontinue radome production and repair at its seattle location due to low demand for these parts but , after further consideration of the air force's requirements , decided to relocate the capability in tulsa .