others had no mobile service . further , officials from about half of the tribes we interviewed described important limitations to their internet services , including higher than usual costs , small data allocations , slow download speeds , and unreliable connections . in january 2016 , we found that the barriers to improvements in high - speed internet service on tribal lands are interrelated . the rugged terrain and rural location as well as tribal members' limited ability to pay for high - speed internet service were tribes' and private providers' most commonly cited impediments . many tribal officials and all six providers we interviewed said these barriers can deter private investment in infrastructure needed to connect remote towns and villages to a service provider's core network — known as the middle - mile . middle - mile infrastructure may include burying fiber optic or copper cables , stringing cable on existing poles , or erecting towers for wireless microwave links , which relay wireless internet connections from tower to tower through radio spectrum . tribal lands , located far from urban areas , may not have the middle - mile infrastructure necessary for providers to deploy high - speed internet . tribal officials and providers we interviewed also cited limited financial resources as a barrier to high - speed internet access . of the 21 tribes we interviewed , many reported poverty and affordability as drivers of low subscribership to existing internet services or as a barrier to broadening the availability of services . poverty rates among the tribes we interviewed varied , but many were well above the 2014 national average of 15.5 percent . two of the providers we interviewed discussed non - payment among tribal households as a disincentive to internet service provision . one provider said that the customers it serves on tribal lands had non - payment rates double that of other customer groups , and that these rates often follow seasonal employment patterns . about half of the tribes we interviewed told us that a lack of tribal members with sufficient bureaucratic and technical expertise was a common barrier to increasing high - speed internet access on tribal lands . tribal officials said that tribal members do not always have the bureaucratic expertise required to apply for federal funds , which can lead to mistakes or the need to hire consultants . a lack of technical expertise also affects tribes' ability to interact with private - sector internet providers . for the seven tribes we interviewed that either had a tribally - owned provider or were in the process of establishing one , three of them said that the lack of expertise in the tribe was a challenge to establishing a tribally - owned telecommunications provider for high - speed internet deployment . to address this , in the early 2000s , fcc held a number of indian telecommunications initiatives , regional workshops , and roundtables . in fiscal year 2012 , the fcc's office of native affairs and policy consulted with about 200 tribal nations , many during six separate one - to three - day telecommunications training and consultation sessions on tribal lands .