pub . 111-148 , § 6409 ( a ) , 124 stat . under this protocol , providers of services and supplies may self - disclose actual or potential violations of the physician self - referral law , commonly known as the stark law . the stark law prohibits physicians from making certain referrals for “designated health services” paid for by medicare to entities with which the physician ( or immediate family members ) has a financial relationship , unless the arrangement complies with a specified exception , such as in - office ancillary services . § 1395nn ( a ) ( 1 ) , ( b ) ( 2 ) . officials told us that one indicator they use is the drop in number of claims for particular services , which they believe coincides with the efforts of the strike force teams to investigate and prosecute fraud . for example , according to information that cms provided to us , payments for home health services dropped by nearly one - half from 2008 to 2011 in miami - dade county , which officials believe was , in part , due to the strike force team's efforts focused on reducing fraud in home health care . hhs - oig uses a variety of indicators to assess the work it conducts using hcfac funds . some of these indicators reflect the collective work of hhs - oig's components and some are unique to the activities conducted by a particular component . for example , hhs - oig tracks the health care savings attributable to hhs - oig investigations , audits , and evaluations . this indicator includes work from nearly all hhs - oig components , including the office of investigations , the office of audit services , and the office of evaluation and inspections . among many other indicators , hhs - oig's office of counsel to the inspector general tracks the number of corporate integrity agreements monitored for compliance , which is specific to the work of that office . hhs - oig officials told us that the indicators they use to assess hcfac activities are reported in the annual hcfac report and in other hhs - oig reports ( such as its semi - annual reports to congress ) . doj uses several indicators to assess the work it conducts with hcfac funding . the indicators it uses relate to the activities that each doj component conducts to enforce health care fraud and abuse laws . for example , the usaos use indicators related to criminal prosecutions , including the number of defendants charged and the number of convictions . in addition to those measures , the usaos also track information related to civil matters , such as the number of pending civil investigations . in addition to the indicators listed in the annual hcfac report , officials from doj's components told us that they use other indicators to assess the work they conduct related to health care fraud and abuse . officials told us that these indicators are tracked at the departmental level and aggregate the work of multiple doj components . for example , doj tracks the percentage of criminal and civil cases resolved favorably .