schools . officials at several schools we visited said they face similar capacity challenges . for example , we visited an elementary school with one full - time employee for facility maintenance , along with one part - time assistant . a decade ago , the school had about six maintenance employees , according to school officials . as a result of the staffing decrease , school officials said that facility maintenance staff may sometimes defer needed maintenance . leading facility management practices emphasize the importance of having managers with sufficient technical expertise . staff capacity is important because the appropriate geographic and organizational deployment of employees can further support organizational goals and strategies and enable an organization to have the right people , with the right skills , doing the right jobs , in the right place , at the right time . however , we have previously reported that limited staff capacity at indian affairs impedes its oversight and support of bie schools and that this runs counter to effective human capital practices . recommended that indian affairs revise its strategic workforce plan . specifically , we recommended that indian affairs revise its strategic workforce plan to ensure that employees providing administrative support to bie have the requisite knowledge and skills to help bie achieve its mission and are placed in the appropriate offices . indian affairs agreed to implement the recommendation but has not yet done so . our preliminary results suggest that indian affairs has not provided consistent oversight of some school construction projects , including projects it managed itself and projects managed by tribes . bia regions . staff in certain regions told us that they have experienced declining staffing levels for over a decade , despite key responsibilities in overseeing bie school construction and repair projects as well as supporting schools with technical assistance . our preliminary analysis of indian affairs data shows that about 40 percent of regional facility positions are currently vacant , including regional facility managers , architects , and engineers who typically serve as project managers for school construction . in one bia region serving over 15 bie schools — along with additional indian affairs' facilities such as detention centers — the regional facility staff has decreased by about half in the past 15 years , according to the regional facility manager . as of december 2014 , two project managers were tasked with overseeing a growing workload of construction projects , among other duties , and only one was a licensed professional , according to the regional facility manager . the regional facility manager also noted gaps in internal staff expertise , such as not having a mechanical engineer on staff to review designs or external engineers' assessments of systems such as heating and air conditioning . regional staff said that hiring an in - house boiler inspector would allow them to conduct more frequent inspections and may cost less than hiring contractors to do so . without staff with particular construction expertise , several indian affairs officials said that they have increasingly relied on outside contractors .