iii . we conducted this performance audit from april 2016 to march 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the federal government owns and leases hundreds of thousands of buildings and permanent structures across the country that cost billions of dollars annually to operate and maintain . federally owned buildings range from multi - story buildings located in urban centers to remotely located storage facilities in national parks or national forests . federally owned buildings are used for offices , warehouses , schools , hospitals , housing , data centers , and laboratories , among others uses . our prior work has found that when these types of buildings remain vacant , they may be good candidates for disposal or re - use for another agency ( see fig . within the executive branch , omb and gsa provide leadership in managing federal real property . as the chief management office for the executive branch , omb is responsible for overseeing how federal agencies devise , implement , manage , and evaluate programs and policies . omb develops and provides direction , such as issuing policies and memorandums , to federal agencies on real property management matters . omb reports the progress of agencies' efforts in freezing and reducing the federal real property footprint . gsa acquires , manages , and disposes of federally owned real property for which it has custody and control . the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , as amended , provides gsa the authority to dispose of property for most federal entities and mandates the process for doing so . gsa's office of government - wide policy is responsible for identifying , evaluating , and promoting best practices to improve the efficiency of management processes . in this policy role , gsa also provides guidance for federal entities and publishes performance measures . established in 2004 in response to requirements in executive order 13327 , frpp is a single comprehensive database that contains information on federal real property worldwide , including disposal information , and is maintained by gsa . the 24 cfo act agencies are required to report their real property data on an annual basis . government decision makers — including congress , omb , and agencies — can use frpp data to understand the nature , use , and extent of the federal real - property inventory . in its june 2015 and september 2016 testimonies to congress on agencies' progress in implementing omb's freeze the footprint initiative , omb used frpp data to report on domestic , federally owned building disposals . since 2012 , omb has undertaken several initiatives and issued guidance to federal agencies to improve the management of federal real property and address long - standing issues . in march 2015 , omb introduced the national strategy for efficient use of real property to improve federal utilization of the real property portfolio .