dod and state contractors also have this requirement for work performed in afghanistan . however , usaid has not yet imposed a similar requirement on its contractors in afghanistan but is developing a plan to do so . our prior work has shown that the criteria dod , state , and usaid used for determining which contractor personnel are entered into spot varied and were not always consistent with the mou . this limited visibility can create challenges for planning and carrying out missions . further , a lack of visibility into the extent to which agencies rely on contractors can hinder their ability to plan for the role of contractors . for example , we reported in november 2009 that without insight into services provided by contractors as part of the drawdown in iraq , dod planners may lack information necessary to efficiently allocate contracted services to support the remaining u.s. forces as the drawdown progresses . without incorporating information on contractors and grantees into planning efforts , agencies risk making uninformed programmatic decisions . as we noted in our 2004 and 2005 reviews of afghanistan reconstruction efforts , when developing its interim development assistance strategy , usaid did not incorporate information on the contractor and grantee resources required to implement the strategy . we determined this impaired usaid's ability to make informed decisions on resource allocations for the strategy . a lack of accurate financial information on contracts impedes agencies' ability to create realistic budgets . as we reported in july 2005 , despite the significant role of private security providers in enabling iraqi reconstruction efforts , neither dod , state , nor usaid had complete data on the costs associated with using private security providers . agency officials acknowledged such data could help them identify security cost trends and their impact on the reconstruction projects , as increased security costs resulted in the reduction or cancellation of some projects . lack of visibility into the services being performed increases agencies' risk of duplicative efforts . in our may 2009 review of dod funding for humanitarian and reconstruction projects in afghanistan , we found that dod lacked visibility into development projects being undertaken by usaid . in particular , by not having a centralized , interagency database of all ongoing projects in afghanistan , the u.s. government may not be in a position to fully leverage the resources available and risks duplicating reconstruction efforts . many recommendations from our prior work on contractors supporting contingency operations focused on increasing agencies' ability to track contracts and contractor personnel so decision makers — whether in the field or at headquarters — can better understand the extent to which they rely on contractors , better plan , and better account for costs . while they have taken actions to address our recommendations , dod , state , and usaid officials told us access to information on contracts and associated personnel still needs improvement . specifically , information on contracts and the personnel working on them in iraq and afghanistan may reside solely with the contractors , be stored in a variety of data systems , or exist only in paper form in scattered geographic regions .