iv ) . we identified these factors from our review of a wide range of dod and navy publications and statements , open literature , academic research on the subject of military innovation and transformation , and case studies of past transformation efforts . to assess the reasonableness and completeness of these factors , we discussed them with navy and dod officials and outside defense experts from various research and academic organizations . we also used the principles laid out in the government performance and results act of 1993 as additional benchmarks for our assessment . to determine the navy's transformation - related activities and develop our observations of the key management issues affecting progress , we obtained information , documents , and perspectives from officials at all levels of the navy , including navy headquarters , the navy warfare development command , the naval war college , the atlantic and pacific fleets , and the offices of the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . we discussed navy transformation with the former secretary of the navy ( 1998-2001 ) and with several senior navy leaders who have responsibility for various aspects of the navy's transformation . we also obtained perspectives from several defense experts and academicians who have followed military and navy transformation . appendix vi lists the principal organizations and offices where we performed work . we reviewed an extensive array of policy , planning , and guidance documents ; intelligence documents ; posture statements and speeches ; congressional hearings and testimonies ; open literature ; and studies and assessments . we also made extensive use of information available on public and dod internet web sites . to develop a better understanding of the navy's transformation and the actions it has taken to carry out the transformation , we obtained information on various areas related to concept development , experimentation , innovation , research and development , and other transformation activities . we reviewed the concept of network centric warfare with navy officials at several organizations and offices responsible for developing and implementing the concept . to ascertain the navy's experimentation and innovation efforts , we discussed the plans , content , and results with officials at the navy warfare development command , atlantic and pacific fleets , and research and development organizations . to obtain information on the navy's participation in joint experimentation efforts , particularly millennium challenge 2002 , we met with officials at the u.s. joint forces command and the joint staff's joint vision and transformation division . to be cognizant of the security environment in which the navy is likely to operate its forces through 2020 , we obtained an intelligence briefing from the defense intelligence agency . to attain information on the navy's investment in research and development to support transformation , we met with officials at the office of naval research , the space and naval warfare systems command , and the defense advanced research projects agency . although we did not include a review of marine corps transformation activities in our review , we did meet with a senior marine corps official responsible for the service's transformation to discuss coordination and joint transformation - related efforts between the two services .