we also conducted interviews with the 25 households . households we identified as potentially ineligible were referred to the usda office of the inspector general for further examination . further details on our scope and methodology are included in the may 2014 report . for the selected updates , in january 2015 usda provided us information on the status of its implementation of our recommendations . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards and standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency . within usda , fns has overall responsibility for overseeing the school - meals programs , which includes promulgating regulations to implement authorizing legislation , setting nationwide eligibility criteria , and issuing guidance . school - meals programs are administered at the state level by a designated state agency that issues policy guidance and other instructions to school districts providing the meals to ensure awareness of federal and state requirements . school districts are responsible for completing application , certification , and verification activities for the school - meals programs , and for providing children with nutritionally balanced meals each school day . the designated state agency conducts periodic reviews of the school districts to determine whether the program requirements are being met . schools and households that participate in free or reduced - price meal programs may be eligible for additional federal and state benefits . household income levels determine whether children qualify for free or reduced - price meals . children from families with incomes at or below 130 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible for free meals ; the income threshold for a family of four was $28,665 in the 2010 – 2011 school year . those with incomes between 130 percent and 185 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible for reduced - price meals . income is any money received on a recurring basis — including , but not limited to , gross earnings from work , welfare , child support , alimony , retirement , and disability benefits — unless specifically excluded by statute . in addition , students who are in households receiving benefits under certain public - assistance programs — specifically , snap , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , or food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) — or meet certain approved designations ( such as students who are designated as homeless , runaway , or migrant ; or who are foster children ) are eligible for free school meals regardless of income . in may 2014 , we reported that usda had taken several steps to implement or enhance controls to identify and prevent ineligible beneficiaries from receiving school - meals benefits . usda worked with congress to develop legislation to automatically enroll students who receive snap benefits for free school meals ; snap has a more - detailed certification process than the school - meals program . for our may 2014 report , usda officials told us that they were emphasizing the use of direct certification , because , in their opinion , it helps prevent certification errors without compromising access .