informed and shared decision making . our experts' evaluation of this category included whether informed consent and communication between treatment providers occurred , according to records . our experts found that informed - consent decisions were mostly documented in 5 of 23 applicable cases . in 11 of 23 cases , our experts found partial documentation of informed consent — such as when some , but not all , medications prescribed to the child included documentation of informed consent — and 7 other cases did not include any documentation of informed consent . for example , in one case , our experts reported there was no documentation of informed consent , psychiatric evaluation , psychiatric diagnosis , or monitoring of antipsychotic medication . in this case , the child was prescribed an antianxiety medication ( buspirone ) , an antipsychotic medication ( risperidone ) , and an adhd medication ( clonidine ) at 4 years of age , presumably to treat psychiatric symptoms that interfered with his functioning , including short attention span , wandering off , self - injury , and aggression . however , our experts noted the documentation was too sparse to determine why the psychotropic medications were prescribed , and the indications , monitoring , and side effects could not be evaluated . in addition , our experts found that communication between treatment providers was mostly documented in 15 of 23 applicable cases . however , communication between treatment providers was partially documented in 5 of 23 cases , and there was no evidence that such communication occurred in 3 of 23 cases . foster children can experience frequent changes in their living placements , which can lead to a lack of continuity in mental - health care , and new providers may not have the medical history of the patient . this lack of stability can lead to treatment disruptions and can increase the number of medications prescribed . of the 24 cases reviewed , 9 were infant cases that our experts evaluated to determine whether the prescriptions were for psychiatric or non - mental - health reasons . our experts agreed that prescriptions of psychotropic medications to infants carries significant risk as there are no established mental - health indications for the use of psychotropic medications in infants and the medications have the potential to result in serious adverse effects for this age group . our experts found in 4 of 9 infant cases reviewed that the prescription of psychotropic medication was for non - mental - health purposes , such as to treat skin conditions , based on documentation reviewed . however , our experts found that in 2 of 9 cases the infants were prescribed psychotropic medications for psychiatric reasons , and the rationale and oversight for such medications were partially supported by documentation . in 3 of 9 infant cases , our experts were unable to discern whether the psychotropic medications were prescribed to infants for mental - health purposes or for some other medical reason , based on documentation reviewed . in conclusion , early detection and treatment of mental - health conditions can improve a child's symptoms and reduce potentially detrimental effects , such as difficulties with relationships , dropping out of school , and involvement with the juvenile justice system .