nnsa did not specifically comment on our recommendations . however , nnsa provided general comments on our findings that nnsa had not developed complete cost estimates for the w88 pit manufacturing mission and that nnsa had not developed clear requirements for the number of w88 war reserve pits it planned to manufacture . with respect to the completeness of nnsa's cost estimate for w88 pit manufacturing , nnsa stated that the pit manufacturing mission should not be accountable for certain costs directly associated with the pit manufacturing and certification project , such as activities at the nevada test site , or the costs associated with support facilities , such as pf - 4 , because these facilities and their capabilities would be required to address other program requirements , regardless of the presence of the pit manufacturing program . however , we note that nnsa's 1998 pit manufacturing project plan did include both direct costs , such as construction costs directly related to pit manufacturing , as well as support costs , such as those needed to maintain the infrastructure at pf - 4 . in addition , we found that currently lanl is developing a cost distribution model that will allow the laboratory to allocate the cost of shared activities at facilities such as pf - 4 and cmr . therefore , we continue to believe that in order for nnsa to be able to successfully manage future pit manufacturing missions such as those proposed in nnsa's complex transformation documents , it will need a cost baseline that accounts for all costs , including an appropriate portion of the necessary supporting costs . with respect to the need for clear requirements for the number of w88 war reserve pits nnsa planned to manufacture , nnsa stated that the main purpose of the pit manufacturing and certification project was to reconstitute pit manufacturing with a limited manufacturing capacity . nnsa stated that the lack of available pits to support the surveillance program for the w88 warhead was the near term requirement and the driver for the project's schedule . however , according to nnsa , the exact number of pits to be manufactured was immaterial to the scope and purpose of the project . these costs total to over $500 million . the capability and capacity to manufacture pits for nuclear warheads is important to maintaining the nation's nuclear weapons deterrent , either through supporting the current nuclear stockpile or producing any new warheads , such as the proposed rrw . as such , nnsa's reestablishment of a w88 pit manufacturing capability at lanl represents a positive step . however , nnsa's long - term strategy for the pit manufacturing mission , and its attendant costs and schedule , is in a state of flux . in our 1998 report on pit manufacturing , we recommended that dod provide doe with its views on the pit manufacturing capacity needed to maintain the then existing stockpile . since then , the two agencies have reached a decision to support a future pit manufacturing capacity of up to 80 pits per year at lanl . however , dod and nnsa have shifted their focus from the existing stockpile to a potential stockpile of new rrws .