i and app . ii ) . its funding has increased from approximately $121 million at that time to approximately $194 million in fiscal year 2001 . research is currently being done to enable the rapid identification of biological agents in a variety of settings ; develop new or improved vaccines , antibiotics , and antivirals to improve treatment and vaccination for infectious diseases caused by biological agents ; and develop and test emergency response equipment such as respiratory and other personal protective equipment . appendix i provides information on the total reported funding for all the departments and agencies carrying out research , along with examples of this research . the department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of defense ( dod ) , department of energy , hhs , department of justice ( doj ) , department of the treasury , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have all sponsored or conducted projects to improve the detection and characterization of biological agents in a variety of different settings , from water to clinical samples ( such as blood ) . for example , epa is sponsoring research to improve its ability to detect biological agents in the water supply . some of these projects , such as those conducted or sponsored by dod and doj , are not primarily for the public health and medical consequences of a bioterrorist attack against the civilian population , but could eventually benefit research for those purposes . departments and agencies are also conducting or sponsoring studies to improve treatment and vaccination for diseases caused by biological agents . for example , hhs' projects include basic research sponsored by the national institutes of health to develop drugs and diagnostics and applied research sponsored by the agency for healthcare research and quality to improve health care delivery systems by studying the use of information systems and decision support systems to enhance preparedness for the delivery of medical care in an emergency . in addition , several agencies , including the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology and doj's national institute of justice are conducting research that focuses on developing performance standards and methods for testing the performance of emergency response equipment , such as respirators and personal protective equipment . federal departments' and agencies' preparedness efforts have included efforts to increase federal , state , and local response capabilities , develop response teams of medical professionals , increase availability of medical treatments , participate in and sponsor terrorism response exercises , plan to aid victims , and provide support during special events such as presidential inaugurations , major political party conventions , and the superbowl . appendix ii contains information on total reported funding for all the departments and agencies with bioterrorism preparedness activities , along with examples of these activities . several federal departments and agencies , such as the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and cdc , have programs to increase the ability of state and local authorities to successfully respond to an emergency , including a bioterrorist attack . these departments and agencies contribute to state and local jurisdictions by helping them pay for equipment and develop emergency response plans , providing technical assistance , increasing communications capabilities , and conducting training courses .