( see fig . 2 ) schools that receive a zone or failing composite score , or do not meet one or more of the other financial responsibility standards , may continue to participate in federal student aid programs if they agree to additional oversight . education may place these schools under heightened cash monitoring ( increasing schools' reporting requirements and postponing the timing for receiving federal student aid payments ) , or require schools to post a letter of credit ( a financial commitment from a bank to protect education against potential liabilities should the school close ) , or a combination of the two . education may rescind a school's ability to participate in federal student aid programs if a significant percentage of its borrowers — generally , 30 percent or more of borrowers for 3 consecutive years or more than 40 percent in 1 year — default on their federal student loans within the first 3 years of repayment . this calculation is called the cohort default rate . although education is prohibited from specifying the specific content of accreditor standards , the agency is responsible for assessing whether accreditors are effectively overseeing schools' academic quality as part of their criteria for recognizing accreditors . our 2014 analysis found that schools with weaker student outcomes were , on average , no more likely to be sanctioned by accreditors than schools with stronger student outcomes , and that the proportion of their member schools that accreditors sanctioned varied . for example , our analysis of education's sanction data from october 2009 through march 2014 found that two accreditors sanctioned less than 2 percent of their member schools during this time frame , compared to 41 percent sanctioned by another accreditor . our 2017 report also discussed challenges with the accreditation system's oversight of academic quality . for example , some experts and literature stated that accreditors may be hesitant to terminate schools' accreditation when they identify issues because such action would adversely affect schools' eligibility for federal student aid programs . despite inconsistencies in accreditors' use of sanctions , our 2014 report found that education did not systematically examine data on accreditor sanctions that could have helped it identify insufficient accreditor oversight and thereby reduce potential risk to students and federal funds . accreditors provide education with records of terminations and probations . however , education officials told us that they had not used this sanction information for oversight of accreditors because education's regulations did not have specific criteria that require them to do so . while education is not required to use sanction data or analyze accreditor sanctions as part of the accreditor recognition process , we found that it could be useful for education to consider these data when evaluating whether accreditors meet prescribed criteria , such as whether they consistently apply and enforce standards . federal internal control standards call for federal agencies to track data to help them make decisions , as well as conduct ongoing , consistent monitoring to identify weaknesses .