( see fig . significant increases have occurred since fiscal year 1998 . the events of september 11th caused the coast guard to direct its efforts increasingly into maritime homeland security activities , highlighted by the coast guard's establishing a new program area: ports , waterways , and coastal security ( coastal security ) . prior to september 11th , activities related to this area represented less than 10 percent of the coast guard's operating budget , according to coast guard officials . in the fiscal year 2004 request , coastal security represents about one - quarter of the coast guard's operating budget . other mission areas , most notably drug interdiction , have declined substantially as a percentage of the operating budget . the emphasis the coast guard placed on security after september 11th has had varying effects on its level of effort among all of its missions , as measured by the extent to which multiple - mission resources ( cutters , other boats , and aircraft ) are used for a particular mission . the most current available data show that some security - related missions , such as migrant interdiction and coastal security , have grown significantly since september 11th . other missions , such as search and rescue and aids to navigation remained at essentially the same levels as they were before september 11th . however , the level of effort for other missions , most notably the interdiction of illegal drugs and fisheries enforcement , is substantially below pre - september 11th levels . missions such as ports , waterways , and coastal security , and migrant interdiction have experienced increased levels of effort . coastal security has seen the most dramatic increase from pre - september 11th levels . given the way the coast guard elected to carry out this project , its success is heavily dependent on receiving full funding every year . so far , that funding has not materialized as planned . delays in the project , which have already occurred , could jeopardize the coast guard's future ability to effectively and efficiently carry out its missions , and its law enforcement activities — that is , drug and migrant interdiction and fisheries enforcement — would likely be affected the most , since they involve extensive use of deepwater cutters and aircraft . under the project's contracting approach , the responsibility for deepwater's success lies with a single systems integrator and its contractors for a period of 20 years or more . under this approach , the coast guard has started on a course potentially expensive to alter . it is based on having a steady , predictable funding stream of $500 million in 1998 dollars over the next 2 to 3 decades . already the funding provided for the project is less than the amount the coast guard planned for . the fiscal year 2002 appropriation for the project was about $28 million below the planned level , and the fiscal year 2003 appropriated level was about $90 million below the planning estimate . and even the president's fiscal year 2004 budget request for the coast guard is not consistent with the coast guard's deepwater funding plan . ( see fig .