this testimony is based on that report and updated information provided by education . in developing that report , we analyzed data from grantees' annual performance reports detailing expenditures of fiscal year 2006 grant funds and conducted site visits at seven grantee institutions . we also interviewed officials at education and reviewed grant program requirements and monitoring plans . we conducted the work for our august 2009 report from september 2007 to june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards and updated this information from april to may 2010 . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include debra prescott ( assistant director ) , michelle st. pierre , carla craddock , susan aschoff , and james rebbe . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in 2007 , congress authorized new programs for other categories of minority serving institutions , including predominantly black institutions , native american - serving nontribal institutions , and asian american and native american pacific islander - serving institutions . funding for title iii and v programs included in our review has increased significantly over the past 10 years . the higher education act outlines broad goals for these grants , but provides flexibility to institutions in deciding what approaches will best meet their needs . an institution can use the grants to focus on one or more activities to address challenges articulated in its comprehensive development plan , which is required as part of the grant application and must include the institution's strategy for achieving growth and self - sufficiency . under education's program guidance , institutions are allowed to address challenges in four broad focus areas: academic quality , student support services , institutional management , and fiscal stability . we have recommended multiple times that education implement a systemic approach to monitoring postsecondary institutions receiving title iii and v grants . as we reported in 2009 , education has made progress in developing tools — such as an electronic monitoring system and risk - based criteria — to assess potential risks , but it lacks a comprehensive risk - based monitoring and technical assistance approach to target its efforts . in the 9 months since our report was issued , education taken some steps to respond to our most recent recommendations , but it is too early to tell if it has fully embraced a risk - based monitoring approach . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .