gao - 07-885 . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 . reagan national airport: update on capacity to handle additional flights and impact on other area airports . gao - 07-352 . ( 2 ) what is the status of efforts to address the impact of aviation noise on communities ? ( 3 ) what are the major challenges and next steps for reducing and mitigating the effects of aviation noise ? my statement is based on our previous reports on aviation and the environment , one of which included a survey of the nation's 50 largest airports ; a synthesis of recent empirical literature ; current faa data and forecasts ; published reports of selected airports' noise abatement initiatives and community - based aviation noise groups' efforts ; and interviews with officials from faa and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , representatives of aviation industry groups and aircraft manufacturers , and selected aviation noise experts . we conducted our work from september to october 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . noise is one of the most significant environmental impacts of aviation . although noise is present around virtually every airport in the country , the problem is greatest near busy commercial airports served by large jet aircraft . according to faa , the retirement of older , louder aircraft and ground - based noise - mitigation efforts over the past 35 years have reduced by over 90 percent the number of people affected by significant aviation noise levels — defined as a 65-decibel day night level ( dnl 65 db ) or greater — despite nationwide increases in population and air traffic . faa's estimates indicate that from 2000 to 2006 alone , the number of people affected by these noise levels dropped by more than a third , from about 780,000 to about 500,000 . nevertheless , these half million people are still exposed to significant aviation noise levels , and as communities expand near airports just outside the highly exposed areas and as air traffic increases , millions more are affected by lower levels of aviation noise . changes in aircraft flight paths can also affect communities' exposure to aviation noise , redirecting air traffic over some communities that were not previously exposed and diverting it from others . both jet aircraft engines and jet airframes produce aviation noise during aircraft operations , particularly during takeoffs and landings . moreover , certain types of aircraft contribute disproportionately to the level of noise around airports . in our 2000 report on environmental concerns and challenges for airports , we reported that the primary issue of concern identified by officials of the nation's 50 busiest airports was the noise generated by older jet aircraft . with the implementation of technologies to reduce aircraft engine noise , efforts to reduce noise from airframes will become more important . as technologies for reducing aviation noise have advanced ( see our discussion of some of these advances in the next section of this testimony ) , regulatory standards for jet aircraft noise have become more stringent .