by this measure , implementation has been slow . since we issued our report , the council made significant progress on its first crosscutting budget — one of the planned actions in the management plan that should help to develop performance measures and promote better coordination of actions among agencies . the office of management and budget is currently reviewing the council's proposal for the fiscal year 2004 budget cycle . in addition , according to council staff , the oversight mechanism should be finalized in july 2003 , and the first revision to the management plan should be finalized later this summer . according to experts and agency officials we consulted , current efforts by the united states are not adequate to prevent the introduction of aquatic invasive species into the great lakes via ballast water of ships , and they need to be improved . since 1993 , federal regulations have required vessels entering the great lakes from outside the exclusive economic zone — a zone extending 200 nautical miles from the shore — to exchange their ballast water in the open ocean ( that is , water deeper than 2,000 meters ) before entering the zone . exchanging ballast water before arriving in the great lakes is intended to serve two purposes: to flush aquatic species taken on in foreign ports from the ballast tanks and to kill with salt water any remaining organisms that happen to require fresh or brackish water . if a ship bound for the great lakes has not exchanged its ballast water in the open ocean it must hold the ballast in its tanks for the duration of the voyage through the lakes or conduct an exchange in a different approved location . data from the coast guard show that the percentage of ships entering the great lakes after exchanging their ballast water has steadily increased since the regulations took effect in 1993 and averaged over 93 percent from 1998 through 2001 . despite this , numerous aquatic invasive species have entered the great lakes via ballast water and have established populations since the regulations were promulgated . experts have cited several reasons for the continued introductions of aquatic invasive species into the great lakes despite the ballast water regulations . in particular , the coast guard's ballast water exchange regulations do not apply to ships with little or no pumpable ballast water in their tanks , which account for approximately 70 percent of ships entering the great lakes from 1999 through 2001 . these ships , however , may still have thousands of gallons of residual ballast and sediment in their tanks that could harbor potentially invasive organisms from previous ports of call and then be discharged to the great lakes during subsequent ballast discharges . there are also concerns that open - ocean ballast water exchange is not an effective method of removing all potentially invasive organisms from a ship's ballast tank . federal officials believe that they should do more to develop treatment standards and technologies to protect the great lakes from ballast water discharges .