facilities . the un budgeted $100 million for facilities - related costs , while we estimate that the cost to the united states would be $208 million . the un budget includes acquisition and construction of troop and civilian housing and other facility - related equipment and supplies . while minustah staff offices are donated by the government of haiti , u.s. facilities must meet state department security standards , which include posting civilian staff within secure u.s. embassy or consulate compounds . in addition to administrative and security expenses , u.s. government agencies with staff in these compounds would be required to contribute a total of about $12 million to the state department's capital security cost - sharing program , which funds the construction of secure embassies worldwide . estimated costs in other categories are likely to be similar for the un and the united states . for example , we estimate that the transport of u.s. troops , civilian personnel , and equipment would cost about $100 million ; the un budgeted $94 million for these costs . various military and nonmilitary factors can influence the composition of a peacekeeping operation and thus impact the estimated cost . we identified three different military scenarios that could substantially affect the estimated costs of a u.s. peacekeeping operation . greater concentration of reserve troops could almost double the military costs , while a quicker deployment of forces and higher operational tempo would also increase costs . further , the addition of nation - building and development assistance activities to the scope of an operation in haiti would increase the estimated cost substantially . according to u.s. experts in military operations and cost estimation we consulted , various factors could significantly influence the cost estimate for a u.s. peacekeeping operation . these factors include the number of troops and types of military units deployed , the pace of deployment , the intensity or operational tempo , the modes of transportation for deployment , and the mix of active duty and reserve troops . these factors depend heavily on the needs of the operation and demands of other military commitments ; decisions about such factors involve complex military , political , and financial considerations that can change rapidly . we analyzed the potential impact of three principal cost factors by altering the assumptions of our cost estimate to reflect ( 1 ) military forces comprised entirely of reserve soldiers , ( 2 ) deployment of military forces within the first 60 days of the operation rather than 180 days , and ( 3 ) higher operational tempo ( more intensive use of vehicles and equipment ) . figure 2 illustrates how altering the assumptions for these factors affects the cost estimate . deployment of all - reserve forces . our base cost estimates assume that the military contingent of a u.s. operation would consist primarily of active duty forces ( 85 percent ) . officials from the joint chiefs of staff confirmed that this is one of a number of possible scenarios , depending on the availability of active duty and reserve troops , ongoing military commitments , specific operational needs , and other factors .