routine inspections . in the eu , member countries are required to inspect facilities with large quantities of chemicals covered by the seveso directive , which includes facilities with ammonium nitrate . according to eu officials and documents , the eu's seveso directive requires covered facilities to be inspected either annually or once every 3 years , depending on the amount of hazardous chemicals a facility has — the greater the amount , the more frequent the inspection . eu officials also explained that member countries are required to report information to the european commission every 3 years on how they are implementing the seveso directive requirements , including the number of facilities that have been inspected in their country . ( 2 ) how do osha and epa regulate and oversee facilities that have ammonium nitrate ? ( 3 ) what approaches have selected other countries adopted for regulating and overseeing facilities with ammonium nitrate ? to answer question 1 , we analyzed data from dhs's cfats program and other sources on the number and types of facilities that reported having ammonium nitrate as of august 2013 and documented the limitations of the data . to assess the reliability of the cfats data , we reviewed agency documentation , interviewed dhs officials , and performed electronic testing of required data elements . we also requested state data on facilities that reported having ammonium nitrate from four states with high ammonium nitrate fertilizer consumption – alabama , missouri , tennessee , and texas – and received data from texas and alabama . we compared data collected by dhs to other data sources , including chemical inventory data from alabama and texas , which were identified as leading users of ammonium nitrate fertilizer , and trade data collected by dhs's customs and border protection agency on u.s. imports and exports of ammonium nitrate . our primary purpose in comparing cfats data with data from other sources was to determine whether the cfats data represent a complete count of facilities with ammonium nitrate . as we discuss later in this report , certain limitations of the data did not allow us to determine whether all facilities that should have reported to dhs actually did so . for question 2 , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , focusing on osha's and epa's regulations , including the types of facilities covered by the regulations . we also interviewed federal agency officials regarding their oversight practices . to describe the approaches selected other countries have adopted for regulating and overseeing facilities with ammonium nitrate , we reviewed approaches used by selected member countries of the european union ( eu ) and the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) : canada , france , germany , and the united kingdom . to select these four countries , we considered the extent to which the countries use ammonium nitrate fertilizer , the results of our literature search , and recommendations from our interviews with chemical safety experts . there are key differences between the united states and these other countries , including the size of the country , the size of the agriculture industry , and the amount of ammonium nitrate used .