mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . our 2008 report also cited inadequate segregation of duties . federal internal control standards provide that for an effectively designed control system , key duties and responsibilities need to be divided or segregated among different people to reduce the risk of error or fraud . these controls should include separating the responsibilities for authorizing transactions , processing and recording them , reviewing the transactions , and accepting any acquired assets . in 30 of the 42 obligations reviewed , one official performed two or more of the following functions: requesting , approving , or recording the miscellaneous obligation of funds , or certifying delivery of goods and services and approving payment . in two instances involving employee grievance settlements , one official performed all four of these functions . in 2007 , the va oig noted a similar problem in its review of alleged mismanagement of funds at the va boston healthcare system . for example , according to oig officials , they obtained documents showing that a miscellaneous obligation was used to obligate $200,000 . this miscellaneous obligation was requested , approved , and obligated by one fiscal official . the oig concluded that chief of the purchasing and contracting section and four other contracting officers executed contract modifications outside the scope of original contracts and the chief of the fiscal service allowed the obligation of $5.4 million in expired funds . in response to the oig recommendations , va officials notified contracting officers that the practice of placing money on a miscellaneous obligation for use in a subsequent fiscal year to fund new work was a violation of appropriations law , and that money could no longer be “banked” on a miscellaneous obligation absent a contract to back it up . similarly , an independent public accountant's july 2007 report found , among other things , that the segregation of duties for va's miscellaneous obligation process was inadequate . financial management oversight — reported as a material weaknesses since fiscal year 2005 . this issue was also identified as a significant deficiency in fiscal years 2000 through 2004 . this weakness stemmed from a variety of control deficiencies , including the recording of financial data without sufficient review and monitoring , a lack of sufficient human resources with the appropriate skills , and a lack of capacity to effectively process a significant volume of transactions . financial management system functionality — reported since fiscal year 2000 — is linked to va's outdated legacy financial systems affecting va's ability to prepare , process , and analyze financial information that is timely , reliable , and consistent . legacy system deficiencies necessitated significant manual processing of financial data and a large number of adjustments to the balances in the system . examples include: inadequate oversight of miscellaneous obligations by contracting officials — many miscellaneous obligations were not submitted for the required approval by the head of contracting activity . further , some miscellaneous obligation were used for invalid purposes , including employee tuition , utilities , general post , lab tests , and blood products .