resources . research should be supported through stable , continuous funding sources and through special one - time funds for evaluation projects of interest to executive branch and congressional policymakers . professional competence . research should be performed by professionals with appropriate training and experience for the evaluation activity ( such as performing a study , planning an evaluation agenda , reviewing evaluation results , or performing a statistical analysis ) . what steps has eta taken to improve its research program ? how has eta improved , if at all , the availability of its research since our last review in january 2010 and what other steps could eta take to further ensure its research findings are readily available ? to address our objectives , we reviewed the 58 research and evaluation reports that eta disseminated between january 2008 and march 2010 and assessed the methodological soundness of the 11 completed studies that cost $1 million or more . in addition , we reviewed the 10 ongoing studies costing $2 million or more to determine if research practices or the soundness of research designs had changed over time . in addition , we convened a virtual ( delphi ) expert panel of academics , researchers , and consultants to obtain their opinions on eta's research priorities and dissemination methods . to learn how eta determines what research to conduct , we interviewed labor officials and reviewed relevant agency and budget documents . in addition , we conducted site visits to two local workforce agencies in pennsylvania and virginia that are implementing eta's ongoing research studies to obtain information about challenges and issues associated with participating in studies . to evaluate the availability of eta's research , we analyzed dissemination time frames for all publications released between january 2008 and march 2010 and we tested the ability of eta's research database to support searches generally available to users of research databases . ( see app . ii for more details on our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from march 2009 through march 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . wia sets forth various requirements for the secretary of labor relating to research and evaluation of federally funded employment - related programs and activities . the law calls upon the secretary of labor to publish in the federal register every 2 years a plan that describes its pilot , demonstration , and research priorities for the next 5 years regarding employment and training . specifically , wia requires the secretary to develop the research plan after consulting with states , localities , and send the plan to the appropriate committees of congress ; and take into account such factors as the likelihood that the results of the projects will be useful to policymakers and stakeholders in addressing employment and training problems .