goals . gao - 06-788 . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2006 . combating terrorism: evaluation of selected characteristics in national strategies related to terrorism . gao - 04-408t . washington , d.c.: february 3 , 2004 . combating terrorism: observations on national strategies related to terrorism . gao - 03-519t . washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2003 . dod had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for policy ; the commander of the u.s. pacific command ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; and the secretaries of the military departments . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or russellc@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has developed strategy documents to guide the rebalance to the pacific that include desired elements of an effective national strategy , we conducted a search of the literature , from january 2010 to july 2015 , to identify official statements on , guidance for , and studies of dod's implementation of the rebalance to the pacific . we reviewed department guidance , such as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instructions and joint publications , to understand dod's processes and procedures for developing and disseminating guidance and strategic plans . we also interviewed dod officials from numerous organizations listed below who were involved with planning , providing guidance or implementing the rebalance to the pacific to identify dod's rebalance efforts and whether a strategy or strategies existed that focused on or included the rebalance . the organizations contacted included: under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) and chief financial officer office of the deputy chief management officer , deputy's assistant secretary of defense for asian and pacific security affairs assistant secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness assistant secretary of defense for strategy , plans and capabilities director of the office of the secretary of defense cost assessment u.s. marines corps forces , pacific u.s. pacific air forces u.s. transportation command based on these interviews and written responses to questions we submitted to the officials associated with these organizations , officials identified documentation and speeches that they indicated informed dod organizations about implementing the rebalance . also , based on this information , we found that there was not a single strategy or plan that provided guidance for or outlined dod's implementation of the rebalance to the pacific . instead , dod officials from multiple offices identified a number of strategy documents that guided activities associated with the rebalance to the pacific , including government - wide documents .