( see fig . two of these divisions have been involved in transformation activities . the 4th infantry is the army's experimental division for advanced war - fighting concepts , and part of a brigade of the 25th infantry is designated to test transformation concepts . the manning initiative directed all army units to be staffed at 100 percent of their authorized personnel by numbers , grades , and skills — and thereafter to maintain those staffing levels — so that they have the personnel needed for wartime missions . the initiative redressed staffing imbalances that had developed in part because staffing priority had been given to the contingency divisions . it included certain measures to ensure the maintenance of adequate readiness ; for example , units are to have no fewer than 70 percent of authorized personnel . the chief of staff also emphasized retention and described recruitment as his number one task . although the specific details are classified , each of the five divisions reported they can conduct most or all of their wartime missions . throughout january to june 2001 , these units reported their overall combat readiness and their readiness in personnel , training , and equipment to be at high levels . the division , brigade , and battalion commanders we interviewed considered the five divisions able to perform their wartime missions . although the personnel levels for all five divisions are at or near 100 percent of the enlisted personnel that they are authorized , each has some shortages in grades and skills . in at least some cases , the redistribution of existing soldiers would fill these staffing shortages . training also improved , which army officials attributed to ( 1 ) the increase in the number of personnel , prompted by the manning initiative , and ( 2 ) the implementation of a new funding policy for fiscal year 2001 that restricted the use of training funds to pay for other expenses . however , the army could not show specifically how the new funding policy improved training or unit readiness . in terms of the amount of equipment on hand and its serviceability , readiness was high during fiscal year 2001 , although some items were in short supply and some equipment difficult to maintain . shortages were attributed to outdated authorizations and the incomplete fielding of new equipment ; according to the army's readiness reports , equipment shortages generally did not degrade readiness . equipment maintenance problems were primarily attributed to the shortage of personnel with specific repair skills and the difficulties associated with maintaining old equipment . as we reported in july 2001 , the manning initiative was largely responsible for staffing the reviewed divisions at authorized enlisted levels and , as a result , improving personnel readiness . for the time period january through may 2001 , each of the five divisions maintained overall numbers of enlisted personnel at nearly 100 percent of authorizations , compared with the 93 percent we reported in march 1998 . ( see fig . the divisions also increased , on average , the numbers of assigned personnel by grade to more than 95 percent ( see fig . 3 ) and skills to greater than 100 percent ( see fig .