we will analyze the report when it is completed . beginning in november 1993 , the army did biennial identification of core capability requirements and the workloads necessary to sustain those depot maintenance core capabilities . the most recent core identification , however , was in december 1999 for fiscal year 2001 and showed that 10.8 million work hours were associated with maintaining core capability requirements for the five depots . an updated core identification is overdue , but in january 2003 the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness issued a new core identification methodology and , at the time of our review , had additional revisions under way to the methodology . thus , the army has not yet computed core capability requirements based on this new methodology . furthermore , the army does not routinely assess whether the work performed by its five depots is adequate to sustain their core capabilities ; and workloads performed by the five depots have not been at the level identified by the 1999 core identification as necessary to maintain core capabilities . the identification of core logistics capability involves a complex process that has been evolving over the past 10 years . this process is based on a requirement contained in 10 u.s.c . 2464 to identify and maintain within government owned and operated facilities a core logistics capability , including the equipment , personnel , and technical competence required to maintain weapon systems identified as necessary for national defense emergencies and contingencies . specifically , the secretary of defense is to identify the workloads required to maintain core logistics capabilities and assign to government facilities sufficient workload to ensure cost efficiency and technical competence in peacetime , while preserving capabilities necessary to fully support national defense strategic and contingency plans . detailed core capability and associated workload computations would be performed on a biennial basis in conjunction with the planning , programming , and budgeting system in order to address both the requirements for new systems and changes to existing systems . also , core computations would be reviewed annually to assess the impact of unanticipated budgetary adjustments . regarding the new methodology issued in january 2003 , dod officials told us that some revisions are being made and the methodology has not yet been finalized . thus , we have not reviewed the methodology in detail and cannot be sure whether the new methodology will correct the weaknesses we identified in the core process . the army's identification of core capabilities and workloads required to sustain them in december 1999 showed that the five depots had a total workload requirement of 10.8 million work hours associated with its core capability requirements . as shown in table 4 , work performed by the depots for the 4-year period , fiscal years 1999 to 2002 , was generally below the amount identified for total core capability requirements . depot officials stated that for the core identification process , the depots identify the skills required by job series to support the core capability . however , army officials said that neither the depots nor the army routinely assess the extent to which work performed by the depots compares with the identification of core capability requirements and associated workloads .