navy . the navy gold star program is its official program for providing long - term support to survivors of sailors who die while on active duty . the navy gold star program facilitates counseling and other support services , such as organizing survivor events . additionally , the navy long term assistance program is available to address questions or issues related to survivor benefits . air force . the air force families forever program provides dedicated outreach and support to air force survivors . the program is organized to provide family care experts at airman and family readiness centers . it provides resources , support , and information to help survivors . marine corps . the marine corps long - term assistance program is a permanent resource for survivors to ensure that they receive sustained assistance from the marine corps . the program provides outreach and assistance to marine corps survivors concerning any issues associated with the receipt of benefits and entitlements . coast guard . according to officials , while the coast guard does not have a separate long - term assistance program , casualty assistance personnel are available to address survivors' issues and concerns for as long as needed . in addition to the support provided by the casualty assistance officers and the long - term assistance programs , the gold star advocate program is available at any point in the casualty assistance process to provide survivors with support and address issues that are raised by survivors regarding casualty assistance and the receipt of benefits . the gold star advocate program is co - located with the casualty and mortuary affairs office in the military community and family policy office of ousd ( p&r ) . figure 1 provides a general overview of the casualty assistance process . dod also established the casualty advisory board , which is responsible for developing and recommending broad policy guidance related to casualty matters . according to ousd ( p&r ) officials , the board discusses issues pertaining to casualty and survivor assistance . it also acts as the focal point with other federal agencies , veterans' service organizations , and non - profit organizations to improve support and assistance for survivors . the board meets tri - annually and is composed of voting members representing each of dod's military services and the coast guard , as well as a member designated by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . within dod , military onesource represents another source of support available to survivors . military onesource is a dod - funded program that provides comprehensive information on aspects of military life , such as coping with deployments and spousal employment and education , at no cost to active duty servicemembers and their families . for survivors of servicemembers who died while on active duty , officials told us that military onesource provides grief counseling , tax assistance ( such as assistance with filing the deceased servicemember's final tax return ) , and assistance with obtaining benefits . there are also organizations outside of dod and the coast guard that provide casualty assistance .