precision . the costs and benefits of measuring compliance can vary with how precisely irs wishes to measure compliance to achieve an intended use ( eg , tax gap estimation or examination return selection ) . obtaining more precise and more detailed compliance data for more detailed populations of taxpayers or tax issues ( eg , types of income or deductions ) would likely be more costly but potentially more useful . capacity . each compliance measurement study requires having enough resources such as staffing , training , tools , and systems to capture the data . regular compliance measurement through smaller efforts targeted at particular types of taxpayers or taxes and sampling designs that collect data across consecutive tax years rather than for one year could help reduce costs and sustain long - term compliance measurement . several factors concern irs about its data on the reasons for noncompliance , which can be unintentional or intentional . although irs is developing a system intended to capture better examination data , irs does not have firm or specific plans to develop better data on the reasons for noncompliance , even though the lack of such data makes it harder to decide whether it should address specific areas of noncompliance through nonenforcement efforts , such as designing clearer forms or publications , or enforcement efforts . irs has concerns with its data on the unintentional and intentional reasons for noncompliance . various types of unintentional or intentional reasons could explain why taxpayers fail to comply with the tax laws . unintentional reasons can include being unaware of recordkeeping requirements , accidentally entering an item on the wrong line of a tax return , or following inaccurate advice from a tax practitioner . intentional reasons for noncompliance can include intentionally omitting income from a tax return or interpreting vague tax laws to evade tax liability . irs collects data on the reasons for noncompliance for specific tax issues during its operational examinations of tax returns . in many of these cases , it is difficult for examiners to determine a taxpayer's intent – whether the noncompliance is unintentional or intentional . unless the evidence clearly points to the reason , the examiner would have to make subjective judgments about why the noncompliance occurred . irs has a number of other concerns with the data: the database is incomplete because not all examination results , including data on reasons for noncompliance , were being entered into the database . irs has not tested the adequacy of the controls for data entry or the reliability of the data being collected . irs has found instances where examiners close examinations without assigning a reason for noncompliance or by assigning the same reason to all instances of noncompliance , regardless of the situation . irs has not trained all examiners to ensure consistent understanding and use of the various codes to indicate the reason for noncompliance . the data do not represent the population of noncompliant taxpayers but rather only those who had their tax returns examined . according to irs officials , the agency does not have firm or specific plans to develop better data on the reasons for noncompliance .