b . as requested by resident d. other ( specify below ) if “other” was checked for question 16a , please describe other times when assessments of residents' needs are updated . if you answered “no” to question 16 , please explain why residents' supportive service needs are not assessed: 17 . what resident - level information , if any , is gathered about how well residents that are 62 or older manage living independently ? nonresponse error . nonresponse error can result from failing to collect information on some or all questions from those sampled . to minimize the possibility of nonresponse error , we made multiple follow - up contacts with nonrespondents throughout data collection to reduce nonresponse . , section 24 of hud form 9834 ) ?  yes ( continue with question 15a )  no ( skip to question 16 )  don't know ( skip to question 16 ) 15a . if “yes” was checked for question 15 , did hud identify any findings or concerns related to residents' access to supportive services ?  yes ( continue with question 15b )  no ( skip to question 16 ) 15b . if “yes” was checked for question 15a , please describe hud's findings or concerns as well as the corrective actions taken to address them . residents' supportive service needs and wellness information 16 . in fy2014 , were residents' supportive service needs formally assessed ?  generally elderly ( head of household is 62 or older )  more elderly than non - elderly disabled  more non - elderly disabled than elderly  other ( specify below ) if “other” was checked for question 3 please explain below: 4 . during any part of fy2014 , did this property employ a service coordinator ?  yes ( continue with question 5 )  no ( skip to question 8 ) properties that do employ service coordinators 5 . during fy2014 , which of the following funding sources were used to pay for the service coordinator ( s ) ? debt service savings c. project rental assistance contract ( prac ) d. service coordinator program grant e. section 236 excess income f. section 8 operating funds h. state or local funds i . other ( specify below ) if “other”: what was the other funding source ? to what extent did the funding used cover the costs of employing a service coordinator ( eg , salary , administrative costs ) ?  covered all costs ( skip to question 7 )  covered some costs 6a . if the funding used did not cover all costs , what percentage of overall costs was not covered — and what types of costs were not covered ? in fy2014 , were any steps taken to ensure that the service coordinator function was implemented effectively ? if “yes” was checked for question 7 , please indicate what steps were taken .  a third party conducted a quality assurance assessment  we conducted a quality assurance assessment “in - house.”  other ( specify below ) if “other” was checked for question 7a , please describe the steps that were taken to ensure that the service coordinator function was implemented effectively .