gsa collected information . gsa collected information during meetings with agencies , vendors , and gsa employees from june 2009 until november 2010 . it also collected information through a study conducted by deloitte consulting from march 2011 through september 2011 . the study included 92 interviews with 117 stakeholders , including gsa personnel , customer agencies , vendors , and omb officials . in addition , noblis , a contractor that provided gsa project management services , provided gsa a lessons - learned report . decoupled contract services . according to gsa and some service providers , another key factor that contributed to delays was that agencies could not purchase multiple services bundled into a single item on the networx contracts . specifically , networx contracts did not permit this type of bundling , as the fts2001 contracts had . instead , the networx contracts offered services by detailed contract line items in order to allow agencies to more accurately identify and maintain inventories of the services they were purchasing . agencies were expected to map their existing fts2001 services to the individual services on networx , using a tool called the networx unit pricer . to facilitate this , agencies were expected to use the networx unit pricer to compare unit prices at the line - item level across the networx universal and enterprise contractors and , where available , the fts2001 contracts . however , the growth in the number of services offered ( 54 on networx compared with 26 on fts2001 ) and the number of contract line items ( about 5,100 in the original contracts ) , including some that vary by location and bandwidth , led to a number of different potential service options for any given requirement . to address this challenge , many agencies developed statements of work to request proposals from the contractors instead of using the networx unit pricer . however , gsa had expected that the vast majority of orders would be placed using the networx unit pricer and would not require the development of statements of work . thus , this process added to gsa's planned workload , requiring gsa to review the statements of work to determine if the requirements were within the scope of the networx contracts and assist in ordering them . if the requirements were not in the scope of the contracts , additional time was required to modify the contracts . ( this extra work , for example , resulted in the number of contract line items increasing from 5,100 to 13,400 as of june 2011. ) challenges related to the fair opportunity process . finally , according to gsa , agencies experienced challenges in implementing the fair opportunity process because of a lack of clear guidance on changes that were made to the process after gsa awarded the contract vehicles . duplicative and overlapping contract vehicles . according to gsa's analysis , the establishment of two networx contract vehicles — universal and enterprise — created confusion with customer agencies and added administrative cost for gsa .