gao - 02-901t . washington , d.c.: july 3 , 2002 . is it the primary mission of the agency or program ? similar goals and objectives: does the agency or program being considered for the new department share primary goals and objectives with the other agencies or programs being consolidated ? leverage effectiveness: does the agency or program being considered for the new department promote synergy and help to leverage the effectiveness of other agencies and programs or the new department as a whole ? in other words , is the whole greater than the sum of the parts ? gains through consolidation: does the agency or program being considered for the new department improve the efficiency and effectiveness of homeland security missions through eliminating duplications and overlaps , closing gaps , and aligning or merging common roles and responsibilities ? integrated information sharing / coordination: does the agency or program being considered for the new department contribute to or leverage the ability of the new department to enhance the sharing of critical information or otherwise improve the coordination of missions and activities related to homeland security ? compatible cultures: can the organizational culture of the agency or program being considered for the new department effectively meld with the other entities that will be consolidated ? field structures and approaches to achieving missions vary considerably between agencies . impact on excluded agencies: what is the impact on departments losing components to the new department ? what is the impact on agencies with homeland security missions left out of the new department ? in the president's proposal , the new department of homeland security would be responsible for conducting a national scientific research and development program , including developing national policy and coordinating the federal government's civilian efforts to counter chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear weapons or other emerging terrorist threats . the new department would carry out its civilian health - related biological , biomedical , and infectious disease defense research and development through agreements with hhs , unless otherwise directed by the president . as part of this responsibility , the new department would establish priorities and direction for programs of basic and applied research on the detection , treatment , and prevention of infectious diseases such as those programs conducted by nih . nih supports and carries out biomedical research to study , prevent , and treat infectious and immunologic human diseases . infectious diseases include those caused by new , emerging , and reemerging infectious agents , including those that are intentionally introduced as an act of bioterrorism . the emphasis of antiterrorism research supported by nih has been in four areas: ( 1 ) design and testing of new diagnostic tools ; ( 2 ) design , development , and clinical evaluation of therapies ; ( 3 ) design , development , and clinical evaluation of vaccines ; and ( 4 ) other basic research , including genome sequencing . the new department would need to develop mechanisms to coordinate and integrate information about ongoing research and development being performed across the government related to chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear terrorism , as well as harmonize user needs .