crisis action teams . these multi - agency teams , whose membership overlaps in part with the new planning teams , are to provide interagency incident management capabilities and to , among other things , recommend courses of action , help prioritize incidents and resources , and serve as a central point for information collection , evaluation , and coordination , especially for complex or multiple incidents . finally , dhs has completed a study of its operational capabilities and gaps to guide its future mission and initiatives . called the operations mission blueprint , dhs operations staff said the results are still under review ; therefore , that they could not provide us with a copy . part of this study includes a plan to consolidate dhs operations centers in headquarters and its components in a facility located at the st. elizabeth's west campus in washington , d.c . the plan cites a number of organizational benefits to collocating facilities , including enhancing collaboration by bringing together a large number of dhs executives and line employees currently dispersed across the region . while dhs provided us with background briefings , some supporting documentation , and some after action reports on the initiatives we have outlined , we did not evaluate the extent to which they have been implemented and are effective at addressing the problems katrina identified , in part because they are so new and in some cases still concepts . dhs officials themselves , however , identified some challenges and next steps in implementation . these include , for example , continuing to outreach to and better integrate dhs components as well as other stakeholders in planning and implementation , such as state , local , and private sector partners . as to this latter challenge , dhs has tested several of its new initiatives , such as the cop , through daily use , as well as interagency exercises . for example , through an exercise conducted last year , the national operations center identified opportunities to improve implementation of the cop . dhs recently completed two other exercises and plans additional exercises this fall and over the next two years that can also provide helpful performance information . we agree that the use of exercises , and more importantly the after - action and lessons learned analyses and recommendations to fix identified problems , are good methods to help determine how well initiatives are working , especially when testing under live , real - time circumstances is not possible . complementing this with more systematic performance measures and ways to obtain feedback from key users and stakeholders on how well the initiatives meet their needs would also be helpful . for example , officials noted that there are systematic methods for evaluating what has been achieved . the objectives of the hsin implementation include providing measurable performance metrics as well as obtaining stakeholder feedback through its new advisory committee , when constituted . implementation of the system is to be based on both agency and industry best practices .