ii ) . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant documents , including legislative authority and budget and staffing information ; documents related to mas's performance measurement system ; and examples of how mas's work has been used by parts of commerce and other u.s. government agencies over the last 5 years . in addition , we discussed mas's efforts with its officials , its government clients , and others who are knowledgeable about mas . we interviewed commerce officials from the offices of the secretary , commercial service , market access and compliance , import administration , and the national institute of standards and technology . we also interviewed officials from other u.s. government agencies , including the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) , the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , departments of state ( state ) , energy , transportation , and treasury , the environmental protection agency , and omb . appendix i provides more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from august 2010 to june 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a mas official stated it does not have the resources to systematically survey its clients about their satisfaction with mas's activities . in addition , mas officials stated they do not view administering a survey to obtain feedback as feasible since many of their clients are senior policy makers . mas officials said that if their clients were not satisfied with their work , the clients would not continue to request analysis and information . officials stated they do obtain feedback from its ita clients through periodic meetings with managers in the other ita business units . although mas does not obtain systematic feedback from all its clients , officials from other government agencies told us that while there is a great deal of industry expertise in critical areas within mas , the level of expertise varies by sector , and some gaps do exist . officials from the departments of state and treasury stated that mas provided valuable analysis on export financing for airplanes for the organisation for economic cooperation and development interagency delegation on export financing . in addition , officials from the department of transportation stated that mas's knowledge of trade policy complemented its transportation - policy expertise and its technical understanding of engineering and infrastructure , allowing it to better serve industry . however , officials from state and ustr noted that the level of expertise in mas is not consistent across all sectors and , consequently , the usefulness and relevance of mas input can be uneven . in addition , an import administration official stated that while it relies on mas to assist with industry analysis of foreign trade zone applicants , the coverage of some sectors is uneven . mas officials recognized there is unevenness in the level of expertise across sectors and said they are trying to address the issue as part of its internal - review process and by providing better training for analysts . some of mas's activities fall outside its external and internal measures .