this led to some problems . for example , one nongovernmental organization agreed to rehabilitate rural roads . after some initial work , we and several others pointed out that the roads were unlikely to stand up to normal traffic and weather . the organization subsequently hired engineers and the quality of the rehabilitated roads improved substantially . two missions — nicaragua and haiti — reported that they combined relatively small activities that could have been awarded separately into larger agreements . this helped streamline the start - up process because the paperwork was reduced and usaid staff only had to deal with one organization rather than several . the mission in haiti also reported that having one grantee enhanced communication , reporting , and accountability . the nicaraguan mission transferred $16.6 million — nearly one - fifth of its total disaster recovery funding — to usaid's bureau for global programs , field support , and research . this allowed the mission to bypass the process for soliciting and reviewing proposals and negotiating agreements . the mission acknowledged , however , that while using such global agreements is faster and the program quality is high , the services provided are generally more expensive than separately funded agreements . the honduran mission used host country contracting — a mechanism whereby usaid transfers funds to the host government , which then enters into contracts with implementing organizations — for some large infrastructure projects in an attempt to speed up implementation . however , usaid regulations for host country contracting required numerous approvals and were difficult to mesh with honduran government regulations . the mission also said that some host country counterpart ministries were bureaucratic and inefficient . the guatemalan mission noted that , due to the deadline , it limited its monitoring and reporting to project outputs during implementation and did not seek to measure impact as it would have for a longer - term effort . the mission added that , for its watershed rehabilitation activities , a period of more than 2 years is required to assess impact . the three usaid missions that received the largest amounts of reconstruction funding — honduras , nicaragua , and the dominican republic — reported staffing problems , primarily the absence of a contracts officer at critical times during the disaster recovery program . in contrast , the three missions receiving smaller amounts of funding — el salvador , guatemala , and haiti — reported no staffing problems . problems noted by the missions included the following . the honduran mission reported that the absence of a permanent contracts and grants officer until october 1999 was a serious constraint due to the important role that a contracts officer plays during the life of a program , particularly during the start - up phases . the mission noted that a contracts officer is needed for negotiating and signing agreements and providing valuable advice during the design process on issues such as the selection of appropriate implementation mechanisms and acquisition instruments . the nicaraguan mission reported that the absence of a contracts officer was a problem during the closeout phase .