gao - 14-829t . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2014 . we did not assess the appropriateness of the initiatives faa identified . in addition , we reviewed prior gao reports on the department of transportation's ( dot ) and faa's actions to implement a set of recommendations and reports specific to topics covered by the 36 initiatives . we also interviewed faa officials responsible for individual initiatives as well as for coordinating the agency's section 812 efforts to discuss the status of each initiative and any future plans or remaining actions . to examine the extent to which faa's efforts to carry out the 36 initiatives were consistent with selected key practices , we identified key practices applicable to the faa initiatives cited in prior gao work on organizational transformations . see appendix i for a list of the 36 initiatives . you requested that we review and analyze faa's actions to respond to the section 812 mandate and progress in implementing the identified initiatives to streamline and reform the agency as you begin considering reauthorization of faa . this report examines ( 1 ) how faa determined the status of the streamlining and reform initiatives that the agency reported in response to section 812 and ( 2 ) the extent to which faa's efforts to carry out these initiatives were consistent with selected key practices for organizational transformations . to describe how faa determined the status of the 36 initiatives , we examined faa's section 812 report to congress and other agency documents such as schedules and examples of communication related to the streamlining and reform initiatives . in addition , we reviewed prior gao reports on the department of transportation's ( dot ) and faa's actions to implement a set of recommendations as well as reports specific to topics covered by the 36 initiatives . we also interviewed faa officials and reviewed and categorized faa officials' descriptions of any actions that are needed for an initiative to be considered implemented or will continue after an initiative's implementation . to examine the extent to which faa's efforts to carry out the 36 initiatives were consistent with selected key practices for organizational transformations , we first identified key practices cited in prior gao work on organizational transformations that were applicable to the faa initiatives . we identified the selected key practices for organizational transformations as criteria against which to assess faa's efforts since section 812 directed faa to review the agency and undertake necessary actions to reform the agency . in addition , key practices for organizational transformations have been used in past gao work to examine government - streamlining efforts , including efficiency initiatives and consolidations . for each initiative , we ( 1 ) reviewed faa documents — schedules , communications , and other planning documents — and ( 2 ) conducted semi - structured interviews with the faa point ( s ) of contact for the initiative . we then systematically assessed the extent to which faa's efforts for an initiative were consistent with the selected key practices for organizational transformations . while we assessed faa's measures or plans to measure benefits against the key practice for organizational transformation , we did not validate faa's estimates of benefits .