the state department misinterpreted our conclusions . we believe this is a positive step . however , dod's efforts should also ensure that the training provided is given to a wide audience including senior military leadership , officers , and enlisted personnel . lastly , dod concurred with the third recommendation to fully implement our 2005 recommendation by including information on typical psc operating procedures and the military's responsibilities to pscs . dod stated that it continues to swiftly improve its procedures through the rapid dissemination of changes to the mnf - i fragmentary order 07-428 . in commenting on our report the state department noted that in addition to the oversight improvements discussed in this report , the state department and the bureau of diplomatic security have increased and realigned staff to enhance oversight . according to the state department , the duties of the increased and realigned staff include assisting in administrating contracts , approving invoices , and increasing oversight of contractor training . in addition , the state department provided us with some additional information regarding actions it has taken to improve contract oversight for private security contractors in iraq which we have included in the report . the state department expressed concern over our depiction of the status of implementation of the secretary of state's panel on personal protective services in iraq in appendix ii . in its comments the state department stated that it has implemented 16 of the 18 recommendations made by the panel . in our draft report we originally assessed 9 recommendations as complete . based on additional information provided by the state department we changed our assessment of the status of two recommendations ( recommendation numbers 3 and 11 in appendix ii ) and now we are reporting that the state department has completed 11 of the 18 recommendations . for example , in comments the state department noted that it considered the implementation of the panel's recommendation that video recording equipment be installed into each security vehicle , even though to date the equipment has been installed in 140 of 233 vehicles . therefore , we disagreed with the state department's assessment and stand by our assertion that the state department has implemented 11 of the panel's recommendations and have detailed our rationale in appendix ii . in addition , the state department's comments and our detailed responses appear in appendix iv . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense and the secretary of state . previous investigative requirements did not include this requirement . the order directs commanders to involve criminal investigative authorities if the preliminary investigations suggest either criminal misconduct , a violation of the rules for the use of force , or an inappropriate graduated force response . finally , the order requires that any military unit observing or becoming aware of a serious incident provide an investigative report to the unit's operational chain of command and to include photographs and names if possible . in reviewing investigative reports to determine whether psc misconduct was involved , commanders are to use the same standards as they would for their own units' actions .