( see fig . given that 28 percent of current supervisors are already eligible to retire and that by 2011 another 65 percent will have reached eligibility , about 93 percent of current supervisors will be eligible to retire by the end of fiscal year 2011 . as a result , faa may face substantial turnover in its supervisory ranks over the next decade . in addition , estimates from our survey show sizable attrition through fiscal year 2011 . as shown in figure 7 , we estimate that 770 supervisors ( about 39 percent of current supervisors ) said they plan to leave between fiscal years 2002 and 2006 , and 1,503 supervisors ( about 76 percent of current supervisors ) plan to leave faa , primarily through retirement , through fiscal year 2011 , an average of about 150 per year . the peak year in planned attrition is fiscal 2007 , when we estimate that 221 supervisors plan to leave . this level of potential attrition for supervisors is higher than in the past 5 years , during which an average of 71 supervisors left each year . high levels of supervisor attrition could also affect the controller specialist workforce . to the extent that faa replaces supervisors who leave , increases in supervisory retirements could further reduce the number of experienced controller specialists available to control traffic and increase controller specialist hiring needs in order to replace the controllers moving to supervisory positions . the overall impact of supervisor attrition is unclear at this time . until recently , faa was in the process of reducing the controller - to - supervisor ratio from 7-to - 1 to 10-to - 1 , through attrition , as agreed to in the 1998 natca collective bargaining agreement . this strategy would help mitigate the flow of natca bargaining unit controllers into the supervisory ranks . the outcome of this strategy is uncertain because the conference report for the fiscal year 2002 department of transportation appropriations ( h. rpt . 107-308 ) stated that the conferees were concerned about the impact of the reduction and directed faa not to reduce supervisory staffing further . faa intends to abide by this language for this fiscal year , and its future decisions on supervisory reductions are subject to congressional direction . because of the crucial role played by en route centers and the busiest terminal facilities in the national air space system , we analyzed the impact of retirement eligibility on the 21 major en route centers , the 10 busiest airport towers , and the 10 busiest tracon facilities . based on our analysis of faa's employee database , we found that the en route centers and the busiest terminal facilities will experience a sizable increase in the number of controllers reaching retirement eligibility . as figure 8 shows , retirement eligibility in these facilities grows over the next decade . in analyzing retirement eligibility data for the en route centers , we found that 903 , or about 11 percent , of the controllers currently at faa's 24 en route centers are already eligible to retire .