this funding remains available until expended . table 1 shows the amount of funds available and the use of those funds for grants and administrative expenses . on the basis of our detailed reviews of processes and supporting documentation , we concluded that seo's controls over determining institution eligibility were generally operating effectively . institutions that we tested that had received dctag program funds met eligibility requirements and had signed ppas . in addition , these institutions were providing the required information to seo along with their invoices . we also found that seo reviewed the accompanying student information prior to approving the invoices for payment . however , we found that seo's controls over determining student eligibility were less effective because some of the documents required to determine if applicants were eligible were not in the files . missing paperwork included required documents , such as photocopies of social security cards and documents proving domicile in the district of columbia . moreover , even when photocopies of social security cards were provided , we found that seo officials were not taking steps to ensure the validity of applicants' social security numbers . furthermore , we found that seo had no process in place to document how eligibility determinations were made for those applicants with unusual or extraordinary circumstances that precluded them from providing the required documents . we also found that the high management turnover that occurred at the seo since the dctag program's inception affected the organization's control environment and program operations . on the basis of our detailed review of processes and supporting documentation of college and university invoices paid by the district with dctag program funds , we concluded that ( 1 ) the billing institutions were eligible to participate in the dctag program and ( 2 ) the required information was provided with the invoices . to test specific controls at seo and ofrm , we selected a statistical sample of payment transactions made during fiscal year 2004 totaling about $11 million from dctag disbursement transactions of approximately $28 million . as mentioned , institutions eligible to participate in the dctag program include public colleges and universities as well as public and private hbcus nationwide , and private colleges and universities in the district of columbia metropolitan area . an eligible institution must have signed a ppa , which is also signed by the mayor of the district of columbia , to participate in the dctag program . the ppa states that the institution must follow the dctag program regulations and all provisions of the legislation that established the program . once the seo has a signed ppa on file , the district makes grant payments directly to that institution for the approved applicants in the dctag program attending that institution . payments for each academic period are based on invoices submitted by the institutions to the seo .