does your committee have any subcommittees ? ( percent ) ( percent ) q21 . how is the work of the subcommittees completed ? in your opinion , to what extent is the public provided an opportunity to express its views to your subcommittees ? fcc nominates the fcc commissioners . to your knowledge , have members of the public ever expressed their views to the subcommittees ? the national association for regulatory utility commissioners nominates the state officials and the national association of state utility consumer advocates nominates the state consumer public advocate . overall , how satisfied or dissatisfied have you been with the operation of your subcommittees ? number of members: 7 ( two federal commissioners and five state commissioners ) . in your experience — given the understanding that the full committee approves all subcommittee advice and recommendations — what is the balance of work between the full committee and subcommittees with regard to output ? steps taken to select members for the joint conference: fcc nominates the federal commissioners and the national association for regulatory utility commissioners nominates the state commissioners . to what extent does the committee deliberate the proposals of the subcommittees before they are voted upon ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q30 . does your committee's work influence fcc policy or operations through any of the following mechanisms ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 200 q31 . how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the extent to which fcc takes your committee's advice and recommendations into account when developing policy or making changes in operations ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q33 . are setting or changing voluntary industry standards an output of your committee ? ( voluntary industry standards are those not mandated by fcc. ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q34 . how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the effectiveness and impact of your committee to set or change voluntary industry standards ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 197 ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q8 . how much time on a yearly basis do you devote to committee membership activities ( including research and preparation for meetings , travel , and attending meetings ) ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q9 . as a member , what type of advice do you contribute to the committee ? would you agree or disagree with the following statements as they apply to the composition of your committee ? ( percent ) ( percent ) disagree ( percent ) strongly disagree ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q11 . who sets the agenda for your committee's meetings ? fcc makes the final selections of joint board members . ( percent ) ( percent ) q13 . type of output: the joint conference makes recommendations to the commission . for example , a recommendation to fcc proposed revisions to part 32 rules to include the reinstatement of certain accounts and the addition of several new accounts .