it has been fielded . increment 3.1 began fielding in november 2011 and adds enhanced radar and enhanced air - to - ground attack capabilities . increment 3.2a is a software upgrade to increase the f - 22a's electronic protection , combat identification , and capability to receive data over dod's link - 16 data network . increment 3.2b is expected to increase the f - 22a's geolocation , electronic protection , and intra flight data link capabilities and integrate aim - 9x and aim - 120d missiles . some of the key content originally planned for increment 3.2b has been deferred , the estimated cost of the overall modernization program has doubled , and the schedule has slipped by 7 years — which program officials attribute to requirements and funding instability . the most recent program schedule indicates that 3.2b will begin fielding in 2017 . the f - 22a and legacy modernization programs we reviewed were rooted in very different development strategies , although they shared some similar characteristics . these differences and similarities are summarized in table 1 . the f - 22a began as a single - step program and did not anticipate the need for significant future modernization . the legacy programs , on the other hand , began with the expectation that their aircraft would be incrementally upgraded and modified over time . f - 22a modernization began in reaction to a major shift in the aircraft's basic mission , which required the development of robust ground attack capabilities that were not part of the initial development program . in contrast , the legacy modernization programs were primarily initiated to make incremental improvements to existing mission capabilities . the f - 22a and legacy modernization programs all began at about the same time in development and procurement . the f - 22a program is more complex and costly than the legacy programs , primarily because the new capabilities have to be retrofitted onto complex , stealth aircraft that have integrated avionics systems , which , according to program and contractor officials , adds labor hours and cost . the current total estimated cost of f - 22a modernization is $9.7 billion . the legacy programs incorporated planned incremental upgrades into new production aircraft that had less complex avionics systems and were not required to be stealthy . because the legacy programs managed and funded modernization as a continuation of their baseline programs , it is difficult to isolate and compare the full costs of modernization . the air force did not expect any major shifts in the f - 22a's primary mission and thus did not plan for future modernization upgrades . from the outset , the air force's f - 22a development strategy was to pursue a quantum leap in capability in a single development program , referred to as a single - step approach , to develop and field a stealthy aircraft with advanced capabilities to replace its aging f - 15c / d fleet and perform air superiority missions . recognizing the magnitude of this development effort , the air force estimated that it would need more than 12 years to develop and deliver an initial f - 22a operating capability .