we are making five recommendations to dod . the secretary of defense should ensure that the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for counternarcotics and global threats issues its counternarcotics and global threats strategic framework that incorporates relevant national - level strategies and reflects current drug threats , and update it , as appropriate , upon issuance of the new national drug control strategy . the draft manual is in the beginning of the review process . however , the national guard bureau will not have guidance to operate the counterdrug program until at least june 2019 . without interim guidance that provides detailed procedures and processes for the national guard counterdrug program , such as reissuing national guard regulation 500-2 , states will continue to be left without clear instructions on how to operate and administer the program , such as how and when to provide support across state lines and to interagency partners . the federal government has operated under a continuing resolution for 36 of the last 40 years . national guard counterdrug program officials stated that they have experienced program disruptions during these periods . the disruptions described by the officials are similar to the problems that other programs experience during continuing resolutions . for example , national guard bureau officials stated that continuing resolutions have created challenges for the national guard counterdrug program in fully obligating its funds . dod data show that the program obligated 84 and 82 percent of total budget authority amounts in fiscal year 2011 and 2013 respectively , although the gap between total budget authority amounts and obligations has decreased since then . according to national guard officials , the differences over the years between the amounts obligated and total budget authority amounts were partly due to the timing and amount of funding received by the program . specifically , they stated that it is difficult to fully obligate funds when dod provides them with a significant portion of their funding close to the end of the fiscal year . remaining unobligated amounts are transferred back to dod's drug interdiction and counterdrug activities , defense account . beginning in fiscal year 2013 , congressionally - directed increases have generally made up half or more of the total funding appropriated to the national guard counterdrug program . table 5 provides a summary of congressionally - directed increases for the national guard counterdrug program , by project code , in fiscal years 2004 through 2018 . according to dod's data , total budget authority for the national guard counterdrug program varied from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2017 . figure 3 details the counterdrug program's obligations from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . table 6 provides a summary of total budget authority for the national guard counterdrug program , by project code , in fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii .