deployments . in the event of unit deployments , many servicemembers would not be in the barracks and possibly entire buildings could be empty for months . as a result , the developer's normal rental income could be reduced or eliminated even though the developer would still need to pay for expenses such as mortgage payments and operations and maintenance costs . this is less of a problem in privatized family housing because family members normally continue to occupy the housing and pay rent if the servicemember deploys . funding for housing allowances . service officials stated that identifying and shifting funds to pay housing allowances to servicemembers living in privatized barracks could be an administrative problem . this is less of a problem with privatized family housing because military family housing has a separate operations and maintenance budget account . when a private developer takes over existing military family housing , funds from the family housing operations and maintenance account can be shifted to help pay for housing allowances used to pay rent for the families living in the housing . however , barracks operations and maintenance is not funded by a similar separate account . instead , barracks operations and maintenance funds are included in each installation's overall base operating budget . according to service officials , it is more difficult to identify , break out , and shift barracks funding to the personnel accounts to pay housing allowances for a privatized barracks project . with its attention largely concentrated on initiating and managing privatization of military family housing , dod has provided limited centralized direction and focus to help the services overcome the challenges associated with barracks privatization and proceed with pilot project proposals . also , in august 1998 , 2 years after the military housing privatization legislation was enacted , dod shifted primary responsibility for implementing the privatization program to the individual services . since that time , the services have independently studied the barracks privatization concept but have not developed actual project proposals . more recently , the services have given increased attention to exploring barracks privatization , but their efforts continue to be independent and non - coordinated . the status of barracks privatization in each service follows . while no service has yet initiated a barracks privatization project , the navy and the marine corps currently appear to be the most active among the services in examining its potential use . navy officials stated that they believe barracks privatization offers an opportunity for the navy to more quickly meet its barracks improvement goals , including the goal of providing barracks space for all junior sailors currently required to live on their ships even while in homeport . in order for barracks privatization to be feasible , navy officials believed that the navy needed additional authorities not contained in the military housing privatization initiative legislation . specifically , navy officials believed that existing housing allowance rates provided more money than would be needed to develop a privatized barracks project . the housing allowance rate for unmarried junior members is targeted to cover the costs of a one - bedroom apartment in the civilian community .