iv ) . in its comments , dhs concurred with our recommendations . in addition , the department stated that the coast guard is working with a variety of partners to determine how cyber - related threats , vulnerabilities , and potential consequences are to be addressed in the maritime risk assessment , which the coast guard will use to inform security planning efforts ( including area maritime security plans and facility security plans ) . dhs also stated that the coast guard will continue to promote the re - establishment of a sector coordinating council , and will also continue to use existing information - sharing mechanisms . however , dhs did not provide an estimated completion date for these efforts . in addition , dhs stated that fema will work with the coast guard to develop the recommended cyber consultation procedures for the port security grant program by the end of october 2014 , and will use any information on cyber - related threats , vulnerabilities , and consequences from the maritime risk assessment in future program guidance , which is scheduled for publication in the first half of fiscal year 2015 . officials from dhs and the department of commerce also provided technical comments via e - mail . we incorporated these comments where appropriate . officials from the departments of defense , justice , and transportation stated that they had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of commerce , defense , homeland security , and transportation ; the attorney general of the united states ; the director of office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov or stephen l. caldwell at ( 202 ) 512-9610 or caldwells@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . our objective was to identify the extent to which the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and other stakeholders have taken steps to address cybersecurity in the maritime port environment . the scope of our audit focused on federal agencies that have a role or responsibilities in the security of the maritime port environment , to include port facilities . we focused on the information and communications technology used to operate port facilities . we did not include other aspects of the maritime environment such as vessels , off - shore platforms , inland waterways , intermodal connections , systems used to manage water - based portions of the port , and federally managed information and communication technology .