( app . ii lists the 49 project studies that underwent peer review since wrda 2007 was passed , including information on project and study type , as well as the district , division , and planning center of expertise associated with each study. ) moreover , it is not possible to determine how many project studies were required to undergo peer review in response to wrda's section 2034 requirements because the corps does not centrally track project studies and could not provide us a list of all project studies that fell within the scope of section 2034 . our review of relevant corps documents for the 49 project studies that underwent peer review , such as review plans and completed review reports , found that none of these documents specifies the authority under which peer reviews were conducted . we also interviewed the three contractors and selected peer review panel members and local sponsors of corps civil works projects . we believe that the report provides a balanced perspective from both the headquarters and field levels . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the chief of engineers and commanding general of the u.s. army corps of engineers , and other interested parties . this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or mittala@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives for this work were to examine ( 1 ) the number of corps project studies that have undergone independent peer review in response to section 2034 of the water resources and development act ( wrda ) of 2007 , ( 2 ) the cost of these peer reviews , ( 3 ) the extent to which the u.s. army corps of engineers' ( corps ) process for determining if a project study is subject to peer review is consistent with section 2034 , ( 4 ) the process the corps uses to ensure that the contractors it hires and the experts the contractors select to review project studies are independent and free from conflicts of interest , and ( 5 ) the extent to which recommendations from peer reviews have been incorporated into project studies . in addition to the $9 million in contractor costs , the corps incurred about $109,000 for the administration of the contracts for the 49 peer reviews . specifically , the corps used two different entities — the institute for water resources and the army research office — to administer these contracts , and both of these entities charged administration fees.contract cost .