( see fig . from each investment policy statement , we compiled relevant information on: ( 1 ) investment philosophy and plan characteristics considered in developing it , ( 2 ) investment return benchmarks , ( 3 ) asset allocation , and ( 4 ) strategies and assets . see table 3 for select asset allocation information . to describe how cspf's investment policy was executed , we compiled information from performance reports prepared by named fiduciaries . we reported cspf's asset allocation generally based on the aggregate asset allocation categories cspf's named fiduciaries assigned in those reports . cspf provided these reports for the end of each year 1984 through 2016 — except 1992 and 1995 , for which it provided reports as of the end of november . information we compiled included the plan's: account breakdown ( i.e. , assets in named fiduciary and passively - asset allocation ; and investment assets withdrawn to pay benefits and administrative expenses . when possible , we checked the information from year - end performance reports against that in other sources . specifically , to ensure we captured the vast majority of the plan's assets in our asset summary we compared the total amount of plan assets named fiduciaries reported with net assets reported in cspf's form 5500 filings , available from 1982 through 2016 . we generally found these totals to be similar for each year — in most years the difference was about or under 1 percent . also , named fiduciary performance reports included information on withdrawals from investment assets to meet pension and administrative expense obligations as of the end of each year , except for 1995 and 1999-present . for 1995 through 2016 , we compiled this information from independent special counsel reports . for years in which we had overlapping information , 1996 through 1998 , we found the reported totals were similar — no more than about 0.6 percent difference in each of those years . based on our review we believe that the differences were insignificant to our overall analysis and did not impact our findings . to determine investment returns , investment fees , and administrative expenses for cspf and related comparator group multiemployer defined benefit plans , we analyzed electronic form 5500 information , the primary , federal source of private pension data . we analyzed information from 2000 through 2014 , the most current and complete year at the time we performed our analysis . we began our analysis with 2000 data as data on investment returns and plan fees is primarily found in the schedule h. schedule h information was first collected in 1999 . but we begin our analysis with 2000 data as electronic data became more reliable the year after the schedule was introduced . we have previously reported on the problems associated with the electronic data of the form 5500 . to mitigate problems associated with the data , we used form 5500 research data from pbgc . pbgc analysts routinely and systematically correct the raw 5500 data submitted by plans , and pbgc's form 5500 research data are thought to be the most accurate electronic versions .