in part this is due to increases in life expectancy . the average number of years that men who reach age 65 are expected to live is projected to increase from just over 13 in 1970 to 17 by 2020 . women have experienced a similar rise — from 17 years in 1970 to a projected 20 years by 2020 . while life expectancy has increased , labor force participation rates of older americans only began to increase slightly in recent years . as a result , individuals are generally spending more years in retirement . in addition to these factors , fertility rates at about the replacement level are contributing to the increasing share of the elderly population and a slowing in the growth of the labor force . also contributing to the slowing in the growth of the labor force is the leveling off of women's labor force participation rate . while women's share of the labor force increased dramatically between 1950 and 2000 — from 30 percent to 47 percent — their share of the labor force is projected to remain at around 48 percent over the next 50 years . by 2025 labor force growth is expected to be less than a fifth of what it is today . the aging of the baby boom generation , increased life expectancy , and fertility rates at about the replacement level are expected to significantly increase the elderly dependency ratio — the estimated number of people aged 65 and over in relation to the number of people of aged 15 to 64 . in 1950 , there was one person age 65 or over for every eight people aged 15 to 64 . the ratio increased to one to five in 2000 and is projected to further increase to one person aged 65 and over for every three people aged 15 to 64 by 2050 . as a result , there will be fewer younger workers to support a growing number of social security and medicare beneficiaries . the aging of the population also has potential implications for the nation's economy . if labor force growth continues to slow as projected , fewer workers will be available to produce goods and services . without a major increase in productivity or higher than projected immigration , low labor force growth will lead to slower growth in the economy and slower growth of federal revenues . these circumstances in turn will accentuate the overall pressure on the federal budget , which will be encumbered with increased claims for benefits for seniors such as medicare and social security , while relatively fewer workers are paying into the benefits systems . as americans live longer and spend more years in retirement , several factors contribute to the growing insecurity of retirement income . with greater life expectancies , individuals need to finance more years of retirement ; however , many workers claim their social security benefits prior to reaching the full retirement age , which results in lower monthly payments . not only do individuals need to make their money last longer ; they also bear greater risk and responsibility for their retirement savings than in the past .