( see fig . according to states' trade offices we visited , as well as sido , most states rely on or partner with cs to obtain export assistance in overseas markets where the states have no representation . where the states have representation , they rely on their own services to assist their exporters . activities in which states' trade offices partnered most with cs included trade shows and trade missions , seminars , training programs , conferences , and event planning . in addition to partnering with cs , some states' trade offices also reported working closely with their local useacs . for example , one state named its useac a “key partner” with which “all export related programs , seminars , and conferences are planned , coordinated , and implemented.” another state said that its useac serves on the state's committee , helping to select the winners of the governor's awards for excellence in exporting . in addition , 11 states' trade offices are colocated with useacs . according to officials of one state trade office colocated with a useac , colocation has helped the state partner with cs to provide services to firms and outreach to potential client firms . just over three - quarters of states' respondents that had a basis to judge ( 34 of 42 ) reported that they have partnered with cs on a variety of activities that are not part of cs's formal services , which requires a signed cooperation agreement . a few states cited frequently working with cs , while the majority of respondents identified only a few activities they have conducted jointly with cs during the last 3 years . for example , some states we visited informed us that they have conducted joint company visits and counseling sessions with their local useacs . some state trade offices work with cs to facilitate state - sponsored trade missions and trade events and are sometimes customers of cs . our survey revealed that some states' trade offices directly purchased some of cs's services during the last 3 years . figure 2 indicates the services states' trade offices have purchased directly from cs . gold key services and seminars / webinars were the services states' trade offices most often reported purchasing directly from cs . half of the states' trade offices reported purchasing gold key service from cs , and less than half reported purchasing seminar / webinar services directly from cs . three states we visited reported purchasing gold key services directly from cs to support overseas trade missions . one state said that it has purchased cs's gold key service to identify potential consultants and representatives overseas and another state said that it has purchased gold key service to complement a state - led trade mission . in responding to our survey , some states' trade offices said that the collaboration between them and cs can be improved to provide greater benefits to their client firms . for example , states and cs target the same client base within their states , and some states' trade offices and sido said that improved information sharing would greatly increase effectiveness and reduce duplication of efforts to the benefit of exporting smes if sharing of client contacts and client needs were allowed .