base . the eelv program has undergone significant changes since its inception . the eelv program has undergone significant changes since its inception . dod's initial acquisition strategy was to have multiple companies develop dod's initial acquisition strategy was to have multiple companies develop launch vehicles and then pick one launch vehicle provider in 1998. launch vehicles and then pick one launch vehicle provider in 1998 . however , in november 1997 dod decided to keep the two contractors however , in november 1997 dod decided to keep the two contractors then competing , boeing and lockheed martin , as eelv providers , and then competing , boeing and lockheed martin , as eelv providers , and later awarded contracts to both companies . dod officials had expected later awarded contracts to both companies . dod officials had expected the emergence of a healthy commercial launch market that would support the emergence of a healthy commercial launch market that would support two families of launch vehicles and ultimately mean lower costs to the two families of launch vehicles and ultimately mean lower costs to the government . dod determined launch service prices in the contracts based government . dod determined launch service prices in the contracts based on an assumption that a robust commercial market would help pay for the on an assumption that a robust commercial market would help pay for the launch providers' infrastructure costs . however , in the late 1990s the launch providers' infrastructure costs . however , in the late 1990s the commercial launch market collapsed , and in late 2003 dod estimated that commercial launch market collapsed , and in late 2003 dod estimated that average launch cost would increase significantly . the ula recently requested a formal extension to the ftc's specified deadline of december 2008 , which was granted by the nsso compliance officer . the revised deadline for separation is october 2009 , representing a 10-month delay . ula has provided dod with a restructure proposal which projects the cost and savings of the transition . according to dcma , as a result of review , the proposal currently meets federal statutory requirements for the reimbursement of restructuring expenses . an advance agreement that accompanies the proposal specifies the maximum amount of reimbursement ula may recover from dod for restructuring expenses . dod is currently reviewing the proposal and advance agreement , in part , to determine if they are based on sound business judgment and are equitable to all parties . however , much of the transition has yet to occur , and some of the transition activities that have begun are proving more complex than anticipated . ula estimates that consolidation of launch infrastructure and operations under the ula joint venture from fiscal years 2008 through 2012 will cost about $205 million , and it plans to recover much of this expense from the government .