as a result , those facilities are in good condition . dod did not estimate repair needs for its frpp reporting . frpp does not require agencies to report their repair and maintenance backlogs , but requires agencies to determine a condition index for each asset by computing a formula that compares the asset's repair needs with its plant replacement value ( prv ) . specifically a condition index equals ( 1-repair needs / prv ) * 100 . based on this formula , a condition index is reported as a whole number from 1 to 100 , with 100 representing the best possible condition for an asset . frpp guidance defines repair needs as “the amount necessary to ensure that a constructed asset is restored to a condition substantially equivalent to the originally intended and designed capacity , efficiency , or capability.” real - property - holding agencies are generally responsible for the cost of maintaining and repairing their assets . we have reported that owning an asset creates an implicit fiscal exposure for the government . this fiscal exposure is created because there is an expectation that the government will incur costs associated with maintaining and operating the assets it owns . as the national research council has observed , federal assets must be well maintained to operate adequately and cost effectively ; protect their functionality and quality ; and provide a safe , healthy , productive environment for the american public , elected officials , federal employees , and foreign visitors who use them every day . the following are illustrative of comments we heard from agency officials on our site visits: at va's palo alto medical center , mission is the main factor that determines project priorities , and the focus is on patient care buildings . administrative buildings are always a lower priority . in selecting sites to visit , working with our applied research and methods team , we reviewed agency inventory and performance measurement data from the federal real property profile ( frpp ) , including information on the condition of each real property asset , issued by the federal real property council as well as data on deferred maintenance and repair needs from the agencies . we performed our site visits in two geographic areas of the country — the washington , d.c. / virginia / maryland area and the san francisco bay area in california — because each agency had significant sites in these areas . within the geographic locations , using frpp data , we determined the average condition for each agency's assets and then selected sites that ( 1 ) were at or near the average condition of the agency's assets , and ( 2 ) reported a high repair and maintenance backlog compared to other sites in average or near - average condition . appendix i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . in january 2003 , we designated federal real property as a high - risk area because of long - standing problems with excess and underutilized property , deteriorating facilities , unreliable real property data , and overreliance on costly leasing . real property is generally defined as land and anything constructed on , growing on , or attached to land .