if the benefits . are in excess of the estimated costs.” 33 u.s.c . this provision , while setting out a statement of congressional policy , does not establish a legal requirement that benefits exceed costs , nor does it prohibit carrying out a project where costs exceed benefits . we have included a reference to this provision in the report's discussion of the corps' guidelines for evaluating water resource projects . we agree that it is not realistic for a village to go without a health clinic for 10 years . our report states that development and maintenance of critical infrastructure , such as health clinics and runways , is necessary as villages find ways to address flooding and erosion . however , given limited federal funds , agencies must explore potentially less costly options for meeting a village's needs until it is able to relocate . as noted in our report , if congress decides to provide additional federal assistance to alaska native villages , it may wish to consider directing relevant executive agencies as well as the denali commission to assess the cost and policy implications of implementing the alternatives . the names for the alaska native entities used in appendix iii of this report are from the official list of federally recognized indian entities published by the department of the interior in the federal register ( see 67 fed . reg . 46328 , july 12 , 2002 ) . the denali commission commented on our recommendation and the alternative to expand its role , both of which are discussed in the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report . in addition , discussed below are gao's corresponding detailed responses to some of the denali commission's general comments . we agree that the corps can determine whether preventing or minimizing flooding and erosion is technically and financially feasible . under the tribal partnership program , authorized by section 203 of the water resources development act of 2000 ( pub . 106-541 , 114 stat . 2572 , 2588-2589 ( 2000 ) ) , the corps is currently examining impacts of coastal erosion due to continued climate change and other factors in the alaska native villages of bethel , dillingham , shishmaref , kaktovik , kivalina , unalakleet and newtok . congress provided $2 million for these activities in fiscal year 2003 . however , other federal agencies , such as the nrcs , also have the ability to conduct feasibility analyses . we acknowledge the commission's desire for a larger role for alaska state and local governments in developing and executing response strategies and in helping to prioritize the use of scarce resources . however , whether or not the state and local governments choose to expend their own resources to become more involved in responding to flooding and erosion issues is entirely a state or local government decision . since this decision would involve the expenditure of state or local government funds , rather than federal funds , it is outside the scope of our report . the state of alaska provided technical comments from the division of emergency services and the department of community and economic development , which we incorporated as appropriate .