financial requirements . the most common types of financial requirements include: ( 1 ) deductibles , which are required payments of a specified amount made by enrollees for services before the issuer begins to pay ; ( 2 ) copayments , which are payments made by enrollees and are a specified flat dollar amount — usually on a per - unit - of - service basis — with the issuer reimbursing some portion of the remaining charges ; ( 3 ) coinsurance , which is a percentage payment made by enrollees after the deductible is met and until an out - of - pocket maximum is reached ; and ( 4 ) out - of - pocket maximums , which are the maximum amounts enrollees have to pay per year for all covered medical expenses . quantitative treatment limitations ( qtl ) . the reviews are used to assess compliance with all applicable health requirements , and cms officials told us cms has broad authority to review or request information as a part of these reviews . however , according to cms officials , cms has limited authority to review or request information from these plans outside of these targeted reviews . specifically , cms officials said cms does not have the authority to conduct random audits , reviews , or examinations of employer - sponsored , non - federal governmental plans , or to require the plans to provide documentation to demonstrate compliance with mh / su parity requirements . on the other state health insurance exchange , 11 percent of the products contained a financial requirement that violated mh / su parity requirements . the case study was not able to assess all aspects of nqtl requirements because the available documents did not provide information about all nqtls , such as whether or not a specific mh / su treatment would be considered medical necessary . cowell , alexander j. , et al . changes in individual and small group behavioral health coverage following the enactment of parity requirements: final report . a report prepared for the united states department of health and human services , office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , office of disability , aging and long - term care policy . january 2017 . methodology: the study reviewed plan documents for a sample of individual and small group plans and assessed changes in mh / su and medical / surgical benefits before implementation of mh / su parity requirements in 2013 and after implementation in 2014 . examples of key findings: the study found that in 2014 most plans' financial requirements and qtls were compliant with mh / su parity requirements . however , the plans included different limits on the quantity of prescription drugs covered for medications used for mh / su treatments and those used for other chronic health conditions . this difference indicated possible noncompliance with mh / su parity requirements for nqtls , and the study noted that differences in nqtls between mh / su and other health conditions is an issue in need of additional study . the study stated that plan documents did not contain all information necessary to fully assess nqtls . friedman , sarah , et al .