aligning stakeholders . industry representatives also noted the challenge of aligning stakeholders — some of whom are natural competitors — to work together . in our past work , we have reported that federal agencies engaged in collaborative efforts — such as the transition — need to create the means to monitor and evaluate their efforts to enable them to identify areas for improvement . reporting on these activities can help key decision makers within the agencies , as well as clients and stakeholders , to obtain feedback for improving both policy and operational effectiveness . some progress in aligning stakeholders , such as the formation of the dtv transition coalition , has been made , but some stakeholders may have competing interests . for example , recent announcements produced by the national cable and telecommunications association invoke the dtv transition , but ultimately promote the role of cable television in the transition . in our ongoing work for the house energy and commerce committee and this committee , we plan to assess the progress of consumer education and awareness about the dtv transition . we will continue to monitor consumer education programs and plan to conduct a series of consumer surveys throughout the year prior to the transition date . these surveys will be aimed at determining the population that will be affected by the dtv transition and the public awareness of the transition . in determining the affected population , we will look at the percent of the population relying on over - the - air broadcasts for their primary television , as well as the percent of the population with non - primary televisions being used to watch over - the - air television . additionally , we will review the demographic characteristics of the affected population to determine what groups might be most disrupted by the transition . we will survey for public awareness of the dtv transition , and specific knowledge of the transition , such as when the transition will take place . we will seek to determine the level of public awareness of those who will be affected by the transition and awareness of the converter box subsidy program and other options for viewing digital signals after the transition . we plan to report on changes in consumer awareness over time by conducting surveys throughout the transition process . furthermore , we will continue to assess government and industry consumer education efforts and will analyze the efforts compared with key practices for consumer outreach . we will review the government's responsibility for consumer education , monitor the outcome of fcc's notices of proposed rulemaking regarding the transition , and collect details on ibm's consumer education plan as they become available . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact mark l. goldstein on ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included matthew cail , colin fallon , simon galed , bert japikse , crystal jones , sally moino , andrew stavisky , and margaret vo . each of the requirements mentions civil penalties for noncompliance .