these efforts are encouraging . however , the aggressive development and testing schedule presents various challenges . for example , two of the three releases of pbocs were not included in the recent performance test because development of these releases had not yet been completed . this increases the risk that performance issues , such as those described above , may reoccur in future releases of the system and the bureau's ability to resolve and retest these issues before the system is needed for key field operations will be limited . in addition to dapps and pbocs , the bureau will rely on six other key automated systems to conduct the census . progress has been made with respect to system testing . however , much system testing remains to be completed in the next few months , as shown in the following table . given the importance of it systems to the decennial census , it is critical that the bureau ensure that dapps , pbocs , and other key systems are thoroughly tested . the limited amount of time to resolve what are , in certain cases , significant performance issues creates a substantial challenge for the bureau . in 2008 , we reported that the bureau had not carried out the necessary analyses to demonstrate that the then life - cycle cost estimate of about $11.5 billion for the 2010 census was credible , and we recommended that the bureau better document and update the estimate , to which it generally agreed . since then , two early census field operations have experienced major differences between their estimated and actual costs . for address canvassing , where census workers verify address lists and maps , actual costs exceeded the bureau's initial estimate of $356 million by $89 million , or 25 percent . in contrast , for group quarters validation , where census workers verify addresses of group housing , actual costs were below the bureau's estimate of $71 million by about $29 million , or 41 percent . because of cost overruns during address canvassing , as well as concerns over the increased number of vacant units due to foreclosures , the bureau has implemented our recommendation and reexamined the assumptions and other data used to support the cost estimate for nrfu , the most costly and labor - intensive of all census field operations . earlier this month , the bureau provided us with the results from that reexamination . although we have not fully assessed the bureau's analysis , our preliminary review shows that the bureau now estimates that nrfu will cost about $2.3 billion , a decrease of around $400 million ( 15 percent ) from its previous estimate of about $2.7 billion . in updating the estimate , the bureau considered a number of cost drivers .