technology . access to technology can help coordinate trips and schedules across rural transit services . about half of the rural transit providers ( 11 of 21 ) we interviewed stated that they use software and other technology to schedule trips and operate call centers to facilitate coordination efforts . for example , people for people , a rural transit provider in yakima , washington , uses technology to coordinate and operate the greater columbia call - center . ( see sidebar ) . however , a handful of stakeholders ( 4 of 43 ) mentioned that access to broadband , which is needed to enable technology and scheduling software , can be limited in certain areas , especially on tribal lands . for example , an official from ebci transit , a tribal transit provider in north carolina , said ebci experienced poor cell phone service and other communication limitations , which affected its ability to schedule and coordinate trips . our recent work on telecommunications found that tribal lands have significantly lower levels of broadband internet access relative to the country as a whole . formal coordinating mechanisms: state - and regional - coordinating bodies as one of the regional coordinating bodies , the southwest georgia regional commission has played a central role in coordinating rural transit services through much of its region ; it currently provides public transit services in 13 counties to the general public as well as to riders with specific needs to access health and human services in 14 counties . the availability of coordinating mechanisms can facilitate information sharing and coordination . about half of the stakeholders ( 18 of 43 ) told us that they participate in some statewide , regional , or local coordinating bodies as part of a process to facilitate coordination . for example , the georgia department of transportation works with regional commissions to coordinate rural transit throughout georgia . ( see sidebar ) . in contrast , officials from the north carolina department of transportation told us that the state disbanded its coordinating council , which may be contributing to challenges in providing nonemergency medical transportation services . we previously reported that state and local transportation agencies and aging network organizations used a variety of different mechanisms , such as state - , regional - , and local - planning bodies to coordinate transportation services for older adults . half of the states we selected ( 4 of 8 ) have statewide - coordinating bodies . for example , participants from one discussion group said that state requirements can facilitate coordination when the state statute requires rural transit providers applying for or receiving federal , state , or local assistance to coordinate with other state agencies , including the state's health and human services department , for funding and services . rural transit providers also told us that they participate in regional - and local - coordinating bodies . for example , all transit providers in montana are required to coordinate through local transportation advisory committees that plan and prioritize local transportation needs .