( see app . i for a complete list of the schedules. ) in response , the procurement reform task force recommended that va establish a contract hierarchy to guide its purchasing practices . in november 2002 , va implemented a new policy requiring va medical centers to purchase medical products first from a national contract , second from a blanket purchase agreement ( bpa ) , and third from an fss contract . only when items are not available from these sources should va medical centers enter into local agreements or purchase items directly from local vendors — the least desirable option . despite these efforts , the va ig again reported in march 2004 that medical center purchases were not made from the best sources . for example , the va ig analyzed a sample of purchases made in fiscal year 2002 valued at $23.4 million . although all of the products were available through va contracts , the medical centers purchased only $14.2 million , or about 60 percent , of the products off the national contracts . the remaining $9.2 million , or about 40 percent , was spent on generally higher priced locally purchased products . in addition , va currently has two new schedules under consideration . in other instances , healthcare services cover additional fee - based doctor , nursing , and dental services provided inside and outside the va medical centers . nearly all of va's existing healthcare services contracts are awarded and administered by va's medical centers . va's prime vendor distribution contract for pharmaceuticals — which has been in effect since 1991 — accounts for the distribution of nearly all pharmaceuticals used at va medical centers . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is at the end of the letter . va operates one of the world's largest healthcare systems . in fiscal year 2003 , va spent about $26 billion to provide healthcare to 4.5 million veterans . more than 1,300 va healthcare facilities , which include 160 medical centers , provide a range of medical , surgical , outpatient , rehabilitative , and long - term care products and services . between fiscal years 2001 and 2003 , va experienced over a 15-percent growth in the number of patients treated . the general services administration established the fss program in 1949 to facilitate federal agencies' acquisition of products and services from commercial suppliers through schedule contracts . in 1960 , the general services administration delegated authority to va to manage and award fss contracts for all medical products and services needed throughout the federal healthcare system . va currently operates eight schedules that cover a wide range of medical products and services . the first , laboratory tests , will be an expansion of va's “clinical analyzers” schedule and will be used for off - site tests such as cytology , pathology , and endocrinology . the second schedule , “home infusion,” will be used for intravenous services at nonmedical facility sites , such as patients' homes . va projects that these two schedules will be available by the end of fiscal year 2004 . currently , va has over 1,200 fss contracts in place for the eight schedules .