doing so is a vast undertaking . for tax year 2011 , irs matched over 140 million individual income tax returns against the 1.6 billion third - party information returns , such as form w - 2 , this matching wage and tax statement , it received from employers.helped irs verify that taxpayers accurately reported their income and other information on their tax returns . while valuable , the matching process also has limitations . for example , information returns are not due to irs until well after many taxpayers have filed their tax returns and received any refunds . as a consequence , irs is unable to match tax returns to information returns before issuing most refunds . as a further consequence , when a mismatch shows a taxpayer underreported his or her tax liability , irs cannot reduce the amount of any current refund . instead , irs must contact the taxpayer and try to collect the tax debt . this imposes additional burden on taxpayers and additional costs on irs . also , if the refund has been spent , taxpayers may not be able to readily pay the amount owed plus interest and any penalties . in early 2011 , the then irs commissioner outlined a vision for a “real time tax” system — a strategy to improve verification by matching third - party information to income tax returns during the pre - refund screening process rather than after refunds are issued . in 2012 , irs launched a three - phase exploratory effort to assess the tradeoffs inherent in pursuing real time tax . moving the matching of third - party information during the pre - refund screening process could have significant impacts on taxpayers , third parties , and irs processes and systems . it could also require congressional action to authorize changes to the tax code , including , perhaps , changes to some information return due dates . considerations associated with moving the due dates include whether third parties have the information they need before the current due dates and whether they would have sufficient time to detect and correct errors before reporting . irs officials noted that they do not yet consider real time tax a “project” and have not decided whether to pursue real time tax . given the potential benefits and costs , you asked us to review irs's strategy for exploring real time tax . the objectives of this report are to ( 1 ) describe when irs receives and matches individual tax and information returns and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which irs is following leading practices for managing an exploratory effort of this importance at irs . to describe when irs receives and matches individual tax and information returns , we reviewed irs documents and guidance , including the internal revenue manual and irs information return forms . we limited the scope of our review to the form 1040 series and the 25 information returns irs officials said would likely be most relevant to matching to individual income tax returns under a real time tax system.these information returns are listed in appendix ii .