health status . we also found that senior prime did not produce any improvement in enrollees' self - reported health status . we base this on enrollees' answers to our questions about different aspects of their health , including their ratings of their health in general and of specific areas , such as their ability to climb several flights of stairs . this finding is not surprising , given the relatively short time interval — an average of 19 months — between our two surveys . we also found that , like enrollees , nonenrollees did not experience a significant change in health status . preventable hospitalizations . the demonstration did not have a clear effect on preventable hospitalizations — those hospitalizations that experts say can often be avoided by appropriate outpatient care . among patients who had been hospitalized for any reason , the rate of preventable hospitalizations was slightly higher for senior prime enrollees than for their medicare fee - for - service counterparts . however , when all those with chronic diseases — whether hospitalized or not — were examined , the rate among senior prime enrollees was lower . a less desirable consequence of enrollees' access to care was its high cost for dod . under senior prime , dod's costs were significantly higher than medicare fee - for - service costs for comparable patients and comparable benefits . these higher costs did not result from senior prime enrollees being sicker or older than medicare beneficiaries . instead , they resulted from heavier use of hospitals and , especially , greater use of doctors and other outpatient services . in other words , the increased ability of senior prime enrollees to see physicians and receive care translated directly into high dod costs for the demonstration . from the perspective of enrollees , senior prime was highly successful . it noted that the report did not compare senior prime enrollees' utilization rates with those of medicare+choice plans and suggested that our comparison with fee - for - service might be misleading , because it did not take account of the richer benefit package offered by senior prime . dod further stated that the utilization data should cover the full 3 years of the demonstration experience and that utilization might be higher during the initial phase of a new plan . finally , dod stated that access and satisfaction for tricare prime enrollees were adversely affected by the demonstration . cms agreed with the report's findings and suggested that higher quality of care might be an explanation for senior prime enrollees' higher use of services . ( dod and cms comments appear in appendixes vi and vii. ) in comparing utilization rates with medicare fee - for - service in the same areas , we chose a comparison group that would be expected to have higher utilization than senior prime or any other managed care plan . mortality rate . although there were slightly more deaths among nonenrollees , the difference between enrollees and nonenrollees disappears when we adjust for retirees' age and their health conditions at the start of the demonstration .