in total , we made 21 recommendations in these areas . however , ntsb has initiated actions that could lead to closure of the recommendations . ntsb is deploying an agencywide electronic information system based on microsoft sharepoint that will streamline and increase ntsb's use of technology in closing out its recommendations and in developing reports . when fully implemented , this system should serve to close these two recommendations . ntsb has also made significant progress in implementing our recommendation to increase its use of safety studies , which are multiyear efforts that result in recommendations . they are intended to improve transportation safety by effecting changes to policies , programs , and activities of agencies that regulate transportation safety . while we , the department of transportation , and nongovernmental groups , like universities , also conduct research designed to improve transportation safety , ntsb is mandated to carry out special studies and investigations about transportation safety , including studies about how to avoid personal injury . although ntsb has not completed any safety studies since we made our recommendation in 2006 , it has three studies in progress , one of which is in final draft , and it has established a goal of developing two safety study proposals and submitting them to its board for approval each year . ntsb officials told us that because the agency has a small number of staff , it has difficulty producing large studies in addition to processing many other reports and data inquiries . ntsb officials told us they would like to broaden the term “safety studies” to include not only the current studies of multiple accidents , but the research done for the other smaller safety - related reports and data inquiries . such a term , they said , would better characterize the scope of their efforts to report safety information to the public . ntsb also developed new guidelines to address its completion of safety studies . congressional reauthorization is an ideal time to obtain stakeholder input on whether a change in terminology like this would meet ntsb's legislative requirement . we made two recommendations for ntsb to increase its own and other agencies' use of the training center and to decrease the center's overall operating deficit ( see fig . the agency increased use of the center's classroom space from 10 percent in fiscal year 2006 to 80 percent in fiscal year 2009 . according to ntsb , it has sublease agreements with agencies of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to rent approximately three - quarters of the classroom space located on the first and second floors . the warehouse portion of the training center houses reconstructed wreckage from twa flight 800 , damaged aircraft , and other wreckage . the training center provides core training for ntsb investigators and trains others from the transportation community to improve their practice of accident investigation . furthermore , ntsb has hired a management support specialist whose job duties include maximizing the training center's use and marketing its use to other agencies or organizations . the agency's actions to increase the center's use also helped increase total training center revenues from about $635,000 in fiscal year 2005 to about $1,771,000 in fiscal year 2009 .