( see fig . which brt features are included in brt projects and why ? how have brt projects performed in terms of ridership and service and how do they compare to rail transit projects ? how do the costs of these projects differ from rail transit projects ? to what extent do brt projects provide economic development and other benefits to communities ? to determine which features are included in brt projects and information on ridership and service , we sent questionnaires to the sponsors of all 20 completed brt projects since fiscal year 2005 that fta recommended for new start , small start , very small start , or bus and bus facilities funding under the capital investment grant program . we prepopulated the questionnaires with information on brt features and service obtained from an existing interest group's brt database , project websites , and other project sponsor documentation submitted to fta and asked project sponsors to verify or correct the prepopulated information and complete any missing information . information from these visits cannot be generalized to all brt projects . to assess how all 20 brt projects have performed in terms of ridership and service and how they compare to all 20 rail transit projects , we used data from the completed brt project questionnaires , and compared this data to the data from the questionnaires we sent to the sponsors of all completed rail transit projects that met the criteria outline above . in addition , we visited five brt projects to obtain information about why certain brt features were or were not included in the projects . we included 55 ( 30 brt and 25 rail transit ) planned or completed projects that had construction grant agreements from fiscal year 2005 through february 2012 . to verify and assess the reliability of the data compiled by fta , we compared and updated project capital cost data based on fta's annual reports on funding recommendations for fiscal years 2005 through 2012 . we supplemented the data collected through our questionnaires with information obtained during our site - visit interviews ( from the locations listed above ) . we received completed questionnaires for 18 of the 20 to assess how brt projects compare to rail transit projects in terms of capital project costs and the new starts , small starts , and very small starts share of funding , we used fta project grant data compiled by fta to identify the 55 ( 30 brt and 25 rail transit ) existing or planned projects that had signed grant agreements from fiscal years 2005 through february 2012 . reports on funding recommendations for fiscal years 2005 through 2012 to ensure that we had the most recent project cost estimates . we discussed data collection and maintenance with fta and determined the data are reliable for our purposes . in addition to collecting data from fta , we also reviewed relevant academic literature on brt and rail transit capital costs and interviewed academic experts , brt stakeholders , and select brt project sponsors to better understand how brt and rail transit projects compare in terms of costs .