( see figure 1. ) in contrast , when students served themselves all of the lunch components in the districts that we visited , their lunches were substantially larger in size , primarily because of the large amounts of fruits and vegetables they selected . ( see figure 2. ) school lunches generally provide fewer calories under the new requirements than in past years , likely because of smaller entrée sizes . specifically , the new required lunch calorie maximums for each grade group are either lower or comparable to the calorie minimums previously required . as a result , school lunches generally provided more calories in the past , according to national data , than they are allowed to in school year 2012-2013 , particularly for younger students . these concerns were likely related to decreased entrée sizes . during our visits to schools , students in six schools mentioned that they have been hungry this year after eating school lunch because of various reasons . for example , students in three schools attributed this to the smaller entrees , and students in one of those schools also noted that it may be related to the timing of their lunch periods , as their school's first lunch period began around 10:30 a.m. and the school day ended at about 2:30 p.m . in another school , students acknowledged that they had not taken or eaten all of the items offered with the lunch , which we observed resulted in a smaller sized lunch . although the previous nutrition standards were developed to align school lunches with the dietary guidelines for americans , they were developed in the mid 1990s . since then , the percentage of children who are overweight and obese has increased , and research has shown that excess food consumption , poor food choices , and decreased physical activity contribute to these trends . the institute of medicine's 2010 recommendations for the lunch pattern were developed using a data - based approach , which assessed data on healthy weights and heights , physical activity , and the distribution of calories among meals , and the authors indicate that the recommended lunches are appropriate for the level of physical activity of most children . sfas also expressed concerns about the impact of compliance with the new lunch requirements on food costs and their budgets . all eight sfas we visited reported that they have incurred increases in fruit and vegetable costs this year because of the requirement that students take at least one fruit or vegetable with lunch . further , most indicated that overall costs for school lunch were greater in school year 2012-2013 than in the past , and three expressed concerns about the impact of these changes on their overall financial stability . because we conducted our visits before the end of the school year , we have not yet obtained data from these sfas on how they ended the year financially , though we plan to provide information on those results in our final report .