( see app . iii for more detailed information on these and selected other in - region sourcing initiatives ) . the itsci initiative was developed by a tin industry association known as itri . the initiative supports responsible sourcing of tin , tantalum , and tungsten from central africa and was launched in rwanda in december 2010 and in the katanga province of the drc in march 2011. itsci expanded its activities in the maniema province of the drc in december 2012 . we reported in 2012 that itsci is a traceability and due diligence program that creates auditable and verifiable chains of custody for tin , tantalum , and tungsten through ( 1 ) tagging and bagging of materials and the collection of tagging data and ( 2 ) regular incident reporting and continuous monitoring of mines and companies participating in the program . in october 2012 , the dutch government , with industry partners such as itsci , started the conflict - free tin initiative focused on conflict - free tin sourcing from south kivu in the drc , a region that is prone to insecurity and violence by illegal armed groups . this initiative is a traceability and due diligence mechanism that brings partners along the supply chain together , from mine to smelter to end - user . this also includes consumers as well as the drc government and civil society and uses the oecd due diligence guidance . according to an implementer , the progress of the initiative will depend on how the security situation in south kivu develops . while the in - region sourcing initiatives have focused on tin , tantalum , and tungsten to date , one of the most recent in - region initiatives in the drc is through the public - private alliance for responsible minerals trade ( ppa ) and is focused on a pilot gold traceability scheme . in fall of 2012 , partnership africa canada began work on establishing an in - region gold traceability project partially funded by ppa . according to information from ppa , the project aims to create a traceable conflict - free mineral chain for artisanal gold from the eastern drc , in the orientale province , thus demonstrating the feasibility of creating artisanal gold chains with full traceability from mine site to gold refiner . according to industry and agency officials , in - region sourcing programs can provide better economic incentive for miners to sell minerals that do not benefit armed groups . for example , itsci reported in february 2013 that the tin initiative in south kivu had led to a number of immediate benefits for the local population , which depends on mining as its source of income . specifically , the price paid to the miners for conflict - free minerals mined at the site had more than doubled . itsci further reported that the additional income had allowed the mining cooperatives to invest in basic equipment such as electricity generators and to improve productivity and working conditions . additionally , some agency officials stated that in - region initiatives can help develop capacity in the drc .