medical supplies . in fiscal year 2015 , usaid awarded about $16 million through a cooperative agreement to an international ngo to deliver medical supplies and equipment in southern syria to support health - related infrastructure , such as clinics , among other types of aid and services . in jordan , we visited their warehouse where supplies were received , checked for quality , affixed with quick response ( qr ) codes , and packaged , as shown in figure 8 . state and usaid have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside syria . state officials noted that state conducts a variety of oversight activities . for instance , state officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs . state also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance . state officials also told us that they ask partners to notify them upon discovering incidents of diversion . for example , one implementing partner provided frequent updates to state on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved . similarly , usaid officials provided information on several measures taken to oversee programs implemented by partners . for example , usaid officials we spoke with in washington explained that officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks and operate in a hazardous environment such as syria . they added that usaid officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners , attend monthly meetings with them , conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities , and coordinate activities among partners to reduce or eliminate duplication or overlap of assistance . usaid officials in the region also receive quarterly reports from partners to monitor progress before submitting them to usaid headquarters for additional review . usaid also noted that it has implemented an informal biweekly reporting system for all partners to provide reports notifying usaid of any challenges or potential risks facing the partner in the preceding two weeks . according to usaid officials in washington , usaid officials in the region are the immediate officials to oversee programs and detect incidents of fraud ; and , usaid officials in the region explained that the usaid oig has conducted fraud awareness training for officials in the region to improve their ability to detect fraud , such as product substitution , when they conduct spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities . further , in october 2015 , usaid's ofda hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in syria . by february 2016 , field monitors had conducted site visits and submitted monitoring reports to usaid , providing information on the status of projects and including major concerns that field monitors identified . based on our analysis , usaid's third party monitoring contract and supporting documentation contain guidelines for verifying the progress of activities in syria ; however , they do not clearly instruct field monitors to identify potential fraud risks as they conduct site assessments of projects in syria .