gao - 17-370 . washington , d.c.: march 24 , 2017 . kc - 46 tanker aircraft: challenging testing and delivery schedules lie ahead . these problems have not resulted in additional costs to the government . however , if delivery delays continue past october 2018 , the air force will need to maintain legacy aircraft such as the kc - 135 longer than planned . the air force expected to have 470 tankers in january 2018 — a combination of kc - 46 , kc - 135 , and kc - 10 aircraft — for refueling missions , but only had 455 of these aircraft at that time . since no kc - 46 aircraft have been delivered , the air force has had to use kc - 135 and kc - 10 aircraft at a higher rate than expected . air force officials negotiated non - monetary considerations from boeing to offset the lost military tanker capacity associated with the delay , such as obtaining additional training at no cost to the government for kc - 46 pilots and maintenance personnel and support for the aircrew training system . according to program officials , boeing has already provided almost all of these considerations even though the contract modification that includes them has not yet been signed by boeing . according to air mobility command officials , if there are delivery delays past october 2018 , the air force would need to keep some kc - 135 aircraft operational longer than planned . the cost of maintaining those kc - 135 aircraft is estimated to be about $10.3 million per year per aircraft . additionally , about $12 million per aircraft may also be needed , according to command officials , for depot maintenance activities that are scheduled every 5 years . command officials stated that the number of depot events that are needed will depend on how quickly boeing can deliver expected kc - 46 aircraft . we are not making any recommendations in this report , but believe the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics should implement a prior recommendation to closely monitor the cost , schedule , and performance outcomes of the kc - 46 program to identify positive or negative lessons learned . as one of only a few major acquisition programs to award a fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) development contract in recent years , evaluating performance and identifying lessons learned will be illustrative , important for informing decision makers , and help guide and improve future defense acquisition programs . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod did not provide any written comments , but the kc - 46 program office provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the secretary of the air force . gao - 15-308 . see figure 1 for an example of boom refueling . the hose and drogue system is comprised of a long , flexible refueling hose and a parachute - like metal basket that provides stability .