hhs had no technical comments . chairman davis and ranking member doggett , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact kay e. brown at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownke@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include james bennett , rachel frisk , alex galuten , gale harris , jean mcsween , and cathy roark . the state in this example would have its minimum work participation rate reduced to 26 percent for all tanf families . the next most frequent work es . activities were job search and job readiness assistance , vocational educational training , and work experience . although fewer than 50 percent of all families receiving tanf cash assistance participated in work activities for the required number of hours both before and after dra , many states have been able to meet their work participation rate requirements because of various policy and funding options allowed in federal law and regulations . specifically , factors that influenced states' work participation rates included not only the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance who participated in work activities , but also 1. decreases in the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance , 2. state spending on tanf - related services beyond what is required , 3. state policies that allow working families to continue receiving tanf 4. state policies that provide nonworking families cash assistance outside of the tanf program . beyond families' participation in the 12 work activities , the factor that states have commonly relied on to help them meet their required work participation rates is the caseload reduction credit . our performance audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addressing these issues , care must to be taken to ensure that data requirements are well thought out and do not present an unreasonable burden on state programs . those standards required that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the number of families receiving welfare cash assistance fell significantly after the creation of tanf , decreasing by almost 50 percent from a monthly average of 3.2 million families in fiscal year 1997 to a low of 1.7 million families in fiscal year 2008 ( see fig . several factors likely contributed to this caseload decline , such as the strong economy of the 1990s , declines in the number of eligible families participating , concurrent policy changes , and state implementation of tanf requirements , including those related to work participation . however , since fiscal year 2008 and the beginning of the recent economic recession , the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance has increased by 13 percent to a monthly average of 1.9 million families in fiscal year 2010 .