website . afterwards , the officials notified state offices . how can guidance be significant ? guidance documents are considered “significant” when they have a broad and substantial impact on regulated entities , on the public or on other federal agencies . guidance can have coercive effects or can lead parties to alter their conduct . for example , under a statute or regulation that would allow a range of actions to be eligible for a permit or other desired agency action , a guidance document might specify fast track treatment for a particular narrow form of behavior , but subject other behavior to a burdensome application process with an uncertain likelihood of success . even if not legally binding , such guidance could affect behavior in a way that might lead to an economically significant impact . similarly , an agency might make a pronouncement about the conditions under which it believes a particular substance or product is unsafe . while not legally binding , such a statement could reasonably be anticipated to lead to changes in behavior by the private sector or governmental authorities such that it would lead to a significant economic effect . for example , the following guidance documents issued by our audited agencies were considered significant: in response to questions from state officials , dol's employment and training administration issued guidance in 2005 clarifying that distance learning can be considered approvable classroom training under the trade adjustment assistance program . in response to requests for technical assistance , education's office for civil rights determined that elementary and secondary schools and postsecondary institutions could benefit from additional guidance concerning title ix obligations to address sexual violence . in 2014 , the office issued guidance that included questions and answers to further clarify legal requirements , and discussed the interplay between applicable laws and proactive efforts schools can take to prevent sexual violence . certain provisions of the omb bulletin were informed by written agency practices established by the food and drug administration ( fda ) for the initiation , development , issuance , and use of its guidance documents . in 1997 , congress established certain aspects of fda's guidance processes as law and directed the agency to evaluate the effectiveness of its practices and develop and issue regulations specifying its procedures.fda's good guidance regulations define the subset of guidance that must be published in the federal register.internal policies and practices to ensure appropriate adherence to their good guidance practices , including a written process to document decisions about the appropriate level of review for each guidance document . fda officials told us that by default , guidance will receive a higher level of review unless a justification is presented to warrant lesser review . fda officials told us that they use tools , such as “guidance initiation forms” or “concept papers” to , among other things , ensure they avoid duplicative or overlapping guidance and to prioritize proposed guidance . component officials used guidance for multiple purposes , including interpreting regulations , disseminating suggested practices , and providing grant administration information . interpret new regulations . component officials told us they used guidance to summarize regulations or explain ways to meet regulatory requirements .