i would be pleased to answer your questions . if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement include jeffrey knott ( assistant director ) , christopher businsky , nancy glover , and rosanna guerrero . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . failure or disruption in the production or distribution of critical products . both man - made ( eg , disruptions caused by labor , trade , or political disputes ) and natural ( eg , earthquakes , fires , floods , or hurricanes ) causes could decrease the availability of material needed to develop systems or disrupt the supply of it products critical to the operations of federal agencies . reliance on a malicious or unqualified service provider for the performance of technical services . by virtue of their position , contractors and other service providers may have access to federal data and systems . service providers could attempt to use their access to obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . installation of hardware or software that contains unintentional vulnerabilities , such as defects in code that can be exploited . cyber attackers may focus their efforts on , among other things , finding and exploiting existing defects in software code . such defects are usually the result of unintentional coding errors or misconfigurations , and can facilitate attempts by attackers to gain unauthorized access to an agency's information systems and data , or disrupt service . we noted in the march 2012 report that threat actors can introduce these threats into federal information systems by exploiting vulnerabilities that could exist at multiple points in the global supply chain . in addition , supply chain vulnerabilities can include weaknesses in agency acquisition or security procedures , controls , or implementation related to an information system . examples of the types of vulnerabilities that could be exploited include acquisitions of it products or parts from sources other than the original manufacturer or authorized reseller , such as independent distributors , brokers , or on the gray market ; lack of adequate testing for software updates and patches ; and incomplete information on it suppliers . if a threat actor exploits an existing vulnerability , it could lead to the loss of the confidentiality , integrity , or availability of the system and associated information . this , in turn , can adversely affect an agency's ability to carry out its mission . in march 2012 , we reported that the four national security - related agencies ( i.e. , defense , justice , energy , and dhs ) had acknowledged the risks presented by supply chain vulnerabilities .