tsa concurred and reported taking steps to address this recommendation . specifically , in january 2015 , dhs stated that tsa's office of security capabilities evaluated the ait - 2 technology and screening officer as a system during an operational evaluation . however , tsa has not yet provided sufficient documentation showing that this recommendation has been fully addressed . in december 2014 , we reported that , according to tsa officials , tsa tested the security effectiveness of the individual components of the managed inclusion process — such as bdos and etd devices — before implementing managed inclusion , and tsa determined that each layer alone provides an effective level of security . however , in our prior body of work , we identified challenges in several of the layers used in the managed inclusion process , raising questions regarding their effectiveness . for example , in our november 2013 report on tsa's behavior detection and analysis program , we found that although tsa had taken several positive steps to validate the scientific basis and strengthen program management of its behavior detection and analysis program , tsa had not demonstrated that behavioral indicators can be used to reliably and effectively identify passengers who may pose a threat to aviation security . further , tsa officials stated that they had not yet tested the security effectiveness of the managed inclusion process as it functions as a whole , as tsa had been planning for such testing over the course of the last year . tsa documentation showed that the office of security capabilities recommended in january 2013 that tsa test the security effectiveness of managed inclusion as a system . we reported in december 2014 that according to officials , tsa anticipated that testing would begin in october 2014 and estimated that testing could take 12 to 18 months to complete . we have also previously reported on challenges tsa has faced in designing studies and protocols to test the effectiveness of security systems and programs in accordance with established methodological practices , such as in the case of the ait systems discussed previously and in our evaluation of bdo effectiveness . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact jennifer grover at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) established tsa as the primary federal agency with responsibility for securing the nation's civil aviation system . this responsibility includes the screening of all passengers and property transported from and within the united states by commercial passenger aircraft . in accordance with atsa , all passengers , their accessible property , and their checked baggage are screened pursuant to tsa - established procedures at the more than 450 airports at which tsa performs , or oversees the performance of , security screening operations . these procedures generally provide , among other things , that passengers pass through security checkpoints where their person , identification documents , and accessible property , are checked by screening personnel .