environmental planning . twenty - one percent of mpos responding to our survey said that they conduct air quality or emissions analysis , beyond the federally required conformity process . further , 32 percent of mpos responding to our survey said that they conduct additional environmental or water quality planning . for example , one state we visited requires its mpos to consider how their long - range transportation plan increases water and energy conservation and efficiency . mpos we surveyed and interviewed cited several funding challenges that impact their ability to conduct transportation planning . about 85 percent of all mpos responding to our survey cited the lack of transportation planning funding as a challenge to transportation planning . project implementation . some mpos also have the responsibility for implementing transportation projects . generally , mpos do not take the lead in implementing transportation projects ; rather , they play a coordinating role in planning and programming funds for projects and operations . usually , local jurisdictions , transit operators , or state governments take the lead in implementing projects . however , 37 percent of survey respondents — representing mpos of all sizes — said that they implement projects . for example , one large mpo we spoke with utilizes its local , state , and federal funds to implement projects by leveraging this money with regional partners to construct large - scale transportation projects . toward this end , the mpo established a program aimed at quickly reducing congestion in particular areas . this initiative uses small - scale projects , such as traffic signal optimization , for congested corridors — which can be implemented within 2 years and are largely funded and carried out by the mpo . transit operations . sixteen percent of mpos responded in our survey that they have some responsibility for operating all or a portion of their regional transit system . for example , one western mpo is both the transit authority — providing mass transit that connects throughout the region — and the transportation - planning agency for the greater metropolitan area . another mpo noted in our survey that rather than operating the transit system , it serves as the planning staff for both the region's mpo and the transit agency . mpos we surveyed and interviewed also cited challenges related to the lack of flexibility of transportation planning funds . specifically , about half of all mpos responding to our survey cited the lack of flexibility of funding as a challenge . while fta allows planning funds to be used for a broad range of planning activities , fhwa is more prescriptive in how planning funds can be spent . for example , fhwa guidance precludes using planning funds for projects' environmental analyses that definitively go beyond transportation planning . furthermore , officials at a few mpos we spoke with stated that it is unclear which activities can be undertaken with planning funds , particularly in terms of the fhwa planning funds , and that such definitions inhibit them from conducting comprehensive planning by not allowing them to use transportation planning dollars for other uses where necessary .