we disagree . the full costs of the bureau's projects , programs , and activities are not reported . as we state in the report , the cost accounting system focuses primarily on cost recovery . it does not identify the full costs of the major activities undertaken by the bureau in accomplishing the primary purposes of its water projects , such as irrigation , m&i water supply , power generation , recreation , fish and wildlife protection , flood control , water conservation , and land resource management . as a result , the full costs of , for example , operating the central valley project , the examination of existing structures program , or the various activities associated with operating and maintaining a facility are not known . in addition , the bureau does not report the full costs of bureauwide programs in either its annual report or budget documents . to report the full cost of bureauwide programs , the bureau would need to include the costs funded through the policy and administration appropriation because many of these programs use policy and administration funds to pay the employees who administer the bureauwide programs . the bureau does report total costs , in aggregate , by government performance and results acts ( gpra ) responsibility segment . however , it does not distribute all of the policy and administration costs to its responsibility segments . for example , for fiscal year 2000 , the bureau made policy and administration one of its gpra responsibility segments instead of distributing those costs to the other responsibility segments that policy and administration supports . the other responsibility segments were: ( 1 ) water and energy management and development , ( 2 ) land management and development , ( 3 ) fish and wildlife management and development , ( 4 ) facilities operations , and ( 5 ) facilities maintenance and rehabilitation . since the bureau did not distribute the policy and administration costs , it did not report the full costs of the other responsibility segments because the policy and administration appropriation funds activities that support the administration of the other segments . for fiscal year 2001 , the bureau changed the gpra responsibility segments to the commissioner's office and its five regional offices . the policy and administration costs were distributed to each of these six offices , with the commissioner's office accounting for over 60 percent of the policy and administration costs . however , since it made the commissioner's office a responsibility segment and did not distribute its costs to the five regional offices , the bureau did not report the full cost of the regional offices because the commissioner's office supports the regional offices . the third major comment by interior was that distributing policy and administration and bureauwide program costs would not improve decision making because these costs are not recoverable , are not controllable by project and program managers , and should not be aggregated with program and activity costs because these costs are not appropriated and budgeted to project - level activities . we disagree .