excluded from this review were programs for small unmanned aircraft . while the military services have acquired more than 6,200 of these aircraft , they generally do not have substantial support requirements . we examined uas program and funding plans and dod's policies governing the requirements definition and acquisition processes . we consulted the office of management and budget's capital programming guide and our cost estimating and assessment guide for instruction on developing cost estimates and plans to manage capital investments . in determining the extent to which dod addressed challenges that affect the ability of the air force and the army to train personnel for uas operations , we visited select military installations and the army's national training center at fort irwin , california , and spoke with knowledgeable dod officials to determine the specific challenges that the air force and the army faced when training service personnel to perform uas missions in joint operations . specifically , we spoke with personnel in air force and army uas units in the united states and in iraq to identify the training they were able to perform prior to operating uas in joint operations and the challenges , if any , that prevented them from performing their required training tasks . in identifying air force and army unit personnel to speak with , we selected a nonprobability sample of units that were preparing to deploy for contingency operations or had redeployed from these operations from may 2009 through september 2009 . we assessed dod's efforts to overcome these challenges in light of leading practices derived from principles established under the government performance and results act of 1993 and key elements of an overarching organizational framework , such as developing results - oriented strategies , as described in our prior work . to determine the extent to which dod had updated its existing publications that articulate doctrine and tactics , techniques , and procedures to reflect the knowledge gained from using uas in ongoing operations , we reviewed joint , multiservice , and service - specific uas doctrine , tactics , techniques , procedures , and concepts of operations . we interviewed dod and military service officials and analyzed publications to determine how the documents articulate knowledge gained from using uas in ongoing operations ; the degree to which information is provided for uas stakeholders , such as military planners and ground commanders ; and the processes that the services use to update the publications . we conducted this performance audit from october 2008 through march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . dod defines a uas as a system whose components include the necessary equipment , networks , and personnel to control an unmanned aircraft — that is , an aircraft that does not carry a human operator and is capable of flight under remote control or autonomous programming .