this report focuses on the expanded program . the act also directed irs to create the whistleblower office , which is responsible for managing and tracking whistleblower claims from the time irs receives them to the time it closes them , either through a rejection letter or an award payment . the secretary of the treasury is required to submit an annual report to congress on the activities and outcomes of both the original and expanded whistleblower programs . as of may 2011 , the whistleblower office had 20 staff members . irs's review of whistleblower claims involves a series of steps and irs can reject claims throughout the process . although irs's whistleblower office manages the whistleblower program , conducts initial reviews of claims , and makes award determinations , irs's operating divisions are responsible for investigating claims and conducting examinations under the expanded program . the office of chief counsel is not involved in every whistleblower claim but reviews whistleblower claims for legal issues when the whistleblower office or operating divisions request such assistance .  smes have other work priorities that may delay their review of whistleblower claims . smes may have expertise in specific areas of tax compliance , such as employment tax or estate and gift tax . lb&i , sb / se , and te / ge have between 7 and 10 smes each ; they do not work exclusively on whistleblower claims and support other examinations and irs programs .  within the examination step , operating divisions do not prioritize whistleblower claims ; they are treated the same as all other examinations . according to irs officials , each claim should rise on its own merits alongside other cases that have been selected for examination by other programs . after the examination step , whistleblowers will likely still have to wait several years before irs can determine if they are due an award due to factors outside the whistleblower office's control . taxpayers can appeal irs's assessment of tax , and if a taxpayer and irs cannot reach agreement on the outcome of the case through the appeals process , the taxpayer may have the case reviewed by the u.s. tax court , u.s. court of federal claims , or a u.s. district court . furthermore , the whistleblower office generally does not pay claims until after irs collects all proceeds from taxpayers , the 2 years taxpayers are granted to request refunds of their payments has elapsed , and in some cases , irs has completed all taxpayer examinations resulting from a single award claim form ( form 211 ) . whistleblower office officials said that the 2-year wait was important because taxpayers , regardless of whether they were the subject of a whistleblower investigation , have the right to request a refund , even on issues that whistleblowers identified . we identified states with tax whistleblower reward programs — new york , florida , and texas — and interviewed representatives from these programs and reviewed relevant program documents . to identify potential lessons learned from irs's past experiences , we spoke with irs officials and attorneys who represent tax whistleblowers and reviewed academic literature on tax whistleblowers .