these practices are as follows . covert testing: two of the 13 foreign rail systems we visited utilized covert testing to keep employees alert about their security responsibilities . covert testing involves security staff staging unannounced events to test the response of railroad staff to incidents such as suspicious packages or setting off alarms . in one european system , this covert testing involves security staff placing suspicious items throughout their system to see how long it takes operating staff to respond to the item . similarly , one asian rail operator's security staff will break security seals on fire extinguishers and open alarmed emergency doors randomly to see how long it takes staff to respond . tsa conducts covert testing of passenger and baggage screening in aviation , but has not conducted such testing in the rail environment . random screening: of the 13 foreign operators we interviewed , 2 have some form of random screening of passengers and their baggage in place . prior to the july 2005 london bombings , no passenger rail operators in the united states were practicing random passengers or baggage screening . however , during the democratic national convention in 2004 , the massachusetts bay transportation authority instituted a system of random screening of passengers . national government clearinghouse on technologies and best practices: according to passenger rail operators in five countries we visited , their national governments had centralized the process for performing research and development of passenger rail security technologies and maintained a clearinghouse of technologies and security best practices for passenger rail operators . we reported in september 2005 that no u.s. federal agency had compiled or disseminated information on research and development and other best practices for u.s. rail operators . implementing covert testing , random screening , or a government - sponsored clearinghouse for technologies and best practices in the u.s. could pose political , legal , fiscal , and cultural challenges because of the differences between the u.s. and these foreign nations . many foreign nations have dealt with terrorist attacks on their public transportation systems for decades , compared with the united states , where rail has not been specifically targeted by terrorists . according to foreign rail operators , these experiences have resulted in greater acceptance of certain security practices , such as random searches , which the u.s. public may view as a violation of their civil liberties or which may discourage them from using public transportation . the impact of security measures on passengers is an important consideration for domestic rail operators , since most passengers could choose another means of transportation , such as a personal automobile . as such , security measures that limit accessibility , cause delays , increase fares , or otherwise cause inconvenience could push people away from rail and into their cars . in contrast , the citizens of the european and asian countries we visited are more dependent on public transportation than most u.s. residents and therefore may be more willing to accept intrusive security measures .