recoupment . the federal share of losses may be recouped after a terrorist event through premium surcharges . as previously discussed , treasury reimburses an insurer for a certain percentage of its losses above its deductible . and , if insurers' aggregate losses are below a specified amount , treasury may be required to recoup federal losses through post - event premium surcharges . figure 2 shows the tria funding mechanism before and after a terrorism event . specifically , the program includes a provision for mandatory recoupment of at least a portion of the federal share of losses if the aggregate sum of all insurers' deductibles and co - shares are below an amount prescribed by tria — known as the industry aggregate retention amount . under mandatory recoupment , the insurers must impose and remit to treasury a premium surcharge on all policies in tria - eligible lines until total industry payments reach 140 percent of any mandatory recoupment amount . treasury establishes the amount of the mandatory recoupment surcharge . the collection timeframes for mandatory recoupment range from 1 year and 9 months to about 6.5 years , depending on when the terrorism event occurs . when federal assistance exceeds the mandatory recoupment amount , tria allows for discretionary recoupment . under the discretionary recoupment provision , treasury may recoup additional amounts based on the ultimate cost to taxpayers of no additional recoupment , economic conditions in the marketplace , the affordability of commercial insurance for small and medium - sized businesses , and other factors treasury considers appropriate . treasury also sets the surcharge for discretionary recoupment , but the increase to tria - eligible premiums must not exceed 3 percent per calendar year . changes in tria reauthorizations . as shown in table 1 , the tria reauthorizations have changed several loss - sharing provisions of the program . over time , the reauthorizations have reduced federal responsibility for losses and increased private - sector responsibility for losses . the 2015 reauthorization requires further incremental decreases in the federal share of losses over 5 years . in addition , the 2015 reauthorization requires insurers in the program to submit information to treasury about the coverage they write for terrorism risk , including the lines of insurance with exposure to such risk , the premiums earned on such coverage , and the participation rate for such coverage . insurance in the united states is primarily regulated at the state level . state regulators license agents , review insurance products and premium rates , and examine insurers' financial solvency and market conduct . in addition , through the naic , state insurance regulators ( of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories ) establish standards and best practices , conduct peer reviews , and coordinate their regulatory oversight . for issues that involve a national standard or require uniformity among all the states , the naic develops and distributes model insurance laws and regulations for consideration among its member states . generally , state law requires insurers to file rates ( and to file insurance forms ) with state regulators who review the rates to ensure they are not excessive , inadequate , or unfairly discriminatory .