fda agreed with most of our recommendations . finally , mr . usda agreed with our recommendation and is providing enhanced training . about 70 percent of those schools also participate in the breakfast program . second , fns has developed a process for holding foods suspected of contamination that applies exclusively to food commodities that usda purchases for donation to schools . schools participating in the school lunch or breakfast programs receive a per - meal federal cash reimbursement for all meals they serve to children , as long as the meals meet federal nutrition standards . in fiscal year 2001 , school meal programs provided lunch , breakfast , and snacks to over 27 million school children daily . at the federal level , fns administers the school meal programs . at the state level , the program is usually administered by state education agencies , which operate them through agreements with local school food authorities . the extent of foodborne illness in the united states and its associated costs are significant . cdc estimates that unsafe foods cause as many as 76 million illnesses , 325,000 hospitalizations , and 5,000 deaths annually . in terms of medical costs and productivity losses , foodborne illnesses associated with seven major pathogens cost the nation between $7 billion and $37 billion annually , according to usda's estimates . the national school lunch program and the school breakfast program share the goals of improving children's nutrition , increasing lower - income children's access to nutritious meals , and supporting the agricultural economy . the school lunch program is available in almost all public schools and in many private schools . overall , usda donates about 17 percent of the dollar value of food that goes on the table in school lunch programs through its food distribution program . usda purchases and distributes commodities to remove surpluses from the marketplace and to provide nutritious foods to the nation's children . schools purchase the remaining 83 percent of the dollar value of food served using usda's cash reimbursement and their own funds . in fiscal year 2001 , the total cost of the school meal programs — including cash reimbursements to schools , usda purchases of donated foods , and program administration — was nearly $8 billion . by far the largest component of the school meal programs is the school lunch program . in fiscal year 2001 , the school lunch program cost about $5.7 billion . the procurement process for foods served in school lunch program differs depending on whether federal or state / local food authorities procure the foods ( see figure 1 ) . usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) and farm service agency ( fsa ) are responsible for procuring usda - donated foods . in effect , cdc went from accepting data from the states to actively soliciting states for more comprehensive information and having the states verify the information that they submit . as a result , states began to report more of all types of foodborne outbreaks , including school outbreaks , to cdc beginning in 1998 .