approach . gao - 19-106 . washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2018 . opioid crisis: status of public health emergency authorities . gao - 18-685r . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2018 . prescription opioids: medicare needs better information to reduce the risk of harm to beneficiaries . gao - 18-585t . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2018 . va health care: progress made towards improving opioid safety , but further efforts to assess progress and reduce risk are needed . gao - 18-380 . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2018 . illicit opioids: office of national drug control policy and other agencies need to better assess strategic efforts . gao - 18-569t . washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2018 . illicit opioids: while greater attention given to combating synthetic opioids , agencies need to better assess their efforts . gao - 18-205 . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2018 . specific assessments . the national drug control strategy was required to include specific assessments related to illicit drug use . for example , the national drug control strategy was required to include “an assessment of the reduction of illicit drug availability.” this assessment was to be measured by , among other things , the quantities of cocaine , heroin , marijuana , methamphetamine , ecstasy , and other drugs available for consumption in the united states ; the amount of marijuana , cocaine , heroin , methamphetamine , ecstasy , and precursor chemicals and other drugs entering the united states ; and the number of illicit manufacturing laboratories seized and destroyed as well as the number of hectares of marijuana , poppy , and coca cultivated and destroyed domestically and in other countries . the 2019 national drug control strategy does not include this information . in addition , the national drug control strategy was required to include “an assessment of the reduction of the consequences of illicit drug use and availability.” this assessment was to include the burden illicit drug users placed on hospital emergency departments ; the annual national health care cost of illicit drug use ; and the extent of illicit drug - related crime and criminal activity . similarly , the 2019 national drug control strategy does not include this information . performance measurement system . the ondcp director was required to submit “as part of the national drug control strategy a description of a national drug control performance measurement system.” among other things , this system was to describe the sources of information and data that would be used for each performance measure incorporated into the performance measurement system . this system was also to coordinate the development and implementation of national drug control data collection and reporting systems to support policy formulation and performance measurement . further , the system was to monitor consistency across the drug - related goals and objectives of the national drug control program agencies and ensure that each agency's goals and budgets support are fully consistent with the national drug control strategy . the 2019 national drug control strategy does not contain a description of such a national drug control performance measurement system .