address challenges in implementing cnci . in january 2008 , president bush established the comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative ( cnci ) . the initiative , which consists of 12 projects , is intended to reduce vulnerabilities , protect against intrusions , and anticipate future threats against federal executive branch information systems . as we recently reported , the white house and federal agencies have established interagency groups to plan and coordinate cnci activities . however , cnci faces challenges in achieving its objectives related to securing federal information , including better defining agency roles and responsibilities , establishing measures of effectiveness , and establishing an appropriate level of transparency . until these challenges are adequately addressed , there is a risk that cnci will not fully achieve its goals . among other recommendations , we recommended that the director of omb take action to: ( 1 ) better define roles and responsibilities of all key cnci participants ; ( 2 ) establish measures to determine the effectiveness of cnci projects in making federal information systems more secure and track progress against those measures ; ( 3 ) establish an appropriate level of transparency about cnci ; and ( 4 ) reach agreement on the scope of cnci's education projects to ensure that an adequate cadre of skilled personnel is developed to protect federal information systems . omb agreed with 3 of the 4 recommendations , disagreeing with the recommendation regarding defining roles and responsibilities . in response to one of these actions , the president appointed a cybersecurity coordinator in december 2009 . we recently initiated a review to assess the progress made by the executive branch in implementing the report's recommendations . in summary , while federal agencies continue to report increased compliance in implementing security training requirements , most federal agencies reported weaknesses in most types of information security controls . additionally , agencies reported mixed progress in implementing key security measures while inspectors general identified persistent weaknesses in those areas of agencies' information security programs . there are multiple opportunities for the federal government to enhance federal cybersecurity and address these continuing weaknesses . these opportunities include addressing the hundreds of recommendations we and inspectors general have made to agencies , making enhancements to fisma and its implementing guidance , and continuing efforts on white house , omb , and federal agencies' initiatives . a summary of these percentages is shown in figure 1 . in these and other areas , inspectors general at the 24 major agencies have also reported weaknesses in their fiscal year 2009 audits and evaluations . weaknesses in requirements such as periodic testing and evaluation , certification and accreditation , configuration management , and remedial actions were most commonly reported . for example , at least 13 inspectors general reported that their agencies had insecure configuration settings , or had not applied needed patches in a timely manner , or both ; at least 15 inspectors general reported that their agency did not adequately assess security controls such as those recommended by nist ; at least 11 inspectors general reported that their agencies failed to create a remediation plan for all identified weaknesses . a concerted response to safeguarding federal systems includes several components .