the results of these interviews are not generalizable . a full list of the stakeholders we interviewed can be found in appendix i . in addition , to identify the extent to which fcc's approach to collecting broadband data accurately captures americans' ability to access broadband internet services on tribal lands , we identified factors that affect broadband access by interviewing tribal stakeholders , as described above , and reviewing fcc documents and previous gao work . we also reviewed relevant statutes and fcc's proceedings , plans , and broadband deployment and progress reports . we compared the form 477 process to fcc's strategic goals and to factors affecting broadband access to determine the extent to which the form 477 collects information on those factors and aligns with fcc's goals . we further evaluated this information against the government performance and results act ( gpra ) , as enhanced by the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) and standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine the extent to which fcc obtains tribal input on the accuracy of provider - submitted broadband data for tribal lands , we reviewed fcc's policies for working with tribal governments and interviewed tribal stakeholders , among other entities . we compared this information to recommendations from fcc's national broadband plan , and standards for internal control in the federal government . for additional details on our scope and methodology , see appendix ii . we conducted this performance audit from june 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to achieve this goal , fcc administers the high - cost program , which provides subsidies to providers of phone service in rural , insular , and other remote areas . in 2011 , fcc launched a series of reforms to its high - cost program , including adding support for broadband services , and created the connect america fund , which provides subsidies to fixed and mobile providers of telecommunications and broadband services in rural , insular , and other remote areas where the costs of providing service is high . to be eligible for universal service fund support from fcc , a provider must be designated an eligible telecommunications carrier by the appropriate state or by fcc and must meet certain service obligations . the connect america fund has distributed approximately $4.5 billion per year , and has separate funding mechanisms targeted to specific goals . for example , there are funds for fixed - phone and broadband service and funds for mobile service , including a tribal mobility fund ( phase 1 ) that awarded nearly $50 million in 2014 for the provision of 3g and 4g service to unserved tribal areas . in addition to fcc , a number of other agencies provide funding for broadband deployment in unserved or underserved areas .