implementation of the restructuring is ongoing . bsee's ongoing restructuring has made limited progress since october 2013 in enhancing the bureau's investigative capabilities . as a result , bsee continues to rely on pre - deepwater horizon incident policies and guidance for managing its investigative capabilities and does not have the capability for analyzing data on incidents that occur on the ocs . additionally , the extent to which the bureau's iru has enhanced bsee's investigative capability is unclear due to poor information management , confusion regarding its role , and inconsistent guidance . bsee has not completed a policy identifying investigative responsibilities under the october 2013 restructuring or updated its existing policies or procedures for investigating incidents that occur on the ocs since the deepwater horizon incident . developing policies and procedures are among the goals of bsee's restructuring , according to restructuring planning documents , and consistent with federal standards for internal control . under federal standards for internal control , agencies are to clearly document internal controls , and the documentation is to appear in management directives , administrative policies , or operating manuals . bsee documents indicate that the bureau planned to complete policies and procedures in the summer of 2015 , but the time frame for establishing its policy framework has slipped to 2016 . as a result , bsee continues to rely on pre - deepwater horizon incident investigation guidance — including the 2009 mms policy on accident investigations , the 2010 mms gulf of mexico region's regional policy on accident investigations and offshore incident reports , the 2003 department manual chapter 3 on incident investigation and information management , and the 2010 mms national accident investigation handbook — to manage district and panel investigations — its primary investigative responsibility . as part of the restructuring that began in 2013 , in october 2015 , interior approved bsee's establishment of the safety and incident investigations division ( siid ) — which according to a memorandum by bsee's associate director for administration will assume the external review functions of the iru and be staffed by iru investigators — to develop new procedures for conducting investigations . however , bsee has not completed a policy outlining what the siid's responsibilities will be or updated procedures to guide its activities . the use of outdated investigative policies and procedures is a long - standing deficiency in the bureau's investigative capabilities . specific goals of this restructuring include establishing national programs for each of these capability areas to develop policies and procedures for each of these programs . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the individual named above , christine kehr ( assistant director ) , cindy gilbert , alison o'neill , matthew d. tabbert , kiki theodoropoulos , barbara timmerman , and daniel r. will made significant contributions to this report . their views are not generalizable but provide illustrative examples . appendix i provides a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from january 2015 to february 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .