( app . iii provides a chronology of key events in the development of sbirs high. ) in august 2002 , the sbirs high program was restructured to address a number of the problems that led to the nunn - mccurdy breach . in implementing changes , the air force relied heavily on the findings and recommendations of the irt . the restructuring increased program oversight and provided additional resources as well as incentives intended to improve contractor performance . as part of the program's recertification after the nunn - mccurdy breach , usd ( at&l ) directed the air force to reestablish a baseline for the program's cost and schedule estimates . the value of the restructured development contract increased by $2 billion to $4.4 billion . for fiscal year 2003 , reserves have been depleted , and air force and program officials are concerned that fiscal year 2004 reserves are insufficient to address contingencies . as a result , some planned development tasks may be delayed to fiscal year 2005 . the program director stated that the program is applying lessons learned from heo 1 to the heo 2 sensor , the first geo satellite , and other parts of the program . the knowledge gained from correcting problems on heo 1 will be necessary if the air force decides to procure additional heo sensors and accelerate procurement of the third , fourth , and fifth geo satellites . the program office is also assessing the overall program impacts from the heo 1 delay but has yet to complete the analysis . we discussed all of these issues with representatives from the sbirs high program office ; lockheed martin space systems company , missile and space operations ; lockheed martin management and data systems ; office of the secretary of defense , director of operational test and evaluation , alexandria , virginia ; and the defense contract management agency , sunnyvale , california . we performed our work from october 2002 through september 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we plan to provide copies of this report to the secretary of defense , the secretary of the air force , and interested congressional committees . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or john oppenheim at ( 202 ) 512-3111 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . missile warning: sbirs high is expected to provide reliable , unambiguous , timely , and accurate missile warning information to the president of the united states , the secretary of defense , unified combatant commanders , and other users . this mission includes both global and theater requirements to provide strategic and theater ballistic missile warning in support of passive defense and force posturing . missile defense: sbirs high is expected to provide reliable , accurate , and timely information to defensive systems . this mission includes both strategic and theater functional requirements to enable active missile defense and attack operations against hostile forces .