( see fig . during this timeframe , major steps were taken to broaden elementary , secondary , and higher education opportunities ; promote development in economically depressed areas ; to help finance health services and medical care for the indigent ; launch a war on poverty ; and attempt a comprehensive physical , social , and economic program to transform slum and blight - ridden cities into model neighborhoods . growth in the both the numbers of new grant programs and the level of funding created greater complexity . during the 1960s and into the 1970s , various reforms were begun to address the complexity in the grant system . in 1968 , congress passed the intergovernmental cooperation act of 1968 that sought to improve the cooperation and coordination of activities among levels of government . from 1969-1973 , the president initiated the federal assistance review — a government - wide effort with a goal to streamline , simplify , and speed up the flow of federal assistance and improve the federal government's responsiveness to its state and local partners . in addition , federal management circular 74-7 , issued in 1974 , provided for standardized administrative provisions across grant programs . the joint funding simplification act of 1974 permitted grantees to streamline federal assistance by enabling them to combine funding from several grants administered by one or more federal agencies . as previous congressional committee reports have noted , these administrative simplification initiatives , while useful in addressing certain administrative burdens associated with grants , did not address the more fundamental challenges stemming from the fragmented nature of the grant system . for example , the house government operations committee , the predecessor to the house government reform committee , noted that the legislative consolidation of closely related categorical programs into broader purpose grants and the placement of similar programs in a single federal agency have more potential for significantly improving grant - in - aid administration . over the years , congress at times has acted to improve the grant system through consolidation . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 consolidated a number of social service programs into nine block grants which allowed for greater state and local autonomy and flexibility in the fashioning of local strategies to address federal objectives . more recently , in 1996 the 104th congress consolidated a number of welfare - related programs into the temporary assistance for needy families block grant . notwithstanding these efforts , as figure 2 shows , over the last 20 years each period of consolidation was followed by a proliferation of new federal programs . moreover , some of the block grants were later recategorized , as congress added new set - asides and cost - ceilings to address national programmatic concerns , thereby limiting the grants' flexibility . a sizable increase in the number of grant programs could be justified and simply be an indication that as society evolves the nation's needs also change and we need new tools — in the form of new programs — at our disposal to address those needs .