measures of impact and sustainability were rarely used . what do we mean by the term “rule of law” ? according to the u.s. agency for international development , the rule of law is premised on a government being able to provide a predictable and transparent legal system . fair and effective judicial and law enforcement institutions to protect citizens against the arbitrary use of state authority and lawless acts are also a basic part of such a system . my discussion of whether the u.s. government's rule of law program in the new independent states has been effective will focus on ( 1 ) our assessment of the extent to which the program has had an impact on the development of the rule of law and whether program results were sustainable and ( 2 ) our identification of factors affecting the program's impact and sustainability . our review focused primarily on russia , ukraine , armenia , and georgia , countries where the u.s agency for international development has defined the development of the rule of law as a strategic objective . we conducted fieldwork in russia and ukraine , which have received about half of the total u.s. rule of law assistance to this region , and interviewed numerous u.s. government and host - country officials , as well as representatives of many nongovernmental organizations and other project beneficiaries . despite some positive developments , u.s. rule of law assistance in the new independent states of the former soviet union has achieved limited results , and the sustainability of those results is uncertain . experience has shown that establishing the rule of law in the new independent states is a complex undertaking and is likely to take many years to accomplish . although the united states has succeeded in exposing these countries to innovative legal concepts and practices that could lead to a stronger rule of law in the future , we could not find evidence that many of these concepts and practices have been widely adopted . at this point , many of the u.s. - assisted reforms in the new independent states are dependent on continued donor funding to be sustained . despite nearly a decade of work to reform the systems of justice in the new independent states of the former soviet union , progress in establishing the rule of law in the region has been slow overall , and serious obstacles remain . as shown in table 1 , according to freedom house , a u.s. research organization that tracks political developments around the world , the new independent states score poorly in the development of the rule of law , and , as a whole , are growing worse over time . these data , among others , have been used by usaid and the state department to measure the results of u.s. development assistance in this region . in the two new independent states where the united states has devoted the largest amount of rule of law funding — russia and ukraine — the situation appears to have deteriorated in recent years .