we also met with r&d project managers and customers . for the selected updates , we reviewed agency documentation on dhs's progress in implementing our prior recommendations . the reports cited provide detailed explanations of our scope and methodology.conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors to this statement include adam hoffman , assistant director ; aditi archer , and charlotte gamble . francis cook , michele fejfar , emily gunn , richard hung , gary malavenda , and linda miller also made contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in september 2012 , we found that dhs did not know how much its components invested in r&d , making it difficult to oversee r&d efforts across the department . according to dhs budget officials , s&t , dndo , and the u.s. coast guard were the only components that conducted r&d and we found that they were the only components that reported budget authority , obligations , or outlays for r&d activities to omb as part of the budget process . however , we reported that the data dhs submitted to omb underreported dhs's r&d obligations because dhs components obligated money for r&d contracts that were not reported to omb as r&d . specifically , for fiscal year 2011 , we identified an additional $255 million in r&d obligations by other dhs components . these obligations included dhs components providing s&t with funding to conduct r&d on their behalf and components obligating funds through contracts directly to industry , universities , or with doe's national laboratories for r&d . as a result , this further complicated dhs's ability to identify its total investment in r&d . we also reported in september 2012 that dhs did not have a department wide policy defining r&d or guidance directing components how to report r&d activities . as a result , we concluded that it was difficult to identify the department's total investment in r&d , which limited dhs's ability to oversee components' r&d efforts and align them with agency wide r&d goals and priorities , in accordance with standards for internal control in the federal government.omb's definition of r&d , but the definition was broad and its application may not be uniform across components , and thus , r&d investments may not always be identified as r&d .