this concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to answer any questions . for further information on this testimony , please contact christopher p. currie at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals making key contributions to this work include alana finley , assistant director ; luis e. rodriguez , analyst - in - charge ; karin fangman ; andrew howard ; and thomas lombardi . key contributors for the previous work that this is based on are listed in each product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we have issued 12 recommendations to the secretary of homeland security who is currently an acting official . we have also issued two recommendations to fema which is currently operating under acting leadership . committed and consistent leadership at the department and component levels will be critical for addressing our priority recommendations . for example: in september 2014 , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security work jointly with the administrator of the general services administration to strengthen management of the ongoing acquisition project to develop the multi - billion dollar headquarters facilities at the st. elizabeth's campus in washington , d.c . leadership is critical in this effort , given the magnitude of the project and the impact of headquarters consolidation on dhs operations . in october 2008 , we recommended actions that fema should take to improve its administration of the national flood insurance program high - risk area . we also recommended in september 2012 that fema develop a methodology to better assess a jurisdiction's capability to respond to and recover from a disaster without federal assistance . in july 2015 , we further recommended that the mitigation framework leadership group establish an investment strategy to identify , prioritize , and guide federal investments in disaster resilience . implementing these actions could limit the federal government's fiscal exposure and increase the nation's resilience to extreme weather events as the costs and impacts of weather disasters resulting from floods , drought , and other events are expected to increase in significance as previously “rare” events become more common and intense . in july 2018 , we recommended that u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) analyze the costs associated with future barrier segments along the southwest border and include cost as a factor in the impedance and denial prioritization strategy . obtaining this key information could help cbp evaluate designs and prioritize locations for future border barrier segments to deter cross - border illegal activity . in february 2017 , we recommended that dhs establish metrics and methods by which to evaluate the performance of dhs's national cybersecurity and communications integration center in relation to its statutorily - required cybersecurity functions .