such students may be reported more than once . as a result , some states included duplicate counts of students , and in other states , these data included other student counts ( based on screening of new students rather than assessments of already identified students as specified in the law ) . in september 2006 , education officials told us that they plan to modify the instructions for providing these data in the consolidated state performance report for school year 2006-07 data that is to be submitted in december of 2007 . because acs data are used as the basis of title iii - funding distribution , it is critical to understand how accurately these data represent the population and whether they do so uniformly across states . in addition , acs data for 2003 and 2004 show some large fluctuations in the number of respondents who speak english less than very well . in part , these fluctuations can be attributed to the partial implementation of the acs in these 2 years . the full implementation of the acs occurred in 2005 , and the data on english ability were not yet available at the time of our review . our analysis of the 2003 and 2004 acs data that education used as the basis of title iii funding showed that 13 states had increases of 10 percent or more in this population , while 20 states and the district of columbia had decreases of 10 percent or more from the prior year . further , seven of the states that showed decreases of 10 percent or more in the acs 2003-04 data representing students with limited english proficiency also showed an increase in the number of recent immigrants for this period . many of these immigrants were likely to have limited english proficiency . for example , according to acs data that education uses to represent students with limited english proficiency , rhode island had a decrease of 33.5 percent in this population at the same time that it had an increase ( about 33 percent ) in the number of recent immigrants ( age 3 to 21 ) . education used the most current acs data available to distribute title iii funding across the states , consequently the fluctuations in the acs data were reflected in fluctuations in funding . in so far as these data reflect population changes , such fluctuations are to be expected . however , if the fluctuations were due to errors resulting from the sample size for the 2003 and 2004 acs data , then they may have resulted in some states receiving a greater ( or lesser ) proportion of the funds than their population of students with limited english proficiency and recently immigrated children and youth would warrant . table 3 shows education's distribution of title iii funds across states for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . in our 12 study states , we found differences between the state - reported number of students identified as having limited english proficiency and the acs data that education uses to represent this population of students ( see fig .