conducting research . the federal reserve continues to conduct research and analysis related to reserve bank operations . for example , one reserve bank is conducting the most recent in a series of triennial payment studies , which it expects to complete later this year , to determine the current volume and composition of electronic and check payments , reporting trends in these payments since 2009 . as part of a broader effort to look at trends in various payment types , another reserve bank is examining the detailed spending habits of a selection of consumers , who were asked to document their transactions and payment decisions over a period of time in a shopping “diary.” because , as previously noted , determining how much of the currency in circulation is being used for transactions is difficult — this type of study can help officials better understand currency use in the united states . the diary study is expected to be completed and published later this year , and cpo officials told us they plan to assess and incorporate relevant findings into their currency management operations . ( 3 ) what actions has the federal reserve taken to respond to potential changes in demand for coins and notes ? ( 4 ) what actions has the federal reserve taken with regard to the circulation of the $1 coin , and what more , if anything , could it do ? to address the first question , we reviewed documentation from and interviewed officials from the federal reserve and u.s. mint . we also met with industry stakeholders ( eg , depository institution representatives and coin terminal operators ) and academic experts to discuss their views on the management of the circulating coin inventory . to assess management operations related to the circulating coin inventory , we used the federal reserve's strategic framework 2012 – 2015 and the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission's ( coso ) internal control — integrated framework . in addition , from the reserve banks we obtained and analyzed coin inventory and production data from 2004 through 2012 and currency management cost data from 2008 through 2012 . we took steps to assess the reliability of data used , such as interviewing knowledgeable agency officials , and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . while there are many other leading supply - chain management practices and supporting characteristics , we selected and validated a sample of those most relevant to our review . in addition , academic and industry experts in operations and supply chain management validated that the selected key practices , definitions , and supporting characteristics were relevant to coin inventory management . u.s. mint officials and industry stakeholders . we then compared the federal reserve's coin - inventory management practices to the selected key supply - chain management practices . for each key practice , we assessed whether the federal reserve was following or substantially following the supporting characteristics ( i.e. , plans , policies , or processes have been developed and implemented properly for all or nearly all of the supporting characteristics ) , partially following ( i.e.