a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . if encryption is not used , user identification ( id ) and password combinations will be susceptible to electronic eavesdropping by devices on the network when they are transmitted . the national security agency and nist recommend encrypting network services , and nist guidance states that passwords should be encrypted while being stored and transmitted . nist guidance also states that the use of encryption by organizations can reduce the probability of unauthorized disclosure of information and that government systems should use sufficiently strong encryption in order to establish and maintain secure communication links between information systems and applications . fdic had implemented controls to encrypt certain sensitive information on its systems . for example , it had restricted the use of unencrypted protocols on the mainframe and had required that sensitive information stored on user workstations or mobile devices be encrypted . however , fdic had not always ensured that sensitive financial information transmitted over and stored on its network was adequately encrypted . specifically , fdic had not always used sufficiently strong encryption on two systems supporting the loss - share loss estimation process and had not always strongly encrypted stored passwords on certain financial systems . as a result of these deficiencies , fdic is at an increased risk that an individual could capture information such as user ids and passwords and use them to gain unauthorized access to data and system resources . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , the capability to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system is needed . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail for determining the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and by monitoring user activity . to be effective , organizations should ( 1 ) configure the software to collect and maintain a sufficient audit trail for security - relevant events ; ( 2 ) generate reports that selectively identify unauthorized , unusual , and sensitive access activity ; and ( 3 ) regularly monitor and take action on these reports . nist guidance states that organizations should track and monitor access by individuals who use elevated access privileges , review and analyze information system audit records for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity , and report the findings to designated organization officials . fdic had ensured that default installation user accounts were no longer used on certain servers and had configured its mainframe logging controls efficiently . however , fdic's audit and monitoring of security - relevant events on key financial systems was not always sufficient . for example , fdic had not always sufficiently configured logging controls on a system that supported the loss - share loss estimation process or on several network devices . as a result of these deficiencies , fdic faces an increased risk that unauthorized activity or a policy violation on its systems and networks would not be detected .