it systems . irs receives and maintains validated taxpayer data , including w - 2 and 1099-misc forms , through the information return master file ( irmf ) system . irs received w - 2 data from ssa daily but only loads the data onto irmf weekly due to the legacy design of this system . this contributed to irs's inability to verify more than half ( 7.79 million or 58 percent ) of tax returns with eitc or actc claiming $38.4 billion in refunds when the february 15 refund hold expired . irs officials stated that due to the system's legacy design , adding new or updating existing information return documents requires the agency to reload its entire file , which contains billions of information returns . officials reported that this process can take up to 3 days or more to complete , depending on the file size of the incoming and existing data , and has prevented irmf from processing and making the w - 2 data available for use , as it is received from ssa . consequently , while irs had received a total of about 210.9 million w - 2s by february 13 , it received an additional 3.9 million w - 2s between february 13 and 20 that irs was unable to use in systemic verification before the february 15 refund hold expired . in october 2017 , irs officials told us several reasons why they were not addressing it limitations . at that time , they said they had discussed various options to make w - 2 data available faster , but they had not assessed whether irmf processing could occur more than once weekly . further , these officials said irs developed a plan to modernize irmf , which would allow for faster processing , but officials told us that this effort is on hold because of competing priorities and funding shortages . these officials also said they had not considered the potential financial benefits of either modifying existing procedures or continuing to pursue modernizing irmf to process w - 2 data more frequently for use in systemic verification . however , in response to our discussions , in november 2017 , irs officials reported they had started to assess the possibility of processing w - 2 data on irmf daily . specifically , irs is planning to assess daily processing for the months of january and february during the 2019 filing season when the number of information returns is lower and the file is less time consuming to load . they noted they would not have time to assess their options and make necessary changes to process w - 2s daily for the 2018 filing season . as we reported in october 2017 , irs faces challenges with managing its aging legacy systems , and with establishing a process for prioritizing its modernization efforts . irs's planned action is consistent with its strategic plan , which includes objectives to strengthen refund fraud prevention by using third - party data and analytics for timely , informed decision making , and to innovate technology systems to support irs's business needs .