wyo . mich. r.i. conn. nebr . pa. n.j. ill. ind . del . colo. kans . mo . w.va. va. md . ark . s.c. miss . ala. ga. tex . la . fla . still , a key question that arises is how sensitive are federal formula grants to alternative population estimates , such as those derived by statistical methods ? with that in mind , you asked us to examine how statistical population estimates might have redistributed federal assistance among the states had they been used to calculate formula grants rather than the actual population counts . for the medicaid program , recalculating state allocations using statistical population estimates based on the 2000 census would have changed the funding for 39 states in fiscal year 2004 . in response , and as requested , we recalculated certain federal assistance to the states using the a.c.e . population estimates from the 2000 census , as well as the population estimates derived from the post - enumeration survey ( pes ) — the independent sample survey the bureau administered to evaluate the accuracy of the 1990 census . while only the actual census numbers should be used for official purposes , our analysis shows the extent to which alternative population counts would impact the distribution of federal grant funds and can help inform congressional decision making on the design of future censuses . as agreed with your offices , we identified ( 1 ) the top 20 formula grant programs based on the amount of funds targeted by any means , and ( 2 ) how much money would have been allocated using census data for certain formula grant programs , and the prospective impact of using estimated population counts from the 1990 and 2000 censuses to recalculate state allocations for these grant programs . to address the first objective , we used expenditure and obligations data from the fiscal year 2004 consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) , the most recent year for which data were available . for the second objective , we recalculated the amount of federal funding allocated to the states for medicaid using the 2005 fiscal year federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) with 2004 state expenditure data , and recalculated the social services block grant ( ssbg ) state allocations using 2005 fiscal year allocation data . in both cases we used the most recent year for which data were available . we based our calculation on the official population counts from the 1990 and 2000 censuses . we then recalculated the allocations using the pes population estimates from the 1990 census , and the a.c.e . population estimates from the 2000 census . the federal share of total medicaid program costs is determined using a statutory formula that calculates each state's fmap . ssbg receives an annual appropriation that is distributed in proportion to each state's population . we selected these programs for our analysis because they would be particularly sensitive to alternative population estimates . medicaid is the largest formula grant program ; thus any changes would redistribute more money compared to other programs . further , any changes in ssbg would have a proportional impact on the distribution of state funds .