gao - 03-725 . washington , d.c.: june 18 , 2003 . ( see fig . the major hallmark of wia is the consolidation of services through the one - stop center system . seventeen categories of programs — termed “mandatory partners” — with appropriations totaling over $15 billion from four separate federal agencies , are required to provide services through the system . ( see table 1. ) wia allows flexibility in the way these mandatory partners provide services through the one - stop system , allowing co - location in one building , electronic linkages , or referrals to off - site partner programs . while wia requires these mandatory partners to participate , wia did not provide additional funds to operate one - stop systems and support one - stop partnerships . as a result , mandatory partners are expected to share the costs of developing and operating one - stop centers . beyond the mandatory partners , one - stop centers have the flexibility to include other partners in the one - stop system . labor suggests that these additional , or optional partners , may help one - stop systems better meet specific state and local workforce development needs . these optional partners may include tanf or local private organizations . states have the option of mandating particular optional partners to participate in their one - stop systems . for example , in 2001 , 28 states had formal agreements between tanf and wia to involve tanf in the one - stop system . in addition , localities may adopt other partners to meet the specific needs of the community . about $3.3 billion was appropriated in fiscal year 2003 for the three wia programs — adult , dislocated worker , and youth . the formulas for distributing these funds to the states were left largely unchanged from those used to distribute funds under jtpa and are based on such factors as unemployment rates , including the number of long - term unemployed , and the relative number of low - income adults and youth in the population . in order to receive their full funding allocation , states must demonstrate the effectiveness of their three wia programs by tracking and reporting a variety of performance measures . these performance measures gauge program results in the areas of job placement and retention , earnings change , skill attainment and customer satisfaction . wia requires states to use unemployment insurance ( ui ) wage records to gather this information about wia participants . states are held accountable by labor for their performance in these areas and may suffer financial sanctions if they fail to meet their expected performance standards . wia did not establish any comprehensive measures to assess the overall performance of the one - stop system . wia also requires that training providers wishing to serve individuals' training needs through wia's adult and dislocated worker programs meet key data reporting requirements , including completion rates , job placement rates , and wages at placement for all students they serve , including those not funded under wia . wia requires the collection of these outcome data so that job seekers receiving training can use them to make more informed choices about training providers .