warehouse costs . to analyze prepositioning warehouse costs , we obtained warehouse contracts from usaid . each contract identifies the annual expenditure target that usaid had established for the warehouse as well as the daily storage charge per metric ton and outlines other charges related to handling the commodities . ocean shipping costs . we estimated the additional cost due to prepositioning using the actual cost of the second leg of ocean shipping , because the data required to re - construct the hypothetical cost of direct shipping for every prepositioned shipment were not available to us . although the first leg of ocean shipping — from a u.s. port to the overseas warehouse — is comparable to ocean transport for standard shipping , the second leg does not exist in the standard shipping process . we obtained data from usaid that track the mode of transportation of shipments from each of the overseas warehouses , the metric tonnage , and the freight cost . ( see app . iii for examples of the additional ocean transportation costs. ) commodity procurement costs . to analyze prepositioning commodity procurement costs , we focused on six commodities that accounted for 76 percent of total prepositioning purchases . we compared the weighted annual average prices of commodities purchased for domestic prepositioning , overseas prepositioning , and standard shipping . to understand the possible reasons for the observed differences in prices for prepositioned commodities , we interviewed u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) officials as well as commodity vendors . ( see app . iv for the results of the price comparison. ) to examine the extent to which usaid monitors prepositioning to maximize time savings and cost effectiveness , we reviewed usaid documentation related to prior , current , and future efforts to monitor its prepositioning program , specifically efforts to monitor the delivery time frames and program costs . we also interviewed usaid officials in washington , d.c. , to discuss the extent to which the agency has taken steps to monitor the program . we also interviewed wfp , one other cooperating sponsor , and freight forwarders in washington , d.c. we reviewed evaluations and reports on usaid's prepositioning , such as a 2008 evaluation of the program and a 2013 usaid inspector general report on prepositioning . using usaid criteria , we evaluated usaid's efforts to monitor its prepositioning program . we also analyzed and assessed the reliability of data on emergency food aid shipments that we collected from cooperating sponsors' freight forwarders to determine whether these data could be used to monitor delivery time frames of prepositioned food . we found that the data provided by three freight forwarders were not sufficiently reliable for tracking delivery time frames for emergency food aid shipments owing to a number of limitations , including incomplete or missing data and , in one freight forwarder's data , lack of distinction between emergency and nonemergency shipments . we also reviewed relevant legislation to determine where there are any statutory requirements to monitor or evaluate usaid's prepositioning program . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to march 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .