other items . the judiciary spent an estimated $2 million on other activities related to the implementation of the act , of which about 98 percent was for staffing costs . these activities included revisions to studies to determine staffing needs and the revision and updating of publications and manuals for external parties . revenues to the trustee program and federal judiciary from bankruptcy filing fees and other fees have declined since the implementation of the bankruptcy reform act due to the reduction in the number of bankruptcy filings . since 1997 , the trustee program has been entirely self - funded from a portion of the filing fees paid by bankruptcy debtors , which are deposited in the u. s. trustee system fund . as shown in figure 3 , the trustee program's filing fee revenues ( excluding chapter 11 quarterly fees ) have declined since the bankruptcy reform act — from $68 million and $74 million in fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , respectively , to $58 million and $52 million in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 . the bankruptcy reform act and subsequent budget legislation increased bankruptcy filing fees , as discussed later in this report . in addition , the bankruptcy reform act changed the portion of the filing fee allocated to various parties . the net effect was that the amount received by the trustee program for each chapter 7 filing increased from $42.50 to $89 while the amount received by the program for each chapter 13 filing remained unchanged at $42.50 . however , the decline in the number of consumer bankruptcy filings since the implementation of the act offset the increase in revenue per chapter 7 case . as we discussed previously , the number of filings in 2006 and 2007 was less than half the annual number of filings in the years just prior to the act . to a more limited extent , trustee program revenues also have been affected by a provision of the act that allows the court to waive the chapter 7 filing fee for debtors below certain income thresholds . chapter 7 filing fees were waived for 2.1 percent of cases in fiscal year 2007 , according to data provided by aousc . the trustee program may expend the funds in the u.s . trustee system fund as appropriated by congress . in its annual budget request to congress , the trustee program provides an estimate of its filing fee revenues , based on the anticipated number of bankruptcy filings . in years where the actual amount of fee revenues deposited in the u.s . trustee system fund is greater than the amount appropriated for that year , the excess fee revenue remains in the fund and is available until expended . accordingly , in years where the actual amount of fee revenues falls short of the amount appropriated for that year , the program may draw down monies from the fund . in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , the program drew down about $44 million and $92 million , respectively , from the u.s . trustee system fund , with congressional approval , to allow the program to operate at appropriated levels .