most agencies agreed with the recommendations or had no comments . nonetheless , agencies continue to be challenged in identifying and reporting their cost savings . in the absence of consistent and full reporting of fiscal year 2016 through 2018 planned savings in agencies' dcoi strategic plans , as required by fitara and omb , agencies' total planned savings will likely continue to be understated . therefore , we are re - emphasizing the need for agencies to implement our prior recommendation to complete their planned data center cost savings targets . operating such a large number of centers has been and continues to be a significant cost to the federal government , including costs for hardware , software , real estate , and cooling . for example , in 2007 , the environmental protection agency estimated that the electricity costs to operate federal servers and data centers across the government were about $450 million annually . according to the department of energy , a typical data center has 100 to 200 times the energy use intensity of a commercial building . in 2009 , omb reported that server utilization rates as low as 5 percent across the federal government's estimated 150,000 servers were a factor driving the need to establish a coordinated , government - wide effort to improve the efficiency , performance , and environmental footprint of federal data center activities . background omb and the federal cio established fdcci concerned about the size of the federal data center inventory and the potential to improve the efficiency , performance , and the environmental footprint of federal data center activities , omb , under the direction of the federal cio , established fdcci in february 2010 . this initiative's four high - level goals were to reduce the overall energy and real estate footprint of government data centers ; reduce the cost of data center hardware , software , and operations ; increase the overall it security posture of the government ; and shift it investments to more efficient computing platforms and technologies . omb , implementation guidance for the federal data center consolidation initiative ( washington , d.c.: mar . background omb's inventory of federal data centers has grown since 2011 , the number of federal data centers reported by agencies has continued to grow . in march 2016 , we reported that agencies had collectively identified a total of 10,584 data centers as of november 2015 — an increase of about 7,500 data centers compared to omb's october 2011 estimate . according to the federal cio , the increase in data centers was primarily due to the expanded definition of a data center and improved inventory reporting by the agencies . figure 4 shows the growth in the total number of reported federal data centers from 1998 to november 2015 . in addition to the contact named above , individuals making contributions to this report included dave hinchman ( assistant director ) , justin booth ( analyst - in - charge ) , gerard aflague , chris businsky , nancy glover , linda kochersberger , carlo mozo , jon ticehurst , and jonathan wall .