these organizations disagreed with our conclusions . all three associations expressed concern about the effect of a potential payment reduction on the industry's stability and , in particular , its ability to care for medically complex patients . the associations said it was too early in the experience of the pps to accurately measure home health care use , visit costs , episode costs , or industry profit margins . vnaa stated that our cost estimates do not reflect current fixed costs under the pps . nahc raised questions about the timeliness of payments if risk sharing is a part of the home health pps . the associations said that more information was needed on how low - utilization episodes , partial episodes , and outlier payments would affect the relationship between average episode costs and payments to hhas . our results are consistent with cms' analysis of a full year of experience under the pps . our analysis of 1.48 million episodes did not consider the payment reduction for partial episodes , payment enhancement for outliers , or variable payment adjustments for a significant change in a beneficiary's condition . when calculating episode payments and estimated costs we treated these as full episodes . the impact of these payment adjustments on average episode payments is likely to be minimal because they are partially offsetting and apply to less than 8 percent of episodes . whether the visit costs for these types of episodes is different from the average visit costs is not known . we excluded low - utilization episodes from our analysis because they are not paid an episode rate . hha visits per user have been dropping since 1997 , allowing ample time for hhas to bring their fixed costs in line with current use patterns . the magnitude of the difference between payments and estimated costs provides compelling evidence that the legislated reduction would not destabilize the home health industry . further , risk sharing if implemented would moderate any negative effects on the hhas that may incur costs that are higher than these estimates including when hhas treat medically complex patients . we are sending copies of this report to the administrator of cms . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 . other contacts and staff who contributed to this report are listed in appendix iii . we conducted our analyses using medicare provider , claims , and beneficiary files for calendar years 2000 and 2001 . we included only those providers that were listed as active in each year . for episodes ending on january 1 , 2001 through june 30 , 2001 , we used all final bills from the home health standard analytic file ( saf ) for 2001 that were available as of january 24 , 2002 . our file of 1.48 million episodes , which excludes all low - utilization episodes , does not include any claims for the first 6 months of 2001 submitted after january 24 , 2002 . for 2000 , we used all final bills ending on january 1 , 2000 through june 30 , 2000 .