home detention . the statute requires the attorney general to monitor and evaluate each eligible elderly offender placed on home detention , and report to congress concerning the experience with the program . according to bop officials , this report has not been completed . we have ongoing work looking at the results and costs of the pilot in more detail , which we will report on later this year . ยง 17541 ( g ) ( 5 ) ( a ) . federal sentencing judge orders that they run concurrently . this includes cases when a federal judge has not stated whether a state and federal sentence should run concurrently or consecutively . however , bop may review , or the inmates may petition bop to review , their cases to determine a federal sentencing judge's intent . bop reviews the inmate's sentencing documents and custody history , and may also contact the federal sentencing judge to determine whether the judge intended that the state and federal sentences should be served consecutively or concurrently . for example , of the 538 cases bop reviewed in fiscal year 2011 , 99 requests to serve sentences concurrently were granted , for a total of about 118,700 days of sentence credit , 386 were not granted , and 53 were still under review as of the end of fiscal year 2011. credit for criminal custody: bop has the authority to grant credit for time served in criminal custody ( such as time spent awaiting trial ) , and according to bop policy , it considers detention by immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) for the purposes of deportation to be administrative custody until criminal charges are brought against a detainee . according to bop officials , bop reviews inmate records for any criminal custody time that could be credited towards an inmate's federal sentence . moreover , all inmates who have financial obligations , whether court - ordered restitution , court fees , or tax liabilities , must comply with the financial responsibility program to participate in programming including community corrections . this ineligibility for rrc placement also disqualifies an inmate from placement in home detention . figure 4 shows the number of inmates ineligible for rrc placement from april 2008 to march 2011 . bop officials stated that certain offenses committed by inmates may also make it difficult for bop to place them in rrcs . for example , according to bop officials , some rrcs are required to enter into agreements with communities regarding the type of inmates they will house and some communities have enacted local laws that prohibit the placement of certain inmates such as sex offenders and arsonists in a communal setting . other reasons inmates may not be placed in rrcs include the inmate's refusal to be placed or the inmate's medical or mental health needs that could not be accommodated at the rrc .