( see table 1. ) massachusetts is the only state to have established a drinking water standard — set at 2 ppb . the california department of health services reports that california will complete the rulemaking for its proposed standard of 6 ppb later this year . states have used these thresholds to identify the level at which some specified action must be taken by dod and other facilities in their state , in the absence of a federal standard . for example , oregon initiated in - depth site studies to determine the cause and extent of perchlorate contamination when concentrations of 18 ppb or greater are found . some federal funding has been directed to perchlorate studies and cleanup activities . in addition , dod has removed soil and treated groundwater at the massachusetts military reservation and camp bonneville in washington state . about 36 percent of u.s. women have these lower iodine levels . the study found decreases in a thyroid hormone that helps regulate the body's metabolism and is needed for proper fetal neural development . moreover , in may 2007 , fda released a preliminary exposure assessment because of significant public interest in the issue of perchlorate exposure from food . fda sampled and tested foods such as tomatoes , carrots , spinach , and cantaloupe ; and other high water content foods such as apple and orange juices ; vegetables such as cucumbers , green beans , and greens ; and seafood such as fish and shrimp for perchlorate and found widespread low - level perchlorate levels in these items . fda is also planning to publish , in late 2007 , an assessment of exposure to perchlorate from foods , based on results from its fiscal year 2005-2006 total diet study — a market basket study that is representative of the u.s. diet . for example , committee reports related to the dod and epa appropriations acts of fiscal year 2006 directed some funding for perchlorate cleanup . in the senate committee report for the department of health and human services fiscal year 2006 appropriations act , the committee encouraged support for studies on the long - term effects of perchlorate exposure . the senate committee report for fda's fiscal year 2006 appropriations act directed fda to continue conducting surveys of perchlorate in food and bottled water and to report the findings to congress . in the current congress , legislation has been introduced that would require epa to establish a health advisory for perchlorate , as well as requiring public water systems serving more than 10,000 people to test for perchlorate and disclose its presence in annual consumer confidence reports . other pending legislation would require epa to establish a national primary drinking water standard for perchlorate . dod has certain responsibilities with regard to emerging contaminants such as tce that are regulated by epa or state governments , but its responsibilities and cleanup goals are less definite for emerging contaminants such as perchlorate that lack federal regulatory standards .