ce . as there are two standards concerning the concept of equity that have commonly been used to design and evaluate funding formulas . the first — known as beneficiary equity — stipulates that funds should be distributed to states according to the needs of their respective populations so that each state , with their federal allocation , can provide the same level of services to each person in need . the second standard — known as taxpayer equity — applies to programs , such as vr , in which states contribute funds . this standard also seeks to provide individuals in need with the same level of services , but in addition , considers a state's ability to finance a program from its own resources . it stipulates that states should be able to provide comparable services to individuals , with each state contributing about the same proportion of their resources to the program . to achieve this standard , taxpayer equity formulas may allocate more funds to states with fewer taxable resources , set the contribution they are required to make at a lower level , or do both , so that poorer states do not contribute a larger share of their resources than wealthier states . to meet the taxpayer equity standard , a formula requires a reliable measure of a state's ability to finance a program from its own resources . to meet both equity standards , a formula should use reliable and appropriate measures of the need population in each state and the cost of providing services in each state . in this context , you asked us to ( 1 ) examine the extent to which the current formula meets generally accepted equity standards , ( 2 ) present options for revising the formula to better meet these standards , and ( 3 ) identify issues to consider with incorporating performance incentives into the formula . to determine the extent to which the vr funding formula meets equity standards and to develop options for revising the formula , we examined data from a number of sources , namely education's data on state vr grants , census bureau data on state disability populations , department of the treasury ( treasury ) data on state taxable resources , bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) data on wages , and department of housing and urban development ( hud ) data on rents . in addition , we interviewed experts in the disability field and had key portions of our analyses formally reviewed by three disability experts . we also surveyed all 80 vr agencies in the states , territories , and district of columbia to obtain their perspectives on the current formula , options for changing it , and views on the use of performance incentives in the vr program . we received responses from 74 ( 93 percent ) of the agencies . we also conducted in - depth interviews with state vr officials at 11 agencies in 9 states , as well as with members of advisory councils to the vr agencies in 5 of these states .