fig . 2 shows the number and rate of incursions , by quarter , during fiscal year 2007 and during the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 . moreover , the number and rate of serious incursions — where collisions were narrowly or barely avoided — increased substantially during the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 , compared to the same quarter in fiscal year 2007 . during the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 , 10 serious incursions occurred , compared to 2 serious incursions during the first quarter of fiscal year 2007 . ( see fig . most runway incursions involve general aviation aircraft . according to faa , 72 percent of incursions from fiscal years 2003 through 2006 involved at least one general aviation aircraft . however , about one - third of the most serious incursions from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 — about 9 per year — involved at least one commercial aircraft that can carry many passengers . that number includes two serious incursions that occurred just two months ago , in december 2007 . ( see table 3 in the appendix for additional information on recent serious incursions. ) figure 4 shows the number of serious incursions involving commercial aircraft from fiscal years 2001 through 2007 . in the united states , most incursions have occurred at major commercial airports , where the volume of traffic is greater . los angeles international airport and chicago o'hare international airport had the greatest number of runway incursions from fiscal years 2001 through 2007 , as shown in fig . the primary causes of incursions , as cited by experts we surveyed and some airport officials , include human factors issues , such as miscommunication between air traffic controllers and pilots , a lack of situational awareness on the airfield by pilots , and performance and judgment errors by air traffic controllers and pilots . according to faa , 57 percent of incursions during fiscal year 2007 were caused by pilot errors , 28 percent were caused by air traffic controller errors , and 15 percent were caused by vehicle operator or pedestrian errors ( see fig . faa , airports , and airlines have taken steps to address runway safety , but the lack of leadership and coordination , technology challenges , lack of data , and human factors - related issues impede further progress . to improve runway safety , faa has deployed and tested technology designed to prevent runway collisions ; promoted changes in airport layout , markings , signage , and lighting ; and provided training for pilots and air traffic controllers . in addition , in august 2007 , following several serious incursions , faa met with aviation community stakeholders and agreed on a short - term plan to improve runway safety .