all funding amounts are in nominal dollars . we determined that the data on other funding available were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this audit with attribution to dod . to describe how dod has realigned o&m funds between o&m and other appropriations through transfers , and within accounts through reprogrammings , since fiscal year 2009 , we analyzed data from dod's 4th quarter o&m execution reports from fiscal years 2009 through 2015 to determine the extent to which dod transferred and reprogrammed o&m base and oco funding . our analysis goes through fiscal year 2015 , as this was the last full year of data during our review . we calculated the value of funds realigned between and within the military services' and defense - wide o&m accounts by two categories reported in the execution reports — prior approval transfers and reprogrammings , and below threshold reprogrammings . funds realigned out of accounts are presented as negative numbers in dod's execution reports . we used the absolute value of the negative numbers to account for the total amount of the realignment . we provided the amounts obtained from the execution reports with ousd comptroller officials to verify the accuracy of the information . next , we calculated the total enacted o&m funding reported in the execution reports for the military services' and defense - wide accounts and determined the percentage of the enacted o&m funding that dod reported moving . we also interviewed ousd comptroller and the military services' financial management officials to understand dod's process for transferring and reprogramming funds , including any notifications to congress about them . all fund realignment amounts are in nominal dollars , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this audit with attribution to dod and the source document . to understand the differences between dod's base obligations and the amounts that congress designated for base o&m programs and activities , we estimated o&m base obligations because dod is not required to report this information in its budget justification materials or execution reports separately from o&m oco obligations , and had not reported the amounts . to estimate o&m base obligations for the o&m title , we compiled and summed o&m oco obligations reported in the budget justification materials for each o&m base account . we then subtracted the o&m oco obligations from the total o&m obligations reported in the o&m o - 1 budget exhibit , which provides aggregate details on o&m obligations . we verified the oco and total o&m obligation data with ousd comptroller officials . we compared estimated o&m base obligations with the enacted funding information previously discussed . further , to understand the differences between o&m base obligations and congressional designations for aggregate categories of similar subactivity groups within the military services' o&m base accounts , we compiled congressional designations , o&m total , and o&m oco obligations by each of the subactivity groups from the military services' o&m budget justification materials . to normalize obligations for the items that were not enacted in the military services' o&m base accounts but were appropriated to other accounts and authorized to be transferred to the military services' o&m base accounts for execution , we obtained data from the military services by subactivity group .