ii ) . for this analysis we matched schools in the civil rights data for school year 2011-12 ( the most year recent for which civil rights data are available ) to schools in the ccd for school year 2011-12 and excluded schools for which there was not a match . harris , douglas n. “lost learning , forgotten promises: a national analysis of school racial segregation , student achievement , and ‘controlled choice' plans.” center for american progress . washington , d.c ; 2006 . logan , john r. , elisabeta minca , and sinem adar . “the geography of inequality: why separate means unequal in american public schools.” sociology of education , vol . mccall , martha s. , carl hauser , john cronin , g. gage kingsbury , and ronald houser . “achievement gaps: an examination of differences in student achievement and growth.” northwest evaluation association . portland , or ; 2006 . mickelson , roslyn arlin , martha cecilia bottia , richard lambert . “effects of school racial composition on k – 12 mathematics outcomes: a metaregression analysis.” review of educational research , vol . owens , ann . “neighborhoods and schools as competing and reinforcing contexts for educational attainment.” sociology of education , vol . palardy , gregory j . “high school socioeconomic segregation and student attainment.” american educational research journal , vol . palardy , gregory j . “differential school effects among low , middle , and high social class composition schools: a multiple group , multilevel latent growth curve analysis.” school effectiveness and school improvement: an international journal of research , policy and practice , vol . riegle - crumb , catherine and eric grodsky . “racial - ethnic differences at the intersection of math course - taking and achievement.” sociology of education , vol . rumberger , russell w. , “parsing the data on student achievement in high - poverty schools.” north carolina law review , vol . rumberger , russell w. and gregory j. palardy . “does segregation still matter ? the impact of student composition on academic achievement in high school.” teachers college record , vol . ryabov , igor . “adolescent academic outcomes in school context: network effects reexamined.” journal of adolescence , vol . ryabov , igor and jennifer van hook . “school segregation and academic achievement among hispanic children.” social science research , vol . 36 ( 2007 ) : 767-788. van ewijk , reyn and peter sleegers . “peer ethnicity and achievement: a meta - analysis into the compositional effect.” tier working paper series ( 2010 ) . in addition to the contact named above , sherri doughty ( assistant director ) , linda siegel ( analyst - in - charge ) , rachel beers , lisa brown , grace cho , sarah cornetto , camille henley , john mingus , anna maria ortiz , and david reed made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were deborah bland , holly dye , farrah graham , kirsten lauber , mimi nguyen , and cady panetta . 9 and fig .