the cnmi . government also notes that its department of labor has no record of any ice request emanating from an after - hours operation . ice officials told us that they recognize that the cnmi official responsible for answering their inquiries works normal business hours and that they limit their inquiries to that time period . however , the ice unit's log shows one inquiry sent at 10:54 pm and the cnmi response received in 16 minutes . the cnmi government infers that our report claims that dhs has proceeded expeditiously to remove illegal aliens from the cnmi . the cnmi's inference is not accurate ; our report neither states nor im that dhs has proceeded expeditiously in this regard . our report of the 72 aliens being processed for removal has been that none deported and that federal immigration hearings take place during 1 week of every month . in addition to the person named above , emil friberg , assistant director ; michael p. dino , assistant director ; r. gifford howland ; julia a. roberts ; ashley alley ; and reid lowe made key contributions to this report . technical assistance was provided by martin de alteriis , ben bolitzer , etana finkler , marissa jones , and eddie uyekawa . american samoa and commonwealth of the northern mariana islands: wages , employment , employer actions , earnings , and worker views since minimum wage increases began . gao - 10-333 . washington , d.c.: april 08 , 2010 . dhs . dhs agreed with our recommendation that the secretary of homeland security work with the heads of cbp , ice , and uscis to establish strategic approaches and time frames for concluding negotiations with the cnmi to resolve the operational challenges related to cbp's access to airport space , ice's contract negotiations regarding detention facilities , and the ability for dhs and its component agencies to obtain information about the status of aliens from databases under the control of the cnmi government . doi . doi stated that the report clearly sets out the problems of implementing the extension of u.s. immigration law to the cnmi and that the information contained in the report corresponds to the observations and analyses of the department's office of insular affairs . cnmi government . the cnmi government raised concerns about the scope of our report and its support for several findings . the cnmi government expressed particular concern that we did not address certain issues that cnra directed gao to assess . as stated in the objectives of this report , we describe the steps taken by federal agencies to establish federal border control in the cnmi and the status of efforts to implement cnra programs specific to the cnmi for workers , visitors , and investors . recognizing that the regulations establishing the cnmi - only programs for workers and investors are not yet available , we reached agreement with the offices of the addressees of this report to examine the likely economic impact of federalization after regulations are in place . the cnmi also expressed concerns regarding the timeliness and content of federal agencies' regulations to implement the cnra programs for workers , visitors , and investors and regarding dhs efforts to identify overstayers and remove aliens .