according to the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , before 1900 , black rhinos lived throughout most of sub - saharan africa , but from 1970 to 1992 , rhino populations declined 96 percent . more recently , from 2007 to 2015 in south africa , poachers killed 5,061 rhinos , according to the government of south africa ( see fig . currently , an estimated 25,000 rhinos remain on the continent , according to fws . according to the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) , the number of elephants killed each year has reached levels deemed unsustainable . the illicit ivory trade has grown by more than three times since 1998 , and elephants are being killed faster than they can reproduce . from 2002 to 2011 , the total population of forest elephants decreased by an estimated 62 percent across central africa . according to fws , from 2010 to 2012 , an estimated 100,000 elephants were killed for their ivory , an average of approximately 1 every 15 minutes . the agency also reported that poaching continues at an alarming rate and is at its highest level in decades . specifically , it reported that the current rate of decline is unsustainable and puts the african elephant at risk of extinction . elephants are under threat even in areas that were once thought to be safe havens . during our fieldwork in africa , we observed an elephant that had been shot and died in a protected area of northern kenya , illustrating the nature of the challenge . according to the strategy , while the united states is among the world's major end markets for wildlife trafficking in general , africa has become one of the largest sources of animal and plant species to supply criminal networks trading to asia . as one nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) reported , wildlife products illegally leave the african continent by air or by sea through increasingly sophisticated routes and concealment methods . in asia , increased demand for ivory and rhino horn stems from a rapidly expanding wealthy class that views these commodities as luxury goods that enhance social status , as reported in the strategy . the flow of ivory illustrates the africa - asia nexus . according to a report by an ngo that works with u.s. government agencies on cwt , the primary axis for the illicit ivory trade is from africa to east asia , through the international container shipping system . the majority of shipments exit kenya and tanzania bound for china , thailand , and vietnam . significant ivory seizures occur in malaysia and singapore due to their role as transshipment hubs . a 2016 united nations office of drugs and crime ( unodc ) report indicates that over 70 percent of the ivory seized from 2009 to 2013 was found in large shipments of raw ivory . figure 3 shows sources and destinations of ivory seizures , based on seizure data from the unodc , with arrows representing repeated indications of a source - destination pairing .