fsrs . created as a result of ffata , fsrs became active in july 2010 . prime contractors must register and report subcontract information for first - tier subcontractors , including award and entity information , such as data universal numbering system ( duns ) identification numbers . fsrs contains the small business status of some subcontractors , but only for limited types of small businesses . information on subcontracts awarded by first - tier subcontractors to other entities , or lower - tier subcontractors , is not currently required . contract reporting systems we reviewed contain relevant information on subcontracting plans , subcontracts , and subcontractors , but no one system was designed to link small business subcontractors to prime contracts . linking small business subcontractors to prime contracts under comprehensive or commercial reporting plans is especially difficult because these plans do not specify the particular contracts to which they apply . despite the limited data available in existing contract reporting systems , we were able to link a few small business subcontractors to prime contracts , including those with comprehensive plans , but multiple steps were required . existing contract reporting systems were not intended to link small business subcontractors to prime contracts and , independently or collectively , do not contain all of the information required to do so . figure 1 describes the extent to which relevant data elements are contained in each contract reporting system . one system we assessed , esrs , is intended to report information on contractors' performance against small business subcontracting goals . this can indicate that subcontracting to small businesses has or may occur , but the utility of esrs in linking small business subcontractors to prime contracts is limited . the system is not intended to provide a list of subcontractors associated with a particular contract . in addition , agency officials stated that information in the system is limited to contracts awarded after the system was created or above certain dollar thresholds . the system uses two types of reports , the individual subcontract report and the summary subcontract report . the report used depends on the type of subcontracting plan assigned to a contract at award . contracts with individual subcontracting plans use individual reports to show the performance for a single contract against agreed - upon subcontracting goals , including those for small businesses.contractors using either comprehensive or commercial subcontracting plans report their performance through summary reports that aggregate data on multiple contracts awarded by specific agencies for an entire division or company . summary reports for comprehensive plans in esrs may also include supplementary information that contains specific contract numbers associated with that plan . according to agency officials , this information is not provided for all comprehensive plans , however , and depends on annual negotiations with the contracting agencies . they stated that detailed subcontract information is not required for commercial plans . this lack of specific subcontract information makes it difficult or impossible to determine whether small businesses were awarded subcontracts under a specific contract covered by summary reports . we entered each contract number into usaspending.gov to search for specific subcontractors associated with the contract .