gao - 07-927sp . we also interviewed 15 project sponsors , including the 10 sponsors that applied for funding for small starts projects , including very small starts projects , for the fiscal year 2008 evaluation cycle . safetea - lu authorized over $45 billion for federal transit programs , including $8 billion for the new starts program , from fiscal years 2005 through 2009 . under the new starts program , fta identifies and recommends fixed - guideway transit projects for funding — including heavy , light , and commuter rail ; ferry ; and certain bus projects ( such as bus rapid transit ) . safetea - lu also made changes to the new starts program , including changes to its evaluation and rating process . fta already has implemented some of these changes and has undertaken efforts to address the remaining changes . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? we selected the other 5 project sponsors that we interviewed on the basis of their agencies' experience with the new starts processes , size , and location . in addition , we interviewed fta officials and representatives from transportation industry associations . we also reviewed fta's new starts and small starts guidance , the advanced notice of proposed rule making for small starts , and the statutory provisions that address the new starts program . in may 2007 , we reported on preliminary findings from our work . we conducted our work from november 2006 through july 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . i for more information about our scope and methodology. ) fta generally funds new starts projects through ffgas , which establish the terms and conditions for federal participation in a new starts project . ffgas also define a project's scope , including the length of the system and the number of stations ; its schedule , including the date when the system is expected to open for service ; and its cost . for a project to obtain an ffga , it must progress through a local or regional review of alternatives and meet a number of federal requirements , including requirements for information used in the new starts evaluation and rating process ( see fig . as required by federal statute , new starts projects must emerge from a regional , multimodal transportation planning process . the first two phases of the new starts process — systems planning and alternatives analysis — address this requirement . the systems planning phase identifies the transportation needs of a region , while the alternatives analysis phase provides information on the benefits , costs , and impacts of different options , such as rail lines or bus routes , in a specific corridor versus in a region . the alternatives analysis phase results in the selection of a locally preferred alternative , which is intended to be the new starts project that fta evaluates for funding , as required by statute . after a locally preferred alternative is selected , the project sponsor submits an application to fta for the project to enter the preliminary engineering phase .