ii. ) because of the emphasis on quickly responding to urgent needs , we focused on the time taken to reach critical events such as tasking to an organization , awarding a contract , and initial fielding of a capability . data were not available for all key events , in part because some initiatives were not yet complete . figure 1 shows the number of initiatives analyzed based on availability of schedule data . this figure is used throughout the report to indicate the data being discussed . we conducted this performance audit between january 2011 and april 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to be validated as a joint urgent operational need , a requirement must be joint in nature and , importantly , if not addressed immediately will seriously endanger personnel or pose a major threat to ongoing operations . dod has taken a number of steps to provide urgently needed capabilities to the warfighter more quickly and to alleviate the challenges associated with the traditional acquisition process for acquiring capabilities.office of the secretary of defense established jrac in 2004 to help overcome institutional barriers and provide timely , effective support to meet the urgent materiel and logistics requirements that combatant commanders deem operationally critical . in july 2005 , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff issued instruction 3470.01 to establish policy and procedures to facilitate the assessment , validation , sourcing , resourcing , and fielding of urgent combatant command needs considered as life - or combat mission - threatening , based on unforeseen requirements that must be resolved quickly . although not addressed in the july 2005 instruction , dod officials stated that a criterion for validation was the expectation that the capability gap could be addressed within 2 years . subsequently , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 provided that the acquisition process for fielding capabilities in response to urgent operational needs is appropriate only for capabilities that can be fielded within a period of 2 to 24 months . headquarters , department of the army regulation 71-9 , warfighting capabilities determination ( dec. 28 , 2009 ) ; department of the navy , navy urgent needs process implementation , opnav 4000 , asn ( rd&a ) ( july 26 , 2007 ) ; air force instruction 10-601 , operational capability requirements development , july 12 , 2010 ; and marine corps order 3900.17 , the marine corps urgent needs process and the urgent universal need statement ( oct. 17 , 2008 ) . integration and development system to identify , assess , validate , and prioritize joint military capability requirements . in response to section 804 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 , dod is now in the process of assessing its policies and processes for managing both joint and service - specific urgent needs .