a brief description of each erp is presented below . the general fund enterprise business system ( gfebs ) is intended to support the army's standardized financial management and accounting practices for the army's general fund , with the exception of that related to the army corps of engineers which will continue to use its existing financial system , the corps of engineers financial management system . gfebs will allow the army to share financial , asset and accounting data across the active army , the army national guard , and the army reserve . the army estimates that when fully implemented , gfebs will be used to control and account for about $140 billion in spending . the global combat support system - army ( gcss - army ) is expected to integrate multiple logistics functions by replacing numerous legacy systems and interfaces . the system will provide tactical units with a common authoritative source for financial and related non - financial data , such as information related to maintenance and transportation of equipment . the system is also intended to provide asset visibility for accountable items . gcss - army will manage over $49 billion in annual spending by the active army , national guard , and the army reserve . the logistics modernization program ( lmp ) is intended to provide order fulfillment , demand and supply planning , procurement , asset management , material maintenance , and financial management capabilities for the army's working capital fund . the army has estimated that lmp will be populated with 6 million army - managed inventory items valued at about $40 billion when it is fully implemented . the navy enterprise resource planning system ( navy erp ) is intended to standardize the acquisition , financial , program management , maintenance , plant and wholesale supply , and workforce management capabilities at six navy commands . once it is fully deployed , the navy estimates that the system will control and account for approximately $71 billion ( 50 percent ) , of the navy's estimated appropriated funds — after excluding the appropriated funds for the marine corps and military personnel and pay . the global combat support system – marine corps ( gcss - mc ) is intended to provide the deployed warfighter enhanced capabilities in the areas of warehousing , distribution , logistical planning , depot maintenance , and improved asset visibility . according to the pmo , once the system is fully implemented , it will control and account for approximately $1.2 billion of inventory . the defense enterprise accounting and management system ( deams ) is intended to provide the air force the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities , including collections , commitments and obligations , cost accounting , general ledger , funds control , receipts and acceptance , accounts payable and disbursement , billing , and financial reporting for the general fund . according to air force officials , when deams is fully operational , it is expected to maintain control and accountability for about $160 billion .