project h.a.n.d.s . is a canada - based international nonprofit organization that helps needy communities through projects such as outreach clinics and education funding . in addition to the contact named above , clarita mrena ( assistant director ) , sara edmondson ( analyst - in - charge ) , laurel beedon , bernice benta - jackson , john lack , and nhi nguyen , made significant contributions to all aspects of the work . also contributing to the report were holly dye , sheila mccoy , john mcgrail , mimi nguyen , cheryl peterson , monica savoy , walter vance , maria wallace , emily wilson , and craig winslow . there are 235 total units . amenities and activities: kitchen , outdoor patio , laundry facility , community room , vending machines , wellness room , fitness center , computer room , library , sunroom , 24-hour security , and health education meetings . bridge housing corp. is a san francisco - based nonprofit housing developer formed in 1983 . this sponsor operates five section 202 properties in california . property opened for occupancy in 2011 and has116 units ( 23 designated for homeless older adults ) amenities and activities: community room with kitchen , laundry facility , assigned covered parking , courtesy patrol , landscaped courtyard and picnic area . hud refers to community - based organizations that receive section 202 funding to provide affordable housing to older adults as sponsors . established grants to states for the provision of services and supports . the framework of agencies , programs , and activities established by the act produced what is referred to today as the national aging services network . with support from aoa , within hhs' administration for community living ( acl ) , the 56 state units on aging , 618 area agencies on aging ( aaa ) , and 264 indian tribal and 2 native hawaiian organizations as components of the aging services network , are responsible for planning , developing , and coordinating home and community - based services and supports for older adults , nationwide . community - based organizations ( cbo ) are public agencies or private nonprofit organizations that represent one or more communities or segments of communities and are engaged in meeting the human services needs of community residents . this sponsor operates two section 202 properties in maryland . cbos can include local or regional governmental or quasi - governmental organizations , as well as private nonprofit organizations . the receipt of , need for , and unmet need for services authorized under title iii of the act . state units on aging are to use their aaas' plans as a basis for an overall state plan that they submit to aoa . five federal agencies across four departments have one or more programs that operate within a system of hcbs and related supports that older adults often require to live as independently as possible in their homes and communities ( see table 1 ) . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownke@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .