this is an example of an equipment problem . the 30 single audit reports included auditor opinions or disclaimers of opinion on the financial statements and schedules of expenditures of federal awards for the fsm , the four fsm states , and the rmi . the financial statements reflect a federal award recipient's financial position , results of operations or changes in net assets , and , where appropriate , cash flows for the year . the schedules of expenditures of federal awards show the amount of expenditures for each federal award program during the year . if the auditors are not able to perform all of the procedures necessary to complete an audit , they consider the audit scope to be limited or restricted . scope limitations may result from the timing of the audit work , the inability to obtain sufficient evidence , or inadequate accounting records . if the audit scope is limited , the auditors must make a professional judgment about whether to qualify or disclaim an opinion . a qualified opinion states that , except for the matter to which the qualification relates , the financial statements are fairly presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles . in a disclaimer of opinion , the scope limitation is serious enough that the auditor does not express an opinion . the auditor's opinions on the financial statements and schedules of expenditures of federal awards for the 30 single audits in our review reveal overall poor financial management . the auditors performing these single audits qualified or disclaimed their opinions on all of the financial statements and about 60 percent of the schedules of expenditures of federal awards generally because they were unable to obtain sufficient evidence or adequate accounting records . for example , the auditor qualified its opinion on the fsm's financial statements for the year 2000 because of the auditor's inability to ensure the propriety of receivables from other governments and missing financial statements for a component unit . in another example , the auditor did not express an opinion on chuuk's financial statements for the year 1999 because of inadequacies in the accounting records and internal controls , incomplete financial statements for component units , and its inability to obtain audited financial statements supporting investments . the significant number of audit findings involving fsm and rmi noncompliance with compact requirements and weaknesses in their financial management systems , along with auditor qualified opinions or disclaimers of opinion on financial statements , echo the control and accountability issues that we identified in our earlier reports on compact assistance . further , the pervasive and recurring nature of the compliance and financial statement problems highlights ( 1 ) the need for stronger control environments that will help ensure that compact funds are used for program purposes and ( 2 ) the limited progress made during the 5-year period of our review in establishing accountability in the fsm , the four fsm states , and the rmi that would provide reasonable assurance that compact funds are used for their intended purposes .