gao - 06-374t . washington , d.c.: february 9 , 2006 . dhs agreed with our recommendations . we currently have an ongoing review assessing the security of air cargo entering the united states from foreign countries . as discussed previously , domestic commercial airport authorities have primary responsibility for securing airport perimeters and restricted areas , whereas tsa conducts regulatory inspections to help ensure that airport authorities are complying with tsa security requirements . we reported in june 2004 on tsa's efforts to strengthen the security of airport perimeters ( such as airfield fencing and access gates ) , the adequacy of controls restricting unauthorized access to secured areas ( such as building entry ways leading to aircraft ) , and security measures pertaining to individuals who work at airports . at the time of our review , we found tsa had begun evaluating commercial airport security but needed a better approach for assessing results . in addition , tsa required criminal history records checks and security awareness training for most , but not all , the airport workers called for in atsa . further , tsa did not require airport vendors with direct access to the airfield and aircraft to develop security programs , which would include security measures for vendor employees and property , as required by atsa . tsa is responsible for , and , at the time of our 2004 review , had begun evaluating the security of airport perimeters and the controls that limit access into secured airport areas , but had not yet determined how the results of these evaluations could be used to make improvements to the nation's airport system as a whole . specifically , we found that tsa had begun conducting regulatory compliance inspections , covert testing of selected security procedures , and vulnerability assessments at selected airports . these evaluations — though not yet completed at the time of our report — identified perimeter and access control security concerns . for example , tsa identified instances where airport operators failed to comply with existing security requirements , including requirements related to access control . in addition , tsa identified threats to perimeter and access control security at each of the airports where vulnerability assessments were conducted in 2003 . tsa had plans to begin conducting joint vulnerability assessments with the fbi but had not yet determined how it would allocate existing resources between its own independent airport assessments and the new joint assessments , or developed a schedule for conducting future vulnerability assessments . in addition , tsa had not yet determined how to use the results of its inspections in conjunction with its efforts to conduct covert testing and vulnerability assessments to enhance the overall security of the nation's commercial airport system . in june 2004 , we also reported that background checks were not required for all airport workers . tsa requires most airport workers who perform duties in secured and sterile areas to undergo a fingerprint - based criminal history records check . tsa further requires airport operators to compare applicants' names against tsa's aviation security watch lists . once workers undergo this review , they are granted access to airport areas in which they perform duties .