( app . ii contains more information regarding the denial of claims , including common reasons for denials. ) the medicare part b appeals process consists of four levels of administrative appeals performed by three appeals bodies . medicare carriers are responsible for the first two levels of appeal — the carrier review and the carrier hearing . through a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) implemented in march 1995 — when ssa was separated from hhs and became an independent agency — oha's administrative law judges ( alj ) within ssa continue to hear the third level of appeal . oha's continued role in medicare appeals is uncertain , as ssa officials have indicated that they plan to discontinue adjudicating medicare appeals and expect to transfer the workload to hhs . however , until an agreement between ssa and hhs is reached , oha will continue to adjudicate medicare appeals . because ssa disability appeals constitute about 85 percent of oha's work , oha would continue to require the use of its hearing offices and judges regardless of whether it continues to hear medicare appeals . bipa language specifies that the third level of appeal be adjudicated by aljs , but because hhs has far less capacity than oha to hear alj cases , hhs would have to compensate for oha's departure by developing plans that would enable it to adjudicate the current workload demands within bipa's time frames and to address the backlog of cases accumulated before the transfer to hhs . as of june 2003 , cms was evaluating oha's medicare operations , workload , and facilities and developing and assessing the feasibility of various options . a cms official stated that assuming oha's workload would be a notable challenge for the agency . bipa demands a level of performance — especially regarding timeliness — that the appeals bodies have not demonstrated they can meet . in addition to lengthy processing times , oha and the mac have developed sizable backlogs of unprocessed cases . the backlogs raise a question about how bipa - governed cases , with their mandated time frames , will be prioritized relative to unresolved cases filed before bipa's mandated implementation date . administrative and systemic inefficiencies , which span all levels of appeals , strongly indicate the need for improvement . without significant improvements , the appeals bodies will be unable to meet bipa's more rigorous performance requirements . uncertainties regarding bipa regulations and funding further complicate the challenge the appeals bodies face in implementing bipa and meeting its requirements . moreover , the transfer of oha's medicare appeals work from ssa to hhs involves major challenges , and until all of the stakeholders resolve workload and timeliness issues , the full impact of such a transfer will not be known . cms , its carriers , oha , and the mac have traditionally not coordinated their management of the appeals process . instead , each has operated as though the process consisted of discrete and independent segments . greater coordination could enable them to resolve the barriers that currently preclude successful management of the appeals process as a whole .