gao - 09-157 . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2008 . employees in most states do not contribute to unemployment taxes . dod uses thousands of defense contractors to provide services ranging from security details and interpreters to transportation and facility management in support of u.s. forces in contingency operations around the world . to oversee these contracts , the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) is responsible for monitoring contractors' performance and management systems to ensure that cost , product performance , and delivery schedules are in compliance with contract terms and conditions . dcaa , under the authority of the dod comptroller , plays a critical role in contractor oversight by providing auditing , accounting , and financial advisory services for dod and other federal agency contracts . we have reported extensively on dod contractor management and oversight challenges in contingency operations and the need for dod to have better contract and contractor personnel information . in part for these reasons , dod contract management issues , including sufficient oversight , have been a long - standing gao high - risk area . from 2003 through 2008 , defense contractors increasingly used offshore subsidiaries . our analysis of sec filings found that in 2008 , 29 of the top defense contractors — accounting for 41 percent of dod contracting dollars in fiscal year 2008 — had at least 1,194 offshore subsidiaries . of the total offshore subsidiaries , about 200 were located in tax haven or financial privacy jurisdictions such as singapore , hong kong , ireland , or luxembourg . publicly traded defense contractors increased their combined use of foreign subsidiaries by 26 percent from 2003 through 2008 . of these new subsidiaries , most were located in the united kingdom and canada , while the largest rate of growth was in the british virgin islands and aruba . see table 1 for more information on the top 25 defense contractor subsidiaries . according to 13 of the top defense contractors we interviewed , 718 of the 738 offshore subsidiaries — or 97 percent — that they reported to the sec in fiscal year 2008 were generally used to support global commercial clients , and foreign government contracts rather than dod contracts . in some cases , contractors established offshore subsidiaries for market presence and proximity to customers as they thought it was important to establish a presence where they do business overseas to be more responsive to customer needs . for example , one defense contractor established subsidiaries in singapore to assist with equipment manufacturing and repairs of commercial aircraft operating throughout asia because it is more cost - efficient than sending the aircraft back to the united states for repairs . ten of the 13 defense contractors told us they establish or acquire offshore subsidiaries to take advantage of foreign government markets . in one case , a defense contractor explained that it created a subsidiary in the netherlands to hire local nationals in order to win a contract with the dutch government . contractors also noted that , in certain circumstances , they are required to create offshore subsidiaries to comply with foreign government requirements .