credits . credits can relieve part or all of irrigation districts' repayment obligations . types of credits include congressionally authorized repayment reductions , or “charge - offs,” and construction expenses determined to be nonreimbursable . charge - offs are credits that are often enacted through legislation in response to special circumstances , such as a determination that the land is unproductive , or the settlement of indian water rights claims . to establish an agreement between the federal government and irrigation districts on the delivery of water from a project and to collect payments , reclamation generally enters into one of the following two types of contracts with irrigation districts: repayment contracts: section 9 ( d ) of the reclamation project act of 1939 authorizes permanent contracts for water delivery with repayment of construction costs allocated to irrigation to be paid in fixed dollar amounts in annual or other regular increments , over a period of up to 40 years , by the irrigation district to reclamation . water service contracts: section 9 ( e ) of the reclamation project act of 1939 authorizes contracts to furnish water for irrigation purposes for up to 40-year periods . reclamation generally enters into water service contracts with irrigation districts when construction of the water project has not been completed , final construction costs are uncertain , or the irrigation district does not want a permanent contract , among other reasons . by law , reclamation must charge rates for water delivered under water service contracts that are at least sufficient to cover an appropriate share of fixed charges the secretary of the interior deems proper , taking into consideration the construction costs allocated to irrigation , as well as an appropriate share of annual operation and maintenance costs . a water service contract can contain a provision providing for its renewal — through negotiations between reclamation and the irrigation district — once the contract's term ends , or the contract may contain a provision allowing for its conversion to a repayment contract . depending on the size of the water project , which varies substantially across projects , reclamation may have contracts with a number of irrigation districts within that project's service area . irrigation districts then enter into separate agreements with landholders to provide project water.geographic area , reclamation may have only one or two contracts with irrigation districts for that water project , which provides water to a small number of landholders . on the other hand , for water projects covering a larger area , reclamation may have contracts with multiple irrigation districts servicing hundreds of landholders within a project . reclamation collects data on water project construction costs and the status of repayment by irrigation districts , but it has not publicly reported this information since the 1980s . reclamation's regional offices collect repayment data annually for each water project with an outstanding construction cost repayment obligation and then compile them in statements of project construction cost and repayment ( repayment statements ) . these repayment statements indicate that $1.6 billion of the $6.4 billion in costs allocated to irrigation was outstanding , as of the end of fiscal year 2012 .