online services . irs has made progress in addressing our december 2011 and april 2013 recommendations to improve its online services strategy ; however , as of march 2017 , irs had not yet completed its efforts . for example , irs's future state initiative aims to improve services across different taxpayer interactions such as individual account assistance , exams , and collections . irs also revised its business case template in 2014 for new online services to include , among other things , a discussion of costs , benefits , and risks of future projects , consistent with our april 2013 recommendation . however , we reviewed irs documentation and found that the business case contained some of the information we recommended , such as high - level time frames , but was missing other information , such as the benefits and costs of the project . further , it is unclear how irs plans to use the business case to prioritize future projects . irs told us it implemented a new process for online investments that requires details on expected benefits and costs to be reviewed by the senior executives for prioritization and follow - up . as of march 2017 , irs has not provided additional documentation concerning this process . analyses of benefits and costs can help agencies decide which new projects to start in a manner that maximizes the benefits derived from agency resources . irs also requested funding in the fiscal year 2017 budget justification to enhance web applications , including the online account previously discussed . in conclusion , w - 2 systemic verification shows promise of being a powerful tool for addressing idt refund fraud and possibly other types of fraud . there were three reasons for this delay: 1 . irs received electronic w - 2 data from ssa daily , but because irs is using older technology in this instance ( a legacy system ) , it could only load the data weekly . for eitc / actc returns , the law provided an approximate 2-week delay between the w - 2 due date ( january 31 ) and the refund release date ( february 15 ) , to allow time for irs to load the data and verify wage information on the returns before releasing the refunds . some w - 2 data were delayed past february 15 because employers requested extensions or missed the new deadline . this year , irs allowed employers a one - time 30-day , non - automatic extension to file w - 2 data if the deadline would cause undue hardship that would also prevent the employer from furnishing the w - 2s to employees by january 31 ( such as if a flood damaged the documentation and equipment needed to file ) . this is a change from prior years in which employers could request one 30-day extension from either the due date on the last day of february ( if filing on paper ) or last day of march ( if filing electronically ) . while ssa begins receiving w - 2 forms on paper in december , it did not begin to transmit these data to irs until march 2017 .