some observers have proposed merging ice and cbp . for example , the heritage foundation and the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) , in a report on dhs management , suggested a possible merger of ice and cbp to address some of these management problems . a senior research fellow at the heritage foundation stated in a march 2005 congressional testimony , “dhs needs to be organized not to accommodate the present , but to build toward the ideal organization of the future . what factors might be considered in addressing some of the management challenges that exist at ice and cbp ? the purpose of my comments is to provide the subcommittee with oversight information as potential changes to the structure of ice and cbp are considered . my comments are based on our wide - ranging , completed work , and our institutional knowledge of homeland security and various government organizational and management issues . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . immigration enforcement includes , among other things , patrolling 8,000 miles of international boundaries to prevent illegal entry into the united states ; inspecting over 500 million travelers each year to determine their admissibility ; apprehending , detaining , and removing criminal and illegal aliens ; disrupting and dismantling organized smuggling of humans and contraband as well as human trafficking ; investigating and prosecuting those who engage in benefit and document fraud ; blocking and removing employers' access to undocumented workers ; and enforcing compliance with programs to monitor visitors . immigration functions also include providing services or benefits to facilitate entry , residence , employment , and naturalization of legal immigrants ; processing millions of applications each year ; making the right adjudicative decision in approving or denying the applications ; and rendering decisions in a timely manner . when ins was abolished in 2003 by the homeland security act of 2002 , its enforcement functions were transferred to two bureaus within the dhs . first , ins's interior enforcement programs — investigations , intelligence , and detention and removal — were placed in ice . within ice , investigators and intelligence analysts from former ins and the u.s. customs service were merged into the investigations and intelligence offices , while staff from former ins's detention and removal program were placed in the detention and removal office . second , inspectors from former ins , customs , and agriculture and plant health inspection service , as well as former ins's border patrol agents were incorporated into cbp . both cbp and ice report to the undersecretary for border and transportation security , who in turn reports to the deputy secretary of the dhs . for service functions , ins's immigration services division , responsible for processing applications for immigration benefits , was placed in citizenship and immigration services ( cis ) , which reports directly to the deputy secretary of dhs . figure 1 shows the transition of ins functions into dhs . immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) ( secretary ) transition efforts for cbp posed fewer challenges than for ice .