providing training to states . responding to questions from states . conducting or assisting in reviews of the process at the state and school food authority levels . monitoring and reporting review results . costs incurred by the selected states ranged from about $5,000 to $783,000 for performing tasks related to the verification process . during this period , these states administered $122 million to $1.1 billion program dollars . states incurred costs associated with overseeing and monitoring the verification process and performed many tasks throughout the year . revising eligibility criteria . reviewing state application materials and eligibility data . conducting or assisting in reviews of the application process at the state and school food authority levels , and monitoring and reporting review results . estimated costs incurred by the five selected states ranged from $53,000 to $798,000 for performing tasks related to the application process , while the total program dollars administered ranged from $122 million to $1.1 billion . for four of the five states we reviewed , total application costs were generally in proportion to the program dollars administered . however , the estimated application costs for one state were higher than for other selected states with significantly larger programs . officials from this state attributed these higher costs to the large number of districts in that state compared with most other states . at the state level , costs were incurred primarily for providing guidance and training to school food authority staff and for monitoring the process . just as at the federal level , state level officials said that they performed their application process duties throughout the year . these tasks included updating agreements with school food authorities to operate school meal programs , preparing prototype application forms and letters of instruction to households and providing these documents to the school food authorities , and training managers from the school food authorities . state officials also reviewed the application process as part of required reviews performed at each school food authority every 5 years . for the sites we reviewed , the estimated median cost at the local level to perform application process tasks was 1 cent per program dollar and ranged from less than half a cent to about 3 cents . the school food authorities incurred most of the application process costs — from about $3,000 to nearly $160,000 , and administered program dollars ranging from about $315,000 to nearly $18 million . not all schools incurred application process costs , but for those that did , these costs ranged from over $100 to as much as $3,735 . the schools reviewed were responsible for $65,000 to $545,000 in program dollars . table 5 lists the estimated application process costs , program dollars , and cost per program dollar for each of the school food authorities and schools included in our review . at the local level , the costs associated with conducting the application process for free and reduced - price meals were primarily related to the following tasks: downloading the prototype application and household instruction letter from the state's web site and making copies of it before the school year begins .