we did not include specialists in our analysis . we selected areas that were diverse geographically and in terms of medicare spending per beneficiary . under our methodology , we computed the percentage of overly expensive patients in each physician's medicare practice . to identify overly expensive patients , we grouped the medicare beneficiaries in the 12 locations according to their health status , using diagnosis and demographic information . patients whose total medicare expenditures — for services provided by all health providers , not just physicians — far exceeded those of other patients in their same health status grouping were classified as overly expensive . once these patients were identified and linked to the physicians who treated them , we were able to determine which physicians treated a disproportionate share of these patients compared with their generalist peers in the same location . we classified these physicians as outliers — that is , physicians whose proportions of overly expensive patients would occur by chance less than 1 time in 100 . we concluded that these outlier physicians were likely to be practicing medicine inefficiently . based on 2003 medicare claims data , our analysis found outlier generalist physicians in all 12 metropolitan areas we studied . in two of the areas , outlier generalists accounted for more than 10 percent of the area's generalist physician population . in the remaining areas , the proportion of outlier generalists ranged from 2 percent to about 6 percent of the area's generalist population . medicare's data - rich environment is conducive to identifying physicians who are likely to practice medicine inefficiently . fundamental to this effort is the ability to make statistical comparisons that enable health care purchasers to identify physicians practicing outside of established standards . cms has the tools to make statistically valid comparisons , including comprehensive medical claims information , sufficient numbers of physicians in most areas to construct adequate sample sizes , and methods to adjust for differences in patient health status . among the resources available to cms are the following: comprehensive source of medical claims information . cms maintains a centralized repository , or database , of all medicare claims that provides a comprehensive source of information on patients' medicare - covered medical encounters . using claims from the central database , each of which includes the beneficiary's unique identification number , cms can identify and link patients to the various types of services they received and to the physicians who treated them . data samples large enough to ensure meaningful comparisons across physicians . the feasibility of using efficiency measures to compare physicians' performance depends , in part , on two factors: the availability of enough data on each physician to compute an efficiency measure and numbers of physicians large enough to provide meaningful comparisons . in 2005 , medicare's 33.6 million fee - for - service enrollees were served by about 618,800 physicians . these figures suggest that cms has enough clinical and expenditure data to compute efficiency measures for most physicians billing medicare . methods to account for differences in patient health status . because sicker patients are expected to use more health care resources than healthier patients , the health status of patients must be taken into account to make meaningful comparisons among physicians .