offerors who shared other information . we identified 11 offerors who shared other information with at least one other offeror when bidding on the same solicitation . in some instances , these potentially related offerors bid on multiple solicitations . for example , we found two potentially related offerors bid together on three separate solicitations in our fbo data . we further examined these 11 potentially related offerors' sam registration information to determine whether they reported shared ownership in sam , and found one instance in which two of the potentially related offerors self - reported their relationship that one offeror owned the other ; the remaining nine offerors did not report any type of shared ownership information in sam . according to dod contracting officials , none of the nine offerors disclosed a relationship with another offeror nor was the contracting officer otherwise aware of the potential relationship . while sharing certain information does not definitively confirm they are owned by the same entity , it is an indicator that these offerors are related . figure 6 below highlights an example in which two offerors bidding on the same solicitation shared information and did not report shared ownership in sam . additionally , we identified an instance in which this type of information was also shared between two offerors and a subcontractor for a third offeror , as shown in figure 7 below . the potentially related offerors we identified did not appear to affect the overall competition on these contracts because other , seemingly unrelated offerors also submitted bids . as a result , it is unlikely that they would have affected the price paid by the government in these contracts . however , these potentially related offerors represent a risk that offerors may not always be competing independently and these types of relationships may not always be readily apparent to contracting officers , which is important when evaluating the sufficiency of competition on a solicitation and the independence of its offerors . further , contractors may not always be forthcoming in reporting their ownership information in sam , which can affect other areas of the procurement process , including any procedures that rely on the accuracy of this information . according to cio officials , adversarial entities could also potentially gain access to sensitive information through their relationship with dod contractors . for example , dia officials identified the possibility of foreign or adversarial entities exploiting companies in dod's supply chain with financial difficulties , and according to cio officials , dod may not always have visibility over foreign entities acquiring a domestic contractor . in 2017 , the office of the director of national intelligence released a management background paper discussing supply - chain risks , which stated that the multiple layers and networks of suppliers in this chain can allow foreign adversaries the ability to access the supply chain at multiple points . for example , according to the background paper , a hostile foreign intelligence entity could potentially conceal its presence in government supply chains by operating through multiple front organizations , companies , hackers , and organized crime , making it extremely difficult to discover and counter its actions .