gsa fleet does not participate in this process . specifically , under the process for disposing of surplus federal property , federal agencies must determine if any property under their control is excess , or no longer needed , within the agency . if this is the case , they must then report this to gsa , which first determines if any other federal agency needs the property . if no other agency needs it , gsa declares the property to be “surplus” and can dispose of it in a number of ways , such as by selling it or destroying it . there was no effect on wages after controlling for demographic variables such as age and education . the survey was administered under the aid to families with dependent children program , which did not have as many employment incentives as the current temporary assistance for needy families program . both age and education had positive effects on employment outcomes . selection models were not used for hour and wage regressions to account for the fact that these outcomes are only observed for those gaining employment . the study did not address the potential simultaneity of employment and car decisions . that is , the car and employment decisions might be made at the same time . data only from one state — california — which could have different demographics and welfare systems than other states . ue used to address outcomes where there are two possible categories , such as employed or not employed . the multinomial logit is an extension of the logit method to cases where there are more than two outcomes . to assess whether boosting minority car - ownership rates would narrow inter - racial employment rate differentials . the analysis first addresses whether car effects are greater for more segregated groups and then addresses whether these differences are more pronounced in more decentralized locations . the data to address whether the car effect differs by race or ethnicity are from 1992 and 1993 “surveys of income and program participation,” wave 4 , which is a u.s. bureau of the census survey . authors restricted sample to civilians 16-65 years of age , with no work - preventing disabilities . nationally representative sample of the u.s. population from ages 16 to 65 with no work - preventing disabilities . data for 242 u.s. primary metropolitan statistical areas were from the 1990 5 percent public use microdata sample . this data was used to address whether the car effects are greater in more decentralized areas . the study did not control for urban and rural areas . the researchers used a linear probability modelto test whether car ownership accounted for the observed differences in employment between races and ethnicities . the effects of car ownership on unemployment are largest when individuals are more isolated from job opportunities . as in some of the prior studies , this one used data from the early 1990s prior to welfare reform and did not attempt to address the potential simultaneity of employment and car decisions . households with four or more cars were eliminated from the sample because ownership was not observable for the fourth or more car .