dhs has fully addressed both of these recommendations . specifically , in response to the first recommendation , dhs implemented an updated top - screen survey in october 2016 and now collects data from facilities and conducts more accurate modeling to determine the actual area of impact ( formerly called the distance of concern ) , rather than relying on the facilities' calculation . in response to the second recommendation , dhs officials reported in november 2016 that they reassessed all facility top - screens that reported threshold quantities of chemicals posing a toxic release threat , and identified 158 facilities with the potential to cause the greatest harm . in april 2018 , dhs officials reported that all of these facilities have since been reassessed using updated top - screen information and , where appropriate , assigned a risk tier . dhs has also taken actions to better assess regulated facilities' risks in order to place the facilities into the appropriate risk tier . in april 2013 , we reported that dhs's risk assessment approach did not consider all of the elements of threat , vulnerability , and consequence associated with a terrorist attack involving certain chemicals . our work showed that dhs's cfats risk assessment methodology was based primarily on consequences from human casualties , but did not consider economic consequences , as called for by the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) and the cfats regulation . we also found that ( 1 ) dhs's approach was not consistent with the nipp because it treated every facility as equally vulnerable to a terrorist attack regardless of location or on - site security and ( 2 ) dhs was not using threat data for 90 percent of the tiered facilities — those tiered for the risk of theft or diversion — and using 5-year - old threat data for the remaining 10 percent of those facilities that were tiered for the risks of toxic chemical release or sabotage . we recommended that dhs enhance its risk assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk and conduct an independent peer review after doing so . dhs agreed with our recommendations and has implemented actions to address both of them . specifically , with regard to our recommendation that dhs enhance its risk assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk , dhs worked with sandia national laboratories to develop a model to estimate the economic consequences of a chemical attack . in addition , dhs worked with oak ridge national laboratory to devise a new tiering methodology , called the second generation risk engine . additional details on the scope and methodology are available in our published reports . in addition , this statement contains updates as of september 2018 from dhs on actions it has taken to address the recommendations made in our prior reports . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . however , based on our review of state data and records , there were more facilities with ammonium nitrate holdings than those that had reported to dhs under the cfats program .