lsu did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of homeland security , health and human services , and veterans affairs and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact cynthia bascetta at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or bascettac@gao.gov for issues related to health services . please contact terrell g. dorn at ( 202 ) 512-6923 or dornt@gao.gov for issues related to medical facilities and fema . gao staff members who made significant contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the contract was awarded for about $689,000 . however , fema officials cautioned against using differences in estimated and actual repair costs for other facilities as benchmarks for comparing or adjusting the estimates for charity and university hospitals , noting that each facility and its associated estimate are unique . to help reconcile fema's and lsu's cost estimates , fema officials suggested that lsu select a few projects at charity hospital and put them out for bid . according to fema officials , this process would provide actual repair costs and could serve as a baseline for adjusting lsu's or fema's estimates as needed . fema officials noted that some repair projects at charity hospital would be necessary even if lsu opted to replace , not repair , the facility . officials from lsu and ofpc told us that they questioned whether this would be the best use of time and resources , however , especially since they said they did not believe that restoring charity hospital to its predisaster condition would adequately meet the health care needs of the community . however , a senior ofpc official told us that ofpc would evaluate whether some repairs were necessary to prevent further deterioration of the facility . fema has begun the process of obligating funds based on its assessments . as of june 16 , 2006 , fema had obligated about $21.5 million for repairs to charity hospital and $14.3 million for repairs to university hospital . the funds are allocated to louisiana's office of homeland security and emergency preparedness ( i.e. , the grantee ) , which then distributes the funds to lsu ( i.e. , the applicant ) for reimbursement for the costs of repairing charity and university hospitals . at the time of our visit in may 2006 , repairs to university hospital were under way , and portions of the facility were expected to reopen by late september or early october 2006 , with the remainder of the facility expected to open by the end of the year . initially , lsu officials had hoped to reopen a portion of the facility by the end of june 2006 . however , according to lsu officials , estimates for reopening a portion of the facility in june — which assumed a 75-day construction schedule — were optimistic given the amount of repair work needed .