investigation . cms prescribes investigation time frames and priority categories for incidents occurring in nursing homes and requires states to establish their own time frames and priority categories for incidents in assisted living facilities . cms requires state survey agencies to assess reports of elder abuse in nursing homes and assign a priority investigation status based on the seriousness of the allegations . the required investigation time frames are tied to the priority status . some states also require law enforcement notification as part of their state mandatory reporter laws . ( see app . i for descriptions of selected state mandatory reporter laws. ) for example , connecticut requires medicaid waiver program staff members to inform law enforcement of all suspected crimes , including abuse . both gao and hhs - oig have identified , among other things , gaps in notifying law enforcement about abuse in nursing homes and recommended that cms make changes to help ensure that nursing homes and state survey agencies notify law enforcement . cms also requires nursing homes to have written policies and procedures for conducting internal investigations of suspected elder abuse and to submit findings from these investigations to the state survey agency within 5 business days of the incident . in contrast , cms does not prescribe investigation time frames or define priorities for incidents occurring in assisted living facilities ; instead , cms requires that state medicaid agencies with hcbs waivers establish their own policies for prioritizing reports of abuse and initiating investigations in assisted living facilities . consequently , investigation time frames and prioritization can vary by state . selected information about assisted living facilities and state - level requirements for each of the three states is summarized in figures 2 through 4 . for example , connecticut does not specify a process for prioritizing incident investigations in its hcbs waiver , but officials told us the state requires the medicaid program to initiate an investigation immediately ; whereas south dakota requires face - to - face contact with a victim within 24 hours if the incident is life or health - threatening . family or legal guardian notification although the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) requires facilities to notify a resident's representative of a deterioration in the resident's condition , cms does not require nursing homes , assisted living facilities , state survey agencies , or state medicaid agencies to notify a victim's family or legal guardian of alleged elder abuse . however , cms's guidance for nursing homes notes the importance of family or legal guardian notification . specifically , cms guidance requires facilities to take actions to prevent further harm from occurring to a victim of alleged elder abuse and cites law enforcement notification , as well as family or legal guardian notification as examples of protective measures facilities may take to comply with that requirement . in addition , cms requires states to develop a policy for notifying participants , family , or legal guardians of the findings of any critical incident investigations under its home and community - based services waiver program .