( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the secretary of labor , the commissioner of internal revenue , and the secretary of the treasury for review and comment . expro applications have been processed in as few as 78 days . according to dol officials , the process can start before an applicant submits a formal application because applicants can , and do , request informal consultations and conferences with dol . dol officials explained that sometimes potential applicants decide not to file an application after an informal conference because applicants realize that their application would likely be denied . dol officials explained that during the review process , they first confirm their understanding and characterization of the proposed exemption through correspondence with the applicants . then , in response , dol often sets conditions under which relief from the prohibited transaction rules is contingent , such as on the applicant taking additional actions and remaining in compliance with those conditions . for example , if an applicant wants to sell or purchase an asset in what would be an otherwise prohibited ira transaction , dol may stipulate that the applicant first obtain an independent appraisal or valuation assessment to determine a fair - market value of that asset . transaction involving self - dealing . an ira owner who is a fiduciary is prohibited from engaging in a transaction with the ira where the ira owner personally benefits ( other than through the receipt of a distribution ) . we previously reported that prohibited transactions are more likely to arise when ira owners make unconventional ira investments . unlike conventional ira investments in publicly traded stocks , bonds , and mutual funds , unconventional investments in real estate , virtual currency , or private equity are more likely to involve the ira owner , disqualified family members , or other disqualified persons . for example , an ira invested in rental real estate can leave ira owners susceptible to a number of prohibited transactions , such as renting to family or paying for repairs with personal funds . ira owners may face adverse and potentially severe tax consequences if they are found to have engaged in a prohibited transaction . specifically , the ira could lose its tax - favored status . the account would then be treated as distributing all its assets to the ira owner at the fair market value on the first day of the year in which the prohibited transaction occurred . the ira owner may be subject to additional income taxes because of any early distribution from an ira . the prohibited transaction may also be subject to excise taxes . the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , which established iras and rules prohibiting certain ira transactions , assigned ira oversight roles to both dol and irs . to avoid confusion over dual jurisdiction , a 1978 executive order further clarified the agencies' roles and responsibilities regarding prohibited transactions . dol officials told us that they use a case tracking system to record and track applications .