( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this statement to dot for review and comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix ii , the agency concurred with our recommendations . dot also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . chairman thune , ranking member nelson , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . below we highlight some of the factors that that could affect implementation progress . fra officials told us that reviewing all of the safety plans in a timely manner will be a challenge given staff resources . fra has 12 technical staff dedicated to the review of railroads' ptc documentation and monitoring of ptc testing . representatives from 10 out of 19 commuter railroads we interviewed said they are concerned about fra's ability to review submitted documentation in a timely manner . three out of five ptc contractors and suppliers and about half of the commuter railroads we spoke with acknowledged that industrywide , there are a limited number of individuals with ptc technical expertise available to successfully implement the technology . this can affect the ability of railroads and contractors to meet planned schedules . our review focused on the 29 railroads fra officials identified as commuter railroads required to implement ptc . we also reviewed previous gao work on ptc and applied standards for internal control in the federal government to fra's role overseeing ptc implementation , including the principles that management should externally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives and that management should identify , analyze , and respond to risks . in addition , we interviewed representatives from 19 commuter railroads to further understand their implementation progress , factors that may be affecting progress , and the interviewees' perspectives on fra's management and oversight of ptc implementation . we selected the 19 railroads to include the 14 railroads that according to fra were identified in may 2017 as at risk of both not meeting the 2018 implementation deadline and not completing statutory requirements necessary to receive a deadline extension , as well as 5 other railroads that were further ahead with implementation and that varied in geographic location and size of rail system , among other factors . we met with relevant fra officials involved in ptc monitoring , enforcement , and technical assistance including the ptc staff director , regional ptc specialists working in each of the fra regions where commuter railroads selected for interviews operate , and members of the headquarters - based ptc task force . by leveraging the freight railroads' experiences , one commuter railroad hopes to address issues before testing , rather than during , and therefore move more quickly through the testing process . we also interviewed representatives from all 7 of the class i freight railroads ( which are also required to implement ptc ) , 5 major ptc equipment suppliers and contractors identified by fra , and representatives from 2 railroad industry associations — the association of american railroads and the american public transportation association — to obtain their perspectives on commuter railroads' implementation of ptc , factors affecting implementation progress , and fra's ptc management and oversight .