port infrastructure . neither service cited port infrastructure as a problem . gulf coast operators said they worked with transportation officials in various locations to provide needed infrastructure additions or upgrades at ports , such as roadway access routes . however , both operators used lift - on / lift - off equipment ( such as cranes ) , and it is unclear whether sss operators who attempted to use roll - on / roll - off technology would encounter port infrastructure problems . adverse impact on port capacity . for example , marad — the primary agency within dot responsible for the sss initiative — has funded studies of the concept , created a public / private partnership of stakeholders to share resources and in - kind services for accelerating sss development in the united states , and sponsored conferences to exchange industry knowledge of sss and its potential contribution to the nation's transportation system . agency officials emphasize that marad's exploration of these issues spans only a few years and results to date can be characterized as preliminary . dot does not yet appear to have a sound basis for identifying sss as a high - priority component of the national freight transportation strategy . thus far , federal efforts have focused on studying and exchanging industry knowledge on the concept , and not on whether federal involvement in its development is necessary . this information may be useful in understanding the potential of the approach to reduce congestion and expand system capacity , but it will not help policymakers determine whether federal involvement in its development is warranted , and it does not begin to broach issues involving the effects of federal involvement on the freight transportation system as a whole . for example , dot has not thoroughly assessed key issues , such as the potential impact of federal involvement in developing sss on the competitive balance among all transportation modes ; lessons learned from new sss services , such as the gulf coast and northeast services that we examined ; and obstacles and mitigating actions necessary to developing sss , particularly with respect to the reluctance by shippers and logistics providers to using this option . in - depth insight into these and other issues is an important prerequisite in order to establish the extent of federal involvement needed , if any , in the development of sss in this country . however , it is unclear at this time whether dot and , in particular , marad are planning to address these issues . dot's office of freight and logistics and marad's directorate of port , intermodal , and environmental activities , which together account for the bulk of federal sss activities undertaken to date , have recently reorganized and are rethinking where next to focus their sss efforts . both are developing plans for future sss activities in which they plan to engage , and these plans were not yet finalized and were not available for our review during the course of our work . before asserting a federal role in the development of a domestic sss system , dot should consider whether federal involvement is even appropriate .