= not applicable for qualitative tests . to illustrate the potential effect of the sensitivity of the genetic tests and data trimming assumptions made in the statistical analyses , we analyzed the fbi repository data and estimated false negative rates for each assay under repository conditions using the results from postvalidation replicate testing of rmr - 1029 and evidentiary material . we developed criteria for assessing the extent of the validation . we used references from agency standards , reports , and guidelines for validation and from scientific literature to identify the essential phases in an approach , or framework , for developing genetic tests . what are the characteristics of an adequate statistical approach for analyzing the repository samples and to what extent was the statistical approach used adequate ? if not adequate , how could this approach be improved for future efforts ? what remaining scientific concerns and uncertainties , if any , regarding the validation of genetic tests and statistical approaches will need to be addressed in future analyses ? what additional research , if any , would be helpful in resolving such scientific uncertainties in any future investigation ? the scope of our work was limited to a review of the scientific methods employed to verify and validate the genetic tests used to screen the fbi's repository of ames b. anthracis samples , the procedures used to identify and collect samples of ames b. anthracis in the creation of the fbi's repository , and the statistical analyses and interpretation of the results of the genetic tests . thus , we did not address any other scientific methods or any of the traditional investigative techniques used to support the fbi's conclusions in this case , and we take no position on the conclusions the fbi reached when it closed its investigation in 2010 . to meet our objectives , we reviewed pertinent agency and fbi contractor documentation on the verification and validation of the genetic tests used to screen the fbi's repository of ames samples . we also reviewed scientific literature and agency and industry guidelines to determine the essential phases in approaches to developing genetic tests . we reviewed existing fbi standards and guidelines for verifying and validating microbial forensics methods . to determine the extent to which the genetic tests were verified and validated , we reviewed the results of the contractors' validation tests , the fbi's requirements for the validation , and the contractors' approaches for developing their genetic tests against an approach , or framework , for validation , encompassing the essential phases that we identified . we interviewed officials and scientists at the fbi , its contractors , and others regarding the development and validation of the genetic tests . to determine the adequacy of the fbi's statistical approach , we conducted a literature review to identify the characteristics of an adequate statistical approach , analyzed agency and fbi contractor documentation , and interviewed fbi and laboratory officials . we conducted an analysis of the repository data to examine the effect of data trimming assumptions and additional estimates of false negative rates on the conclusions of the fbi's statistical analyses .