nippani et al . ( 2001 ) found that the effect of the debate over the debt limit in 1995 – 1996 was greater on 3-month treasury bills than on 6-month treasury bills , indicating the investors may have believed that debate over the debt limit would be resolved over time and that longer - dated securities would therefore be less affected . however , even a smaller premium when applied to the large amount of treasury securities offered by treasury would result in a notable increase in borrowing costs . for instance , for each additional basis point paid on bills issued during the 2009 – 2010 debt limit event period , treasury's borrowing cost would increase by roughly $92 million . there are a number of limitations to using a multivariate regression to measure changes in treasury's borrowing costs . first , the results of our analysis explain only a small portion of the variation in the yield spread , as indicated by the relatively low r - squared statistics . any equation attempting to explain the yield spread would have limited explanatory power given inherent randomness in daily time series data such as treasury bill and commercial paper yields . furthermore , the estimates are subject to omitted variable bias . second , there was substantial variation in the sign , size , and significance of the estimated coefficients across debt limit events . however , the event variable's coefficient , which is the central focus of our analysis , had the expected negative sign in four of the five debt limit periods included in our analysis and was significant in three of these periods . we discussed these and other limitations with treasury officials , staff at the federal reserve bank of new york , and other market experts such as primary dealers and incorporated their suggestions and feedback when appropriate . despite these limitations , the estimates do suggest that a debt limit event may result in a premium . susan j. irving , ( 202 ) 512-6806 or irvings@gao.gov gary t. engel , ( 202 ) 512-3406 or engelg@gao.gov . in addition to the contacts named above , melissa wolf , assistant director ; dawn simpson , assistant director ; thomas j. mccabe , analyst - in - charge ; richard krashevski , claire li , inna livits , and nicole mcguire made key contributions to this report . this could affect auction demand . most of the postponed auctions in the past 16 years were delayed by only 1 to 3 days and therefore did not affect the refunding of maturing securities . however , in november 1995 , the 3- and 10-year note auctions intended to refund notes maturing on november 15 , 1995 , were postponed past the maturity date . in this instance , treasury bridged the gap between the maturity and settlement date by auctioning a short - term cm bill . overall , treasury issued 20 cm bills totaling more than $300 billion during disps in the past 16 years to manage the amount of debt near the limit . in some cases , these were used to augment treasury's regular schedule of bill auctions .