gao - 05-638r . washington , d.c.: may 11 , 2005 . we are making five recommendations . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness to take the following actions in revising dod's solicitation regulation: develop and implement , with the services , a dod - wide searchable violations database that uses consistent data elements and coding across services . solicitation coordinators or others at the installation would then be required to enter the installation name , violating agent's name , insurance company supplying the product , type ( s ) of violation ( s ) , date and type of action taken , and other information important for identifying patterns of violations and facilitating efficient data collection and dissemination of information on confirmed violators to all installations and state insurance regulators . further , dod stated that our report makes only minor mention of the fact that we did not substantiate the insurance industry's assertions that servicemembers were being prevented from using allotments to obtain life insurance . to the contrary , we devoted a section of our report to the issue , but that issue was only one of many allotment - related concerns that we addressed in that portion of the report . second , dod expressed concern about our use of survey data in examining the extent to which insurance solicitation violations were occurring on installations . the most significant reason for using the survey was the incompleteness and other problems associated with the data that dod maintains on violations . the problems with those data are addressed more fully in our later response to dod's partial concurrence with our first recommendation . because we were aware that survey data are unsubstantiated , we supplemented that information with data gathered from other sources such as dod's list of banned agents and information gathered from a wide variety of individuals during our six visits to military installations . dod similarly conduits surveys to monitor other personnel issues . for example , the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness conducted a survey of over 75,000 servicemembers asking for unsubstantiated perceptions about racial / ethnic discrimination and harassment and these data could be combined with compliance - related information from dod's investigations of alleged violations to give the department a more complete view of the issue . dod also stated that we should have disclosed the wording used in the survey . the information that dod reviewed in our figure 1 is the exact wording of our survey items . although the wording for the overall question , “during the past 12 months , how often have the following practices concerning supplemental life insurance taken place on the installation ? ” was changed to a declarative sentence to increase readability , our paraphrasing is a true representation of what we asked . finally , the response rate of 75 percent for our survey of all personal financial management program managers on u.s. installations is higher than the rate obtained on recent dod - wide surveys such as the august 2004 survey which had a response rate of 40 percent .