we identified six principles . what data - based tools are available to determine whether a partnering arrangement is leveraging nonfederal resources effectively ? what lessons learned from other partnering arrangements are used to inform new partnering decisions ? increasingly , the federal government relies on networks of partners to achieve critical results , often including multiple federal agencies , sectors , and levels of government . ccos are in a unique position to leverage nonfederal resources by working with partners to produce greater public value than they can achieve alone , especially given the special managerial flexibilities and legal authorities they enjoy . chief among these flexibilities is the ability to solicit private funds and accept gifts . these nonfederal resources are particularly valuable in light of today's constrained budget environment , in which agencies may no longer expect regular increases in their budgets . while the four ccos we studied — the holocaust memorial museum , the national gallery of art , the presidio trust , and the smithsonian institution — benefit from millions of nonfederal , nonappropriated dollars that provide programmatic , research , and operational support , information about how these ccos leveraged nonfederal funds are not reported in a timely , consistent manner . congress does not direct the ccos' use of nonfederal funds . however , because the federal budget process is the primary means by which congress evaluates competing demands for federal funds , it is essential that congress has timely , sufficient information about the nature and scope of all resources — federal and nonfederal — being used to serve a public purpose . absent a requirement to present this information in a timely , transparent fashion and make it available for use in congressional budget deliberations , congress will lack complete information about ccos' federal and nonfederal financial resources . further , ccos may be missing an opportunity to share good practices and strategies for leveraging resources and strengthening relationships with private and nonprofit partners in new , more cost - effective ways . to provide more timely , complete information about ccos' fiscal health , and increase awareness about good practices and strategies for leveraging resources from nonfederal partners , congressional committees should consider requiring ccos under their jurisdiction to report on their total nonfederal funds — including a breakdown of the amounts and uses of these funds — in their annual budget requests . in requiring this information , congress should also consider what types of information on ccos' nonfederal funds would be helpful to them , how that information should be reported and at what level of detail , and whether the information should be presented consistently across ccos . we provided the executive director of the holocaust memorial museum , the director of the national gallery of art , the executive director of the presidio trust , and the secretary of the smithsonian institution with a draft of this report for review and comment . all of the ccos generally agreed with the findings and conclusions in this report . they also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated , as appropriate . the director of the national gallery of art provided written comments that we have reprinted in appendix ii .