we address these comments below . first , fema stated that our finding that probability curves for floodwaters exceeding a specific elevation had not been updated since the 1980s was unfounded because these probabilities are relative to the base flood elevation ( bfe ) , and bfes are revised as flood maps are updated . as we noted in our report , flood risk experts told us that flood probabilities are likely to change as land use , infrastructure , and weather patterns change . as a result , even if the probability curves are adjusted to reflect a new bfe , other changes since the 1980s could result in the probability curves themselves no longer being accurate . fema stated that it prepared a sensitivity analysis that showed that reestimating the probability curves would have a minimal impact on rates . we were not provided this analysis until fema gave us its comments on this report , and therefore cannot comment on the accuracy of the analysis . nonetheless , it illustrates the type of analysis that fema should perform periodically to ensure the integrity of its rate - setting process and are encouraged by this effort . finally , while we understand that the data used to develop probability curves were based on detailed engineering studies , available flood data , simulations , and professional judgments , neither fema nor the corps was able to provide us with the specific data set used to develop the original probability curves . as a result , we could not review the reliability of those data . second , in response to fema comments about the corps' use of the hydrologic model that underlies fema's flood insurance rate - setting process , we have clarified the language in our report to make clear that while the corps has revised its model for estimating flood damage , it continues to use the hydrologic model . third , fema stated that we dismissed its contention that it is adequately pricing the premiums for the class of business that includes grandfathered properties . considering the class of grandfathered properties as a subset of policyholders , owners of grandfathered properties pay less than full - risk premiums . although fema may raise premiums for others to compensate for the potential shortfall from this subset , the extent and effect of this cross - subsidization deserves scrutiny and should be analyzed . fema concurred with our recommendation to gather additional information on grandfathered properties and analyze their financial impact on nfip . fourth , fema challenged our discussion about the number of risk groups used for rate setting and contended that we failed to consider the complexity and cost of using more refined risk classifications . we did recognize and consider the challenges associated with using more refined risk groups and therefore did not specifically recommend that fema change its risk rating system . instead , we recommended that fema reevaluate its practice of aggregating risks across zones in light of the program's expansion to determine whether the current risk groups are still relevant . as we noted in our report , fema has not revisited its class rating approach since its inception , when it had around 2 million policyholders .