( app . in addition , we reviewed relevant gao reports on federal agencies' administration of grants or funding to state and local entities . we conducted our work from june 2006 through june 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during the 1990s , the united states began to take steps to address trafficking in persons at home and abroad . doj prosecuted trafficking cases under several federal criminal statutes , including the involuntary servitude statutes , the mann act , and labor laws on workplace conditions and compensation . however , various u.s. policymakers determined that existing u.s. statutes did not take into account some characteristics of contemporary trafficking in persons and , therefore , did not adequately protect trafficking victims , deter trafficking , and bring traffickers to justice . these statutes did not always treat trafficked persons as victims . involuntary servitude was restricted to cases of physical abuse — force , threats of force , or threats of legal coercion , as opposed to the psychological coercion often used by today's traffickers . while the modern concept of trafficking in persons focused on compelled service , under the mann act trafficking was perceived as interstate transportation for prostitution . moreover , these statutes scattered enforcement authority across the government and resulted in different case outcomes , depending on the charges brought or which agency learned of the allegations of abuse . the tvpa addressed limitations in existing law that made it difficult to prosecute traffickers , as well as adding new crimes and enhancing the penalties . federal agencies continue to rely on a number of statutes to prosecute traffickers and halt their operations . table 1 lays out the primary statutes that support the investigation and prosecution of trafficking in persons crimes . traffickers may also be charged with other offenses . examples of these statutes are shown in table 2 . this appendix provides additional data on federal agencies' efforts to investigate and prosecute trafficking in persons crimes . it also presents available information on federal agency resources used to support these efforts . the fbi , ice , and crt / cs reported data on the investigations , prosecutions , indictments , and arrests related to trafficking crimes since the passing of the tvpa . these data are a general indicator of the level of agency effort on trafficking in persons , although they are limited by a number of factors . because trafficking in persons is a hidden crime and victims are hesitant to come forward , it is difficult to estimate the extent of trafficking in persons crimes . moreover , because prosecutors may charge traffickers with other crimes ( eg , kidnapping , the mann act , immigration violations , or money laundering ) for strategic or tactical reasons , data on the number of trafficking in persons investigations and prosecutions do not provide a complete picture of the number of traffickers who have been thwarted . the data systems agencies use are primarily case management systems , which may not be able to extract trafficking data if trafficking was not listed as a charge .