year . in 1999 , we analyzed legislative proposals to increase the number of slots in 1999 , we analyzed legislative proposals to increase the number of slots at reagan national and reported that the airport could accommodate at at reagan national and reported that the airport could accommodate at least 36 more slots per day and that adding beyond - perimeter slots would have limited effects on nearby dulles international ( dulles ) and baltimore - washington thurgood marshall international airport ( bwi ) . the rule that governs the number of slots at reagan national limits the number of takeoffs or landings to 48 commercial slots per hour occurs during an 18- hour period ( 6:00 a.m. to midnight ) over the airport's 24-hour operating day . in 2000 and 2003 , two federal statutes — air - 21 and vision 100 increased the number of slots and for the first time allowed for exemptions to be granted to the perimeter rule . the statutes granted exemptions to the existing rules , adding 44 slots per day during a 15-hour period and allowing 24 of these slots for flights of more than 1,250 miles — flights longer than 1,250 miles are called beyond - perimeter flights . in effect , given the 15- hour period for these slot exemptions , this added on average three commercial slots per hour . the department of transportation ( dot ) awarded these new slots exemptions to airlines and routes that best met specified criteria . the 24 beyond - perimeter slot exemptions were awarded to airlines operating flights from six airports – denver international ( denver ) , phoenix - sky harbor ( phoenix ) , mccarran international ( las vegas ) , los angeles international ( los angeles ) , salt lake city international ( salt lake city ) , and seattle - tacoma international ( seattle ) . in anticipation of this year's reauthorization of faa , you asked for an update of gao's 1999 report on reagan national's ability to accommodate additional capacity and the effect of relaxing the perimeter rule . to provide this update , we addressed these key questions: to what extent can reagan national accommodate additional flights ? since air - 21 and vision 100 , for the six beyond - perimeter airports , what changes have occurred in market share and fares at reagan national and what changes have occurred in the number of passengers and fares at dulles and bwi airports ? to identify the number of additional slots reagan national can accommodate and the factors affecting existing capacity , we reviewed faa flight data and gate utilization data obtained from the metropolitan washington airports authority ( airports authority ) and we interviewed dot , faa and airport officials . to assess the changes in passenger levels and fares at washington area airports and the six beyond - perimeter airports , we analyzed dot origin and destination ticket data and interviewed officials at all three washington , d.c. , area airports . we reviewed the reliability of these data and concluded that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from july 2006 to february 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .