we disagree . as noted in the draft report , hhs approved a per person spending limit for florida's demonstration ; however , there is no aggregate cap on spending in florida similar to that in vermont , where hhs placed a cap on total spending . hhs also strongly disagreed with our recommendation that it recalculate the florida spending limit using appropriate methods and data sources and adjust the spending limit accordingly . hhs indicated that florida's data and methods for calculating payments for its supplemental payment program were irrelevant to the development of the florida demonstration . we disagree that florida's calculations were not relevant to the florida demonstration , since florida's historical payments were used as a basis for the low - income pool spending limit under the demonstration , and as a result , the spending limit allows for continuation of spending that a hhs review suggests should not have been allowed . with regard to hhs's approval of the vermont demonstration , hhs disagreed with our concerns and prior recommendation to reexamine the terms of the demonstration and , where appropriate , to either modify its terms or seek statutory authority for the demonstration to continue in its current form . hhs maintained that issues of legal authority were adequately and appropriately addressed in the information provided to us during the course of our fieldwork . we disagree and note that hhs has not addressed the concerns raised in our july 2007 letter . hhs also commented that our concern regarding excessive reimbursement for administrative expenditures for the public managed care organization in vermont was unwarranted because all demonstration revenue must be spent for demonstration purposes and costs matched by federal funds would be clearly identified . our concern remains that the broad scope of costs identified as for “demonstration purposes” — for example , funding the state public health laboratory — can allow vermont to shift costs to the federal government that were previously funded by the state and that do not exclusively benefit individuals eligible for medicaid . we provided a draft of this report to florida and vermont . florida stated that during the negotiations over the demonstration waiver , state officials worked closely with hhs to ensure that all data and documentation were provided in a timely and accurate manner to support the waiver application . vermont indicated that the state had assumed an unprecedented amount of risk related to program expenditures in exchange for the flexibility granted by the secretary and that state and federal staff had engaged in extensive discussion and analysis of vermont's historical expenditures , cost and caseload trends , and program policies in arriving at the final budget neutrality spending limit . vermont also questioned our finding that hhs agreed to reimburse the state's administrative expenditures under the demonstration at a rate higher than prior to the demonstration , indicating that an independent actuary relied on vermont's historical administrative expenditures in developing this component of the capitation rate . we agree that the states provided data and documentation to hhs to show the basis for their demonstration proposals .