prior authorization . medicare does not have the same broad authority as state medicaid agencies to implement prior authorization , which can be used to review documentation and verify the need for coverage prior to services being rendered . state medicaid agencies we spoke with credit prior authorization with preventing improper payments from being paid in the first place . cms has used prior authorization in medicare for certain services through temporary demonstration projects and models , as well as one permanent program . in april 2018 , we found that savings from a series of medicare temporary demonstrations and models that began in 2012 could be as high as about $1.1 to $1.9 billion as of march 2017 . we recommended that cms take steps , based on its evaluations of the demonstrations , to continue prior authorization . all six of our selected states use prior authorization in medicaid for at least one of the four services we examined . in particular , all six selected states require prior authorization for dme , and five require prior authorization for home health . officials from several states noted that they often apply prior authorization to services at high risk for improper payments , and most told us that prior authorization screens potential improper payments before services are rendered . we did not evaluate the effectiveness of states' use of prior authorization , or review the documentation required by states for prior authorization . ( see fig 6 for an example state medicaid prior authorization form. ) physician signatures: while both medicare and state medicaid agencies require signatures on provider documents to ensure their validity , medicare has detailed standards for what constitutes a valid signature . physician did not support the medical necessity for the specific type of catheter ordered . variety of situations . for example , illegible signatures and initials on their own are generally invalid , though they are valid when over a printed name . examples of insufficient documentation in medicare laboratory documentation from the referring physician did not support the order or an intent to order the billed laboratory tests . in medicaid , perm contractor staff told us that state agencies generally have not set detailed standards for valid signatures , and that reviewers generally rely on their judgment to assess signature validity . documentation from the referring physician did not support that the beneficiary's currently has diabetes for a billed laboratory test for the management and control of diabetes . documentation for referred services . medicare requires documentation from referring physicians to support the medical necessity of the referred services that we examined — home health , dme , and laboratory services — but medicaid generally does not require such documentation . medicare generally requires documentation from the referring physician , such as progress notes , to support the medical necessity of referred services . cms officials told us that medicare requires such documentation from referring physicians to ensure that medical necessity determinations are independent of the financial incentive to provide the referred service , particularly as certain referred services are high risk for fraud , waste , and abuse . ( see sidebar for examples of insufficient documentation in medicare home health , dme , and laboratory services. )