we also reviewed u.s . circuit court of appeals decisions that were identified by asylum division officials as influencing how uscis pursues asylum terminations due to fraud and uscis policy documents related to asylum termination , such as the post adjustment eligibility review memo , that reflect uscis policy changes made as a result of circuit court decisions . we visited five hsi locations – new york , new york ; washington , d.c. ; houston , texas ; los angeles , california ; and fairfax , virginia – - and interviewed officials about how they receive asylum fraud referrals and how they investigate allegations of asylum fraud . we interviewed officials from eoir about mechanisms to address identified asylum fraud in the immigration courts and how those mechanisms are used , including disciplinary measures available to eoir for attorneys and other practitioners who commit asylum fraud , and how frequently they are used . we interviewed officials in the eight uscis asylum offices as well as asylum division officials to determine how uscis handles cases with identified fraud , including cases in which fraud is identified after asylum has been granted , and how uscis tracks , monitors , and adjudicates cases in which an individual's asylum status is pending termination for identified fraud . we compared uscis and eoir mechanisms to address identified asylum fraud and the frequency of their use with mechanisms in gao's fraud framework to assess their likely effectiveness as a fraud deterrent . we conducted this performance audit from september 2014 to november 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . gao's a framework for managing fraud risks in federal programs notes that managers who effectively assess fraud risks attempt to fully consider the specific fraud risks the agency or program faces , analyze the potential likelihood and impact of fraud schemes , and then ultimately document prioritized fraud risks . moreover , managers can use the fraud risk assessment process to determine the extent to which controls may no longer be relevant or cost - effective . there is no universally accepted approach for conducting fraud risk assessments , since circumstances vary among programs ; however , assessing fraud risks generally involves five actions , as noted in figure 8 . in addition to the contact named above , kathryn bernet , assistant director ; ashley vaughan davis ; david alexander ; dominick dale , imoni hampton ; grant mallie ; mara mcmillen ; linda miller ; jan montgomery ; jon najmi ; and mary pitts made significant contributions to this report . a grant of asylum from an immigration judge confers the same benefits as a grant of asylum from a uscis asylum officer . if the judge determines that the applicant is ineligible for asylum , and is removable , the judge may order the applicant to be removed from the united states , unless the applicant seeks ( and receives ) another form of relief from removal .