transformers . transformers are critical to the efficient and effective delivery of electricity to customers and , under certain circumstances , can be vulnerable to the effects of gmd and hemp . transformers facilitate the efficient transfer of electricity over long distances through the transmission system by converting electricity to different voltages along the delivery system — either up or down , depending on the design and function of the transformer ( see sidebar ) . figure 2 depicts a large power transformer . paired with equipment — for example , a protective relay — that is designed to take them out of service temporarily when the effects of an electromagnetic event reach the grid . if transformers were temporarily taken out of service for preventative purposes , it could lead to an interruption of electricity service to consumers . however , if transformers — especially those more vulnerable due to age , condition , or design — are not taken out of service during an electromagnetic event they are at risk of being permanently damaged when additional electrical current flows into them , causing excessive localized heating and damage to internal components . ( see fig . 3 for an example of transformer windings that were damaged from localized heating associated with a gmd event. ) transformers that become permanently damaged during an electromagnetic event can also contribute to interruptions in service . according to doe , replacing a damaged transformer can be challenging because they are custom - designed and interchangeability and availability of spares is limited . if a usable spare transformer is not immediately available , obtaining a replacement transformer is often a long and costly process , usually involving long delivery lead times due to their size and weight , limited inventory , a complex procurement and manufacturing process , and other factors . according to doe , in 2014 the average lead time to obtain a large power transformer was between 5 and 16 months , but could take more than 20 months in the event of supply disruptions or delays in procuring raw materials or key parts ; larger , more sophisticated models are generally manufactured abroad . according to a transformer manufacturer , depending on the function of the transformer , the voltage rating , and the model , in 2017 the approximate price of a large power transformer , weighing from 170 to 410 tons , ranged from approximately $2 to $7.5 million in the united states . distribution system . the final stage in the electric power system is the distribution system , which carries electricity out of the transmission system to industrial , commercial , residential , and other consumers . the distribution system includes equipment that can be damaged during electromagnetic events , but the extent of the risk is limited because distribution lines are generally too short and of too low voltage to pose a risk to distribution equipment . system operations: operation of the electricity system is managed by entities such as a local utility , which this report collectively refers to as system operators . because electric energy is not typically stored in large quantities , system operators must constantly balance the generation and consumption of electricity to maintain reliability .