state officials told us that they have been working to implement this strategy . for example , state officials told us they engaged with other oas member states , including canada and mexico , to explore options for quota structure reform . according to state officials , canada led a modernization committee that produced a strategic plan that included quota structure reform . state officials added that they also reached out to member states from the caribbean to discuss the importance of quota structure reform while highlighting oas development programs that benefit caribbean nations . in addition , officials at the u.s. mission to the oas worked with their counterparts from mexico to review the oas's assessed quota structure and to consult on alternatives that would adjust all member states' quotas so that no member pays more than 50 percent of the oas's assessed contributions . according to state officials , the four largest contributing member states , including the united states , have agreed on the importance of quota structure reform . state officials added that quota structure reform efforts were bolstered by the selection of a reform - minded oas secretary general in 2015 . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we also interviewed officials from the four organizations , as well as officials from state , the u.s. agency for international development , the u.s. department of agriculture , and the department of health and human services which provide assessed contributions and project - specific voluntary contributions to the four organizations . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to state , the oas is the primary inter - american political forum through which the united states engages with other countries in the western hemisphere to promote democracy , human rights , security , and development . while paho , iica , and paigh are independent organizations , the charter of the organization of american states ( oas charter ) directs them to take into account the recommendations of the oas general assembly and councils . paho , a specialized international health agency for the americas , works with member countries throughout the region to improve and protect people's health and serves as the regional office for the americas of the world health organization , the united nations agency on health . iica , among other things , supports its member states' efforts to achieve agricultural development and rural well - being through consultation and the administration of agricultural projects through agreements with the oas and other entities . paigh specializes in regional cartography , geography , history , and geophysics and has facilitated the settlement of regional border disputes . member states collectively finance these organizations by providing assessed contributions , in accordance with the organizations' regulations . the member states' assessed contributions are intended to finance the organizations' regular budgets , which generally cover the organizations' day - to - day operating expenses , such as facilities and salaries .