wasp . the marine corps' squadron in iwakuni stated that this had a measurable effect on the squadron's readiness to support its operational requirements , as reflected by lower availability of parts within their inventory to support broken aircraft . specifically , during the time of the u.s.s . wasp deployment , only about 46 percent of the critical parts ( that is , parts needed to fix aircraft that cannot fly ) that the squadron at iwakuni needed were available in its inventory , and the squadron had to wait an average of about 12 days to receive these parts from off - base . as the f - 35 fleet continues to expand and the number of operational deployments increases , military service officials said that these manual workarounds and the singular focus on ensuring that one unit has the appropriate parts to deploy will not be tenable . program officials said that they have started a working group to look at options for addressing this issue , but they could not provide a timeframe or details about this effort . dod guidance for risk management in acquisition programs states that defense programs must anticipate and address risks on a continuing basis , and suggests that programs implement processes that include risk identification , analysis , mitigation , monitoring , and planning . further , the services have recognized that , to meet operational readiness objectives in a deployed environment , it is critical to have mechanisms ensuring that spare parts packages with which units plan to deploy are built to support the configurations and expected missions of the deploying aircraft , and have established guidance and processes to that effect . dod also has a separate , ongoing initiative to determine whether using risk - based assumptions can produce a more efficient and effective mix of parts within deployment parts packages across a range of weapon systems , including the f - 35 . while this effort is nascent , it could potentially offer insights for the f - 35 program to consider when reviewing the make - up of the f - 35 deployment and afloat spares packages . without a process for dod to modify the f - 35 afloat and deployment spares packages , to include reviewing the parts within the packages to ensure that they match deploying aircraft and accounting for updated parts demand , and without aligning any necessary funding for needed updates , the military services face risk that the parts that they have specifically purchased to meet their operational requirements will not be sufficient to do so . uncertainty exists about how the program will prioritize scarce f - 35 spare parts among global participants . the program has developed a set of business rules to govern the prioritization of scarce f - 35 parts . the business rules are to differentiate between the relative significance of competing needs and create a structure to be responsive to customer requirements during both peacetime and war . these rules are critical to ensuring fair and transparent allocation of parts to all program participants , particularly given the significant shortages of spare parts throughout the f - 35 program .