washington . d.c.: january 22 , 2002 . aviation safety: safer skies initiative has taken initial steps to reduce accident rates by 2007 . gao / rced - 00-111 . and ( 3 ) what are the key safety challenges facing faa ? we will also discuss our related recommendations that faa has not fully addressed . this statement is based on our recent reports on faa's inspection oversight programs , industry partnership programs , and enforcement and training programs . additionally , we met with faa officials and relevant industry groups and reviewed their documentation to obtain information on challenges facing faa . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . following is a summary of our findings: faa's safety oversight system has programs that focus on identifying and mitigating risk through a system safety approach , leveraging resources , and enforcing safety regulations , but concerns exist with each aspect of the system . faa's system safety approach for overseeing airlines — through the air transportation oversight system ( atos ) and surveillance and evaluation program ( sep ) — has many strengths . both programs , for example , use inspection staff efficiently by prioritizing workload based on areas of highest risk and ensuring that corrective actions have been taken . however , the full potential of sep is not being realized because the inspection workload for the 81 airlines included in sep is heavily oriented to nonrisk based activities . ( 2 ) how is faa ensuring that its staff maintain the skills and knowledge to consistently carry out the agency's oversight programs ? of additional concern is that recent and planned changes to transfer about 100 airlines from sep to atos will affect inspector workload that may affect faa's capability to oversee the aviation industry . faa leverages resources and saves money through its “designee” programs , in which individuals and organizations have been delegated to act on faa's behalf to perform about 90 percent of certification - related activities . the designee program allows faa to better concentrate its limited staff resources on the most safety - critical functions . however , planned changes to some designee programs that would create a new “organizational designation authorization” will result in faa focusing on the performance of organizations rather than the individuals within the organization who carry out the delegated functions . as faa moves from direct oversight of the individuals performing delegated activities , it will be important for the agency to have valid and reliable data and strong evaluative processes to monitor any program changes that have implications for safety . faa's enforcement program , which is an outgrowth of its inspection process , is intended to ensure industry compliance with safety regulations and is another important element of its safety oversight system . a key objective of faa's policy of assessing legal sanctions against entities or individuals that do not comply with aviation safety regulations is to deter future violations .