reinsurance . industry stakeholders said uncertainty would delay reinsurance coverage . if insurers delayed paying policyholder claims because of uncertainty about certification of a terrorist attack , reinsurers also might delay payments to insurers . reinsurance payments are often triggered by the insurer's payment of a claim to the policyholder . did the event meet the nonmonetary definition established under tria ? defining an event as an act of terrorism includes determining whether it was “committed by an individual or individuals as part of an effort to coerce the civilian population of the united states or to influence the policy or affect the conduct of the united states government by coercion.” it also includes determining whether it was a “violent act or an act that is dangerous” to human life , property , or infrastructure , and whether it resulted in damage within the united states or certain areas outside the united states . as part of this determination , the secretary of the treasury must consult with the attorney general and secretary of the department of homeland security before certifying an event . did the event cause at least $5 million in insurance losses in tria - eligible lines ? tria prohibits the secretary of the treasury from certifying acts of terrorism unless insurance losses exceed this threshold . in 2004 treasury issued regulations to implement tria's procedures for filing insurer claims for payment of the federal share of compensation for insured losses . within 7 days after certification of an act of terrorism , a treasury contractor is to activate a web - based system for receiving claims from insurers and responding to insurers that seek assistance . the terrorism risk insurance program provides for shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting from certified acts of terrorism . under the current program , if an event were to be certified as an act of terrorism and insured losses exceeded $200 million , an individual insurer that experienced losses first would have to satisfy a deductible before receiving federal coverage . an insurer's deductible under tria is 20 percent of its previous year's direct earned premiums in tria - eligible lines . after the insurer pays its deductible , the federal government would reimburse the insurer for 80 percent of its additional losses and the insurer would be responsible for the remaining 20 percent . annual coverage for losses is capped – – neither private insurers nor the federal government cover aggregate industry insured losses in excess of $100 billion . after an act of terrorism is certified and once claims are paid , tria requires treasury to recoup part of the federal share of losses in some instances . under this provision , when insurers' uncompensated insured losses are less than a certain amount ( up to $41 billion for 2020 ) , treasury must impose policyholder premium surcharges on commercial property / casualty insurance policies until total industry payments reach 140 percent of any mandatory recoupment amount . when the amount of federal assistance exceeds this mandatory recoupment amount , tria allows for discretionary recoupment . prior tria reauthorizations decreased federal responsibility for losses and increased private - sector responsibility for losses , but the 2019 reauthorization of tria made few changes to the program .