iii. ) specifically , dod agreed that the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs should develop a policy that requires each of the seven reserve components to designate a central point of contact for trs education that will be accountable for providing information about trs to their selected reserve members annually . however , dod countered that each designee should coordinate the provision of reserve unit information through the tricare regional offices rather than communicating directly with the tricare contractors , noting that the tricare regional offices have oversight responsibility for the contractors in their respective regions . we understand the department's concern about coordinating contractor communications through the tricare regional offices , and we have modified our recommendation accordingly . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . trs is an important option for members of the selected reserve . however , educating this population about trs has been challenging , and despite efforts by the reserve components and the contractors , some members of the selected reserve are likely still unaware of this option . most of the reserve components lack centralized accountability for trs education , making it unclear if all members are getting information about the program — a concern that is further exacerbated by the lack of awareness about the trs education policy among officials from some of the reserve components . additionally , the contractors' limitations in briefing all of the units in their regions about trs make each component's need for a central point of contact more evident . without centralized accountability , the reserve components do not have assurance that all members of the selected reserve who may need trs have the information they need to take advantage of the health care options available to them . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs to develop a policy that requires each reserve component to designate a centralized point of contact for trs education , who will be accountable for ensuring that the reserve components are providing information about trs to their selected reserve members annually . in establishing responsibilities for the centralized points of contact , dod should explicitly task them with coordinating with their respective tricare regional offices to ensure that contractors are provided information on the number and location of reserve component units in their regions . three of the components had difficulties providing a point of contact . in fact , two of the components took several months to identify an official whom we could speak with about trs education , and the other one had difficulties identifying someone who could answer our follow - up questions when our original point of contact was no longer available . furthermore , officials from three of the seven components told us that they were not aware of this policy . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov .