army guard soldiers . army guard soldiers in our case studies told us that they were confused about their responsibilities in the travel voucher reimbursement process because they had not been sufficiently trained in travel voucher processes related to mobilization . for example , prior to september 11 , 2001 , most travel guidance addressed the criteria for single trips or sequential trips and was not always clearly applicable to situations in which army guard soldiers could be authorized short intervals of travel for temporary duty at different locations within their longer term mobilization . this “overlapping travel” proved to be problematic for army guard soldiers trying to understand their travel voucher filing requirements and travel computation office examiners responsible for reviewing travel vouchers . in addition , we found indications that some soldiers were not aware of dod's requirement to complete a travel voucher within 5 days of the end of travel or the end of every 30-day period in cases of extended travel . for example , as shown in figure 8 , in our selection of 139 vouchers , 99 ( 71 percent ) of the army guard soldiers did not meet the 5-day requirement . if i call your department three times and ask three different people the same question i will receive three differing answers.… is there or is there not a single standard for paying soldiers travel pay ? ” during our audit of selected travel vouchers , some that were paid as much as 500 days after travel ended , we found that significant delays frequently occurred when soldiers had to submit travel vouchers multiple times to travel computation offices . travel computation offices routinely returned improperly prepared and inadequately reviewed vouchers that did not contain basic required signatures , dates , and travel orders . further , dfas staffing shortfalls contributed to some of the delays that we noted . table 3 shows examples of the extent of delays experienced by soldiers in obtaining payment for travel expenses . the following provides more details for the experiences of some of the soldiers with payment delays . a corporal with the california 49th military police company was frustrated by the repeated recycling of his voucher eight times through the travel reimbursement process , which caused his reimbursement of travel expenses to be delayed for about 17 months . his story exemplifies process and human capital flaws . for example , ( 1 ) the reviewing official approved the voucher even though it lacked supporting documentation , ( 2 ) dfas cto did not know that faxed vouchers were not being printed , and ( 3 ) customer service was weak as evidenced by piecemeal requests for information . according to the california unit's reviewing official , the voucher , along with others , was initially faxed to dfas cto in august 2002 . when not all soldiers received notification that dfas cto had received the vouchers , the unit official again faxed the vouchers . the corporal told us that he later received an e - mail from dfas cto requesting his dd form 214 , certificate of release or discharge from active duty .