this was not the case . we recognize that acf officials have encouraged programs , such as tanf , to intentionally set ambitious targets for some goals . our comments were only meant to alert the congress to the fact that certain goals may not be achieved in the future , information that acf should have provided to assist congressional decisionmaking . for the examples cited , gao relied on the multi - year data presented in acf's fiscal year 2002 performance plan , not on a single year's performance as suggested by acf . few acf strategies for achieving this outcome ( 1 ) were directly linked to specific performance that fell below fiscal year 2000 or 1999 target levels or ( 2 ) were aimed at overcoming acf management challenges identified by us or the hhs oig . because it administers most of its programs in conjunction with states and / or other entities , acf involves its partners in establishment of performance measures to help ensure their achievement . for example , other acf strategies include providing technical assistance , disseminating the results of program evaluations and other research , and using rewards and penalties to improve performance . finally , the fiscal year 2002 plan indicates that acf will continue its ongoing evaluation of various aspects of welfare reform ; in particular , acf plans to evaluate performance measures related to increasing parental responsibility and increasing affordable child - care . acf's fiscal year 2002 plan offers no concrete strategy to overcome the time lag in receiving and validating performance data from program partners , and it generally does not report on the results of data validation efforts . acf's report acknowledges that such time lags make it difficult to provide a comprehensive summary of fiscal year 2000 performance until later in fiscal year 2001 . acf indicated it would develop a plan with hhs and the office of management and budget in fiscal year 2001 for reducing the delay in the availability of state administrative data , where appropriate . until this plan is developed and implemented , however , obtaining timely data for measures pertaining to helping individuals and families become self - sufficient will continue to impede assessments of acf's performance . in commenting on a draft of this report , acf cited grant - reporting timeframes as a constraint in the timely availability of performance data . the fact remains , however , that acf offered no concrete strategy to overcome the reporting time lags . by indicating that it will work with the office of management and budget to reduce delays in the availability of administrative data , acf underscores the need for more timely information . we do point out in our conclusions , however , that the issue of data lags may become less critical as trends emerge from data over longer time periods . acf broadly discusses its human capital and information technology strategies in its fiscal year 2000 report and 2002 plan . acf reported that it did not achieve an increase in the manager - to - staff ratio — its one human capital performance measure in fiscal year 2000 — because of limits on hiring new staff and on reducing the number of managers already on board .