we then interviewed the 11 stakeholders . for each interview , we asked them to provide their views on the strengths and limitations of each option in relation to small , mid - sized , and large businesses and for federal agencies . we performed a content analysis to analyze the responses . first , we created preliminary codes that represented key themes across the interviews of the strengths and limitations of the 14 options , such as “would increase administrative burden on agencies” or “would increase contracting opportunities for mid - sized businesses.” a methodologist reviewed the coding system to ensure it was logical . we pre - tested the coding of responses from three interviews to ensure the appropriateness of the codes . one analyst coded each response to a particular strength or limitation of an option and a second analyst reviewed the coding . if a response did not align with a strength and limitation , the response was coded as “unclassified.” the team discussed the results of the initial coding analysis and made some adjustments to the codes . once the coding scheme was finalized and the responses from the remaining eight interviews were coded by an analyst , a second analyst reviewed the coding . if the second analyst disagreed with the coding of a particular response , the two analysts spoke and achieved concurrence . after response coding was completed , we tabulated the responses based on the codes . a second person verified the calculation of the stakeholders' response totals . because we selected a nongeneralizable sample of stakeholders to interview , their views are not generalizable to other stakeholders who have knowledge about options for increasing contracting opportunities for mid - sized businesses , but their views offered important perspectives . to characterize the number of stakeholders who offered the same opinion , we used “nearly all” for nine or 10 stakeholders , “most” for seven or eight stakeholders , “more than half” for six stakeholders , “several” for four or five stakeholders , and “some” for three stakeholders . we also interviewed sba officials to obtain their views on how the options might affect small businesses , as well as to gather information related to our other two objectives . we conducted this performance audit from april 2018 to august 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in this appendix , we provide information on contracts awarded to small , mid - sized , and large businesses in fiscal year 2017 . because there is no statutory or regulatory definition of a mid - sized or large business , we applied multipliers to the small business administration's ( sba ) size standards . small businesses were those with revenue or employees at or below the size standard for their industry .