they do not capture the views of those who do not shop there . although deca's strategic plan addresses the need to attract more military personnel to use the commissary , deca officials do not know to what extent eligible customers are not shopping at a commissary and the reasons why not . realignment of the workforce , through greater use of part - time employees , has enabled many stores to increase their operating hours and maintain or improve customer service . however , deca's strategic plan does not include specific goals for the full - time / part - time workforce mix . as a result , the extent of part - time employees varied among the stores and is significantly less than current industry practice . opportunities to achieve even more efficiencies may exist through greater use of part - time positions . in addition , small store directors have concerns about balancing their workload and maintaining store operations . although deca's customer satisfaction survey questionnaire is reasonable , survey results could be subject to some under - or over - stated because the current methodology does not explicitly weight stores' results by sales volume and does not collect data on non - responding customers . finally , deca does not know how many eligible service members do not shop at a commissary and the reasons they do not . we recommend that the under secretary of defense ( personnel and readiness ) , in consultation with the chairman , commissary operating board , require the director , defense commissary agency , to update the strategic plan to include goals that identify the percent of the store workforce that is expected to be full - and part - time to achieve further efficiencies from reshaping the workforce ; reassess the management reductions at small stores to ensure managers can balance their workload and maintain store operations ; adjust the customer survey results on the basis of sales volume and document the number of survey non - respondents and their reasons for not completing the questionnaire ; and examine potential methods and analyses to periodically determine how many and why eligible personnel do not shop at commissaries , to identify ways to improve service and increase the number of potential customers using the commissary benefit . in commenting on a draft of this report , the under secretary of defense ( personnel and readiness ) concurred with four of our five recommendations and outlined actions to be taken to address the four recommendations the department concurred with . he disagreed with our recommendation that the defense commissary agency update its strategic plan to include goals that identify the percent of the store workforce that is expected to be full - and part - time , expressing the view that staff in washington should not prescribe the full - part - time mix for stores . the intent of our recommendation was not for the under secretary to prescribe the workforce mix for stores but rather have the defense commissary agency include agencywide goals on the projected workforce mix in its strategic plan to help achieve the goal of reshaping the workforce .