figure 2 . categories of programs required to provide services through the one - stop system and related federal agencies d e pt . of e■ adlt edtion nd litercy ■ wia adlt , yoth , nd dilocted worker ■ voctionl edtion ( perkin act ) one - stop centers serve as the key access point for a range of services that help unemployed workers re - enter the workforce — such as job search assistance , skill assessment and case management , occupational skills and on - the - job training , basic education and literacy training , as well access to unemployment insurance ( ui ) benefits and other supportive services — and they also assist employers in finding workers . any person visiting a one - stop center may look for a job , receive career development services , and gain access to a range of vocational education programs . in our 2007 study , we found that a typical one - stop center in many states offered services for 8 or 9 required programs on - site , and one state offered services for 16 required programs on - site . in addition to required programs , one - stop centers have the flexibility to include other , optional programs in the one - stop system , such as tanf , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) employment and training program , or other community - based programs , which helps them better meet specific state and local workforce development needs . the dayton , ohio one - stop center , for example , boasts over 40 programs on - site at the 8-1 / 2 acre facility , including an organization that provides free business attire to job seekers who need it , an alternative high school program that assists students in obtaining a diploma , and organizations providing parenting and self - sufficiency classes . under wia , services may also be provided at affiliated sites — designated locations that provide access to at least one employment and training program . while wia requires certain programs to provide services through the one - stop system , it does not provide additional funds to operate one - stop systems and support one - stop infrastructure . as a result , required programs are expected to share the costs of developing and operating one - stop centers . in 2007 , we reported that wia programs and the employment service program were the largest funding sources states used to support the infrastructure — or nonpersonnel costs — of their comprehensive one - stop centers . for program year 2005 , of the 48 states that could provide funding information , 23 states identified wia programs as the primary funding source and 19 states reported it was the employment service program . in addition , 27 states reported using tanf funds to pay for part of their one - stop center infrastructure costs , and 3 states identified tanf as the primary funding source . in 2007 , tanf was on - site at a typical one - stop in 30 states .