to do so , it created basic organizational and acquisition infrastructures . to date , however , tsa has not developed an acquisition infrastructure that facilitates successful management and execution of acquisition activities , helps ensure that the agency acquires quality goods and services at reasonable prices , and supports informed decisions about acquisition strategy . specifically , our review of tsa's acquisition function and inspector general reports identified a number of challenges in each of the four areas we assessed . organizational alignment and leadership: tsa's office of acquisition is at an organizational level too low to oversee the acquisition process , coordinate acquisition activities , and enforce acquisition policies effectively . for more on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted our review from july 2003 through march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . tsa risks an imbalance in its acquisition workforce that could diminish the performance of the acquisition function throughout the agency . with almost half of tsa's fiscal year 2003 budget devoted to acquisition , a qualified and trained workforce is critical to ensuring the efficiency of tsa's acquisition activities . the department of homeland security has developed a departmentwide acquisition workforce plan , and tsa began implementing it in february 2004 . the plan focuses on formalizing competencies and skill sets ; establishing certification standards ; and identifying training requirements , first for contracting specialists and then for acquisition professionals in other key career fields — including program management , financial management , engineering , and information technology . subsequent phases of the plan include establishing career paths , targeting positions for recruitment , establishing mentoring programs , and creating a strategy for succession planning . for an understanding of organizational alignment and coordination , we interviewed the chief support systems officer and a representative for the acting chief operating officer . to assess how well acquisition activities are coordinated and carried out throughout the agency , we interviewed assistant administrators of all major operations offices — aviation operations , maritime and land security , security intelligence , and operations policy — and mission support offices — finance and administration , human resources , information technology , and workforce performance and training . to determine tsa's current policies and processes , we reviewed applicable laws and policies that granted tsa the flexibility to use and modify faa's system , and we also interviewed a member of tsa's legal counsel . we analyzed faa's acquisition management system and reviewed tsa's modified version of this guidance . to assess tsa's progress towards developing and implementing policies and processes , we reviewed tsa and department of homeland security memoranda , directives , internal newsletters , handbooks , quality assurance checklists , and policy documents . to analyze tsa's effectiveness in implementing policies and processes , we interviewed assistant administrators for each of the operations offices , as well as the division directors within the office of acquisition for each of the contracting support offices . additionally , we interviewed management and staff within the office of acquisition regarding acquisition policy and processes , program support , and quality assurance .