tsa agreed with this recommendation . however , communications issues with the business community persist . in july 2011 , we reported that vendors for checked - baggage screening technology expressed concerns about the extent to which tsa communicated with the business community about the current eds procurement . tsa agreed with our july 2011 recommendation to establish a process to communicate information regarding tsa's eds acquisition to eds vendors in a timely manner and reported taking actions to address it such as soliciting more feedback from vendors through kickoff meetings , industry days , and classified discussions of program requirements . our prior work has also shown that not resolving problems discovered during testing can sometimes lead to costly redesign and rework at a later date . addressing such problems before moving to the acquisition phase can help agencies better manage costs . specifically: in june 2011 we reported that s&t's test & evaluation and standards office , responsible for overseeing test and evaluation of dhs's major acquisition programs , reviewed or approved test and evaluation documents and plans for programs undergoing testing , and conducted independent assessments for the programs that completed operational testing . dhs senior - level officials considered the office's assessments and input in deciding whether programs were ready to proceed to the next acquisition phase . however , the office did not consistently document its review and approval of components' test agents — a government entity or independent contractor carrying out independent operational testing for a major acquisition . in addition , the office did not document its review of other component acquisition documents , such as those establishing programs' operational requirements . we recommended , among other things , that s&t develop mechanisms to document its review of component acquisition documentation . dhs concurred and reported actions underway to address them . in july 2011 , we reported that tsa experienced challenges in collecting explosives data on the physical and chemical properties of certain explosives needed by vendors to develop eds detection software . these data are also needed by tsa for testing the machines to determine whether they meet established requirements prior to their procurement and deployment to airports . tsa and s&t have experienced these challenges because of problems associated with safely handling and consistently formulating some explosives . the challenges related to data collection for certain explosives have resulted in problems carrying out the eds procurement as planned . specifically , attempting to collect data for certain explosives while simultaneously pursuing the eds procurement delayed the eds acquisition schedule . we recommended that tsa develop a plan to ensure that tsa has the explosives data needed for each of the planned phases of the 2010 eds requirements before starting the procurement process for new edss or upgrades included in each applicable phase . dhs stated that tsa modified its strategy for the eds's competitive procurement in july 2010 in response to the challenges in working with the explosives for data collection by removing the data collection from the procurement process .