that contract was awarded in september 2008 . although the shift to individual acquisitions is intended to provide the coast guard with more visibility and control , key aspects still require a system - level approach . these aspects include an integrated c4isr system — needed to provide critical information to field commanders and facilitate interoperability with the department of defense and dhs — and decisions on production quantities of each deepwater asset the coast guard requires to achieve its missions . the coast guard is not fully positioned to manage these aspects under its new acquisition approach but is engaged in efforts to do so . c4isr is a key aspect of the coast guard's ability to meet its missions . how the coast guard structures c4isr is fundamental to the success of the deepwater program because c4isr encompasses the connections among surface , aircraft , and shore - based assets and the means by which information is communicated through them . c4isr is intended to provide operationally relevant information to coast guard field commanders to allow the efficient and effective execution of their missions . however , an acquisition strategy for c4isr is still in development . officials stated that the coast guard is revisiting the c4isr incremental acquisition approach proposed by icgs and analyzing that approach's requirements and architecture . in the meantime , the coast guard is continuing to acquire c4isr through icgs . as the coast guard transitions from the icgs - based system - of - systems acquisition strategy to an asset - based approach , it will need to maintain a strategic outlook to determine how many of the various deepwater assets to procure to meet coast guard needs . when deciding how many of a specific vessel or aircraft to procure , it is important to consider not only the capabilities of that asset , but how it can complement or duplicate the capabilities of the other assets with which it is intended to operate . that report is also expected to be issued this summer . this statement is based on our issued work on the coast guard's deepwater program , specifically the information in our june 2008 report , coast guard: change in course improves deepwater management and oversight , but outcome still uncertain . that work was conducted in accordance with generally acceptable government audit standards . in the meantime , coast guard continues to plan for asset acquisitions in numbers very similar to those determined by icgs , such as 8 nscs . like many federal agencies that acquire major systems , the coast guard faces challenges in recruiting and retaining a sufficient government acquisition workforce . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the coast guard is a multimission , maritime military service within dhs .