assessment of security controls . programs are to develop a test plan that will determine which controls to test ( called a security controls assessment ) , prioritize and schedule assessments , select and customize techniques , and develop risk mitigation techniques to address weaknesses . in addition to testing controls , test plans may also include penetration testing , which involves simulating attacks to identify methods for circumventing the security features of an application , system , or network , and using tools or techniques commonly used by attackers . these have not yet been resolved . the program is also experiencing challenges in testing the ground system's requirements that may cause a delay in verifying some requirements until closer to launch . program officials reported that they are developing a contingency plan to deal with the open change requests , and are re - planning the activities leading up to the completion of block 2.0 in order to remove potential schedule conflicts between the ground and satellite testing schedules . similar to its efforts to manage the program's cost and schedule , the jpss program office is actively monitoring these risks . close management and monitoring of costs , schedules , and risks will be essential to ensuring a successful and timely launch . in accordance with fisma and the nist risk management framework , noaa has established security policies and procedures governing its organizations and programs in each of the framework areas . the jpss program implemented information security practices in the area of system categorization , and made progress in implementing information security practices in each of the other risk management areas . however , the program has yet to fully implement the best practices and policies established by the organization , and shortfalls exist in each of the remaining areas . for example , while the program has established plans of action to address control weaknesses , it has not addressed systemic critical issues in a timely manner . while required to remediate critical and high risk vulnerabilities within 30 days , as of august 2015 , the program had over 1,400 critical and high risk vulnerabilities that were over 4 months old . as described earlier , fisma requires federal agencies to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program . it also calls for agencies to perform key activities to protect critical assets , in accordance with nist's risk management framework . this framework provides broad information security and risk management activities which guide the life - cycle processes to be followed in developing information systems: system categorization: programs are to categorize systems by identifying the types of information used , selecting a provisional impact level , modifying the rating based on mission - based factors , and assigning a category based on the highest level of impact to confidentiality , integrity , and availability . programs select the initial impact levels using an assessment of threat events and their impact to operations . selection and implementation of security controls . programs are to determine protective measures , or security controls , to be implemented based on the system categorization results . these security controls are documented in a system security plan .