this includes services for those who may be at risk for developing ptsd . these oef / oif veterans can choose one of three tricare health care benefit options through tamp . while the three options have no premiums , two of the options have deductibles and copayments and allow access to a larger number of providers . the options are tricare prime — a managed care option that allows oef / oif veterans to obtain , without a referral , mental health services directly from a mental health provider in the tricare network of providers with no cost for services . tried hard not to think about it or went out of your way to avoid situations that remind you of it ? were constantly on guard , watchful , or easily startled ? felt numb or detached from others , activities , or your surroundings ? the completed dd 2796 is reviewed by a dod health care provider who conducts a face - to - face interview to discuss any deployment - related health concerns with the servicemember . health care providers that review the dd 2796 may include physicians , physician assistants , nurse practitioners , or independent duty medical technicians — enlisted personnel who receive advanced training to provide treatment and administer medications . dod provides guidance for health care providers using the dd 2796 and screening servicemembers' physical and mental health . the guidance gives background information to health care providers on the purpose of the various screening questions on the dd 2796 and highlights the importance of a health care provider's clinical judgment when interviewing and discussing responses to the dd 2796 . health care providers may make a referral for a further mental health or combat / operational stress reaction evaluation by indicating on the dd 2796 that this evaluation is needed . when a dod health care provider refers an oef / oif servicemember for a further mental health or combat / operational stress reaction evaluation , the provider checks the appropriate evaluation box on the dd 2796 and gives the servicemember information about ptsd . the provider does not generally arrange for a mental health evaluation appointment for the servicemember with a referral . see figure 1 for the portion of the dd 2796 that is used to indicate that a referral for a further mental health or combat / operational stress reaction evaluation is needed . dod's health care system , tricare , delivers health care services to over 9 million individuals . health care services , which include mental health services , are provided by dod personnel in military treatment facilities or through civilian health care providers , who may be either network providers or nonnetwork providers . a military treatment facility is a military hospital or clinic on or near a military base . network providers have a contractual agreement with tricare to provide health care services and are part of the tricare network . nonnetwork providers may accept tricare allowable charges for delivering health care services or expect the beneficiary to pay the difference between the provider's fee and tricare's allowable charge for services . va's health care system includes medical facilities , community - based outpatient clinics , and vet centers .