this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have . charles jeszeck , 202-512-7215 . in addition to the above , michael hartnett , sharon hermes , kun - fang lee , david lehrer , sheila mccoy , and frank todisco made key contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the majority of these plans expected insolvency in 15 or fewer years . our contacts with individual plans provide insight into the stark choices faced by these plans . four of the eight critical status plans we contacted expected to eventually become insolvent , and officials explained that their analyses concluded that no feasible combination of contribution increases or benefit reductions could lead them back to a healthy level of funding . fifteen plans proposed to cut accruals by 40 percent or more . this doesn't reflect all the changes plans made , because some plans reduced accrual rates prior to development of the rehabilitation plans . furthermore , a majority of plans — 88 out of 107 — proposed to reduce one or more adjustable benefits . we conducted our work from april 2012 through march 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to summarize , we found that while the most distressed multiemployer plans have taken significant steps to address their funding problems , a substantial percentage of these plans have determined that they will not be able to return to a healthier funding status , and instead seek to forestall insolvency . further , existing and anticipated plan insolvencies threaten to drive the pbgc's multiemployer insurance fund into insolvency in about 2023 . if this occurs , retirees depending on the pbgc multiemployer insurance fund would see their pension payments reduced to a small fraction of their original value — or nothing at all . to address the need for improved funding , the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ) included new provisions designed to compel multiemployer plans in poor financial shape to take action to improve their long - term financial condition . the law established two categories of troubled plans — endangered status ( commonly referred to as “yellow zone” , which includes an additional subcategory of “seriously endangered” ) and a more serious critical status ( commonly referred to as “red zone” ) . ppa further requires plans in both categories to develop strategies that include contribution increases , benefit reductions , or both , designed to improve their financial condition . these strategies must generally be adopted through the collective bargaining process , and plans are required to periodically report on progress made in implementing them .