( app . iii shows housse point systems from 2 site visit states. ) in addition to the categories above , the point systems in two states that we visited also included the option for teachers to demonstrate subject matter competency through advanced certification . teachers in maryland and tennessee could earn all of the required points by achieving national board certification . in addition to the point system , the housse procedures in some site visit states offered alternatives for demonstrating subject matter competency . for example , teachers in tennessee could demonstrate subject matter competency through multiple observations of their performance completed by trained evaluators or the data showing their effect on student achievement . teachers in california who were unable to obtain the required number of points through the point system could use evidence of positive evaluations of their performance in the classroom or prepare a portfolio of their work . our review of housse procedures in states that we visited , particularly the analysis of the points they allowed teachers to count for different activities , showed that they varied in the weight given to these activities . the extent to which certain activities reflect teachers' subject matter knowledge may affect the rigor of these procedures . for example , as shown in figure 3 , rhode island allowed experience to count for about one - fourth of the 100 points required for demonstrating subject matter competency , but the other 4 states with housse procedures allowed experience to count for about one - half of the points to be earned . officials in colorado indicated that they had chosen not to count experience toward teachers' demonstration of subject matter competency because they did not believe that experience would necessarily translate into improved subject knowledge . however , colorado permitted relevant travel to count toward demonstration of subject matter competency , whereas the other states did not explicitly include travel in their housse . some site visit states also set a minimum number of points to be earned in certain categories , while other states did not require teachers to earn points from those categories . specifically , kansas and maryland required teachers to earn at least a portion of the total number of points they needed to demonstrate subject matter competency through college coursework , while other states did not require a minimum number of points in that category . states also differed in the number of categories in which teachers had to earn points . for example , teachers in rhode island were required to earn points from at least three different categories , such as college - level coursework and professional development in the content area . in contrast , teachers in maryland could earn all points necessary for demonstration of subject matter competency from a single category . california , kansas , rhode island , and tennessee also set a requirement that some activities had been completed within a recent period of time . for example , kansas required professional development and service activities to have taken place within the last 6 years to earn points toward demonstrating subject matter competency under housse .