this is the second of two reports on the subject . specifically , we sampled 100 percent of the “unverifiable” cases , 50 percent of the “unfavorable” cases , 25 percent of the “favorable” cases , and 25 percent of the “no action” cases . our random sample included both prelicense and postshipment checks and included at least one case from each country . we also judgmentally selected an additional six cases for our sample that involved checks on nvds that were conducted during fiscal years 2005 through 2010 . we included checks on nvds in our sample because they are a sensitive military technology and are the only item sold through both fms and dcs to the gulf countries that are on dod's list of items requiring enhanced end - use monitoring . in addition , we judgmentally selected three cases from fiscal years 2005 through 2010 that were designated by state as priority level 2 , or higher priority , blue lantern checks . priority level 2 checks are based on more substantial indications that a violation of the international traffic in arms regulations may have occurred or will be attempted . we requested both the cables from state to the embassy and the embassy's response cable to state for each of our sample cases . state was unable to provide us with the cables for 11 of the 34 cases because officials decided not to send a cable requesting the embassy to conduct a blue lantern check in those cases . our final sample included 23 cases — 6 prelicense checks and 17 postshipment checks . of those 17 postshipment checks , 4 involved checks on brokers , and were not associated with verifying the delivery of specific items on a license . the remaining 13 postshipment checks consisted of 8 we selected randomly and 5 we selected judgmentally . we then analyzed and recorded information about each case , including the subject of the check , the commodity checked , the time it took post to conduct the check , license conditions , whether or not site visits were requested and conducted , inventories requested and conducted , and any follow - up that post indicated was necessary . to assess the extent to which dod and state provide similar or differing levels of protection for the same military technologies sold or exported to the gulf countries , we interviewed dod and state officials in washington , d.c. , and the gulf countries , as well as host country officials in saudi arabia and the uae . this included the defense security cooperation agency and state's directorate of defense trade controls , who oversee end - use monitoring for nvds purchased by the gulf countries through fms and dcs , respectively , and the defense technology security administration , which is responsible for setting policy and reviewing requests for the sale or export of nvds . we received a briefing on , and practiced using various types of image intensification and thermal nvds at the army's night vision and electronic sensors directorate in fort belvoir , virginia . additionally , we observed dod and state officials conduct a serial number inventory of nvds in saudi arabia as part of a blue lantern postshipment check .