dbfo . for new infrastructure or significant upgrades , a municipality and a company enter into a dbfo partnership in which the company is responsible for designing , constructing , and financing the infrastructure and then operating and maintaining it for the term of the contract . if an nib is created , how should it be structured ? what relationship , if any , should an nib have with the existing state - level clean water state revolving fund programs ? stakeholders provided a variety of open - ended responses to this question , which are discussed in the report as appropriate . how should an nib initially be capitalized ? stakeholders provided a variety of open - ended responses to this question , which are discussed in the report as appropriate . should an nib have the authority to generate its own funds for operating expenses and lending using different financing mechanisms ? if you answered “yes” to question 6 , which mechanisms should an nib have the authority to use to generate is own funds ? should an nib become self - sustaining after its initial capitalization ? by self - sustaining , we mean an nib that is fully reliant on funds that it generates , rather than on continued federal funding . how important is it that an nib has the authority to provide each of the following financing mechanisms ? if an nib suffers from financial losses due to municipalities defaulting on loans or commercial paper , taxpayers may be at risk to cover those financial losses . how should an nib mitigate this potential risk to taxpayers ? stakeholders provided a variety of open - ended responses to this question , which are discussed in the report as appropriate . how should an nib distribute financing to qualified projects ? what types of wastewater utilities , if any , should an nib have the authority to assist ? please check all that apply . assuming constrained resources , by what method should an nib prioritize eligible projects for financing ? what should be the level of priority for the following criteria that an nib could use to evaluate projects and select those that should be financed ? should an nib exclusively finance large infrastructure projects ? should there be a limit on the amount of financing that one project can receive from an nib ? in your opinion , which of the following wastewater infrastructure activities should an nib finance ? in addition to design issues discussed above related to administration , authorities , financing prioritization , and financing eligibility ( questions 1 through 16 ) , what other design issues should be considered in designing and establishing an nib , if any ? stakeholders provided a variety of open - ended responses to this question . please provide any additional information that would be helpful to gao in better understanding potential issues related to establishing an nib . stakeholders provided a variety of open - ended responses to this question . we identified the following published works which address privately financed wastewater ppps and were published since 1992: haarmeyer , david .