ii ) . specifically , we recommended that the ocs director establish formal written policies and procedures to ( 1 ) ensure that teams conducting monitoring visits include staff with requisite skills , ( 2 ) ensure the timely completion of monitoring reports to states , ( 3 ) maintain and retain documentation of monitoring visits , and ( 4 ) ensure the timely issuance of annual reports to congress . in response to this letter , ocs officials said that they plan to address each of our recommendations by hiring additional monitoring staff with expertise in financial oversight , training all staff on requirements that states must meet prior to visits , establishing a triennial monitoring schedule for visiting states , developing new guidelines for reporting to states and maintaining monitoring documents , and issuing timely reports to congress , among other efforts . see appendix iii for more details on hhs's response to our letter . ocs did not systematically use or collect key information that would allow it to assess states' csbg management risks and target its limited monitoring resources toward states with the greatest risks . ocs officials told us that they used a risk - based approach to select states to visit , but we found the selection process to be ad hoc and often unexplained . ocs officials explained that they used information received from state and local officials on state csbg management concerns to decide in which states to conduct compliance evaluation visits . for example , upon learning that local agencies in louisiana were concerned that they had not received all the funds allotted to them , ocs decided to conduct an evaluation of that state . ocs officials also mentioned that when selecting states to visit , they considered such risk factors as staff turnover and having limited information about the state in general . however , ocs officials could not provide an explanation for why they visited six of the nine states that had undergone evaluations since 2003 and had no formal , written criteria for determining which states to visit . each state provides annual program performance information to ocs , but ocs does not systematically use this information to assess states' risks of not meeting program objectives . specifically , states annually provide ocs with information about the number of people receiving services and the types of services local agencies provided and categorize this information according to designated program goals , which can provide ocs with data on whether state and local agencies are performing as expected . ocs also did not systematically use information on the amount of csbg funds states have expended . ocs officials said they reviewed state single audit reports when csbg was included , but we found state csbg programs generally fell below thresholds to receive an annual required audit . ocs does not systematically collect other key information that would allow federal officials to assess risk related to states' oversight efforts and therefore cannot determine whether states are fulfilling their requirement to visit local agencies .