expenditures . economic experts and government officials suggest that palau could lower its operating expenditures , at around $67 million in 2006 , by reducing the public sector wage bill . although palau has slightly reduced its nonwage operating expenditures since 2000 , it has been less successful in reducing the wage bill . from 2000 through 2006 , palau's national government wage bill grew from 46 percent to 50 percent of its operating expenditures , with wage levels nearly twice those in the private sector . according to government officials , palau instituted a freeze on public sector employment in 2001 that has not been observed , and recent public sector reclassification efforts will result in a further increase in wage expenditures . palau's prospects for economic self - sufficiency depend in part on the growth of its economy through private sector expansion , which will require an improved business environment . palau's strategy for expanding its private sector focuses primarily on pursuing environmentally sustainable growth by promoting high - end tourism and capitalizing on growth opportunities from the new compact road . officials , experts , and private sector representatives view the tourism sector as offering the most potential for growth . for example , the imf estimates that every 2 percent increase in tourist arrivals creates a 1 percent increase in tourism - related employment and that more than a third of foreign direct investment occurs in this sector . current palau tourism strategies aim to capitalize on opportunities for high - end tourists from asia and from u.s. military bases on guam . the marine and agricultural industries together provide less than 5 percent of gdp ; however , palau is pursuing opportunities in aquaculture and considering whether foreign fishing license fees could be raised . in all cases , private sector development is dependent on sustained exploitation of palau's fragile environmental resources . however , according to palau government officials , economic experts , and private sector representatives , problems related to palau's foreign investment policies , financial systems , land ownership system , labor market , and commercial conditions create a costly business environment that discourages private sector growth . for example , palau imposes stringent requirements on foreign investment , restricting foreign investment in certain activities ; palau's financial markets do not effectively finance investment but instead supply large amounts of consumer credit ; palau's system of land ownership prevents the effective use of land for development ; available skilled labor is lacking in palau and palau government officials expressed concern about illegal importation of unskilled foreign workers ; and palau's commercial legal system is outdated , lacking laws for bankruptcy , sales , and consumer privacy protection , and the government often reportedly delays payment of vendors for several years . in 2009 , the u.s. and palau governments will formally review the terms of the compact and its related agreements . although compact direct assistance will expire that year , the provision of federal postal , weather , and aviation services may continue if the federal programs and services agreement is renewed or extended . some discretionary federal programs will also likely continue .