relationships are reevaluated annually . through these relationships , mentees get exposure to critical decisions , as well as other parts of the business . rio tinto representatives told us that the company has a formal mentoring program targeted at high - potential talent that partners people with senior leaders , including those from different departments . senior leaders at rio tinto are expected to participate in long - term career development discussions for people two levels below them . the company also provides senior executives and other lower - level managers access to external coaches who focus more on leadership than technical company matters . practice #5 — career paths that describe skills needed to advance: according to dxc technology representatives , the company has documented a program management career path that details the skills needed to be a program manager . the company annually identifies the developmental needs of employees , who can then take steps such as moving to another program to gain the required experience to address any gaps . this helps management make decisions that benefit both the individual and the company . boeing representatives told us that the company has developed a general career path for many of its career fields , including program management , and encourages people to develop the skills they need by gaining experience in different career fields and business units . boeing program managers we met with described the range of experiences they had within the company that equipped them for their roles , such as working on different kinds of aircraft and in technical and business functions . leading practices identified by us and the project management institute suggest that a combination of financial and nonfinancial incentives can be used to retain high performers . for example , leading organizations we spoke with offer student loan repayments and financing of higher education in compensation packages as financial incentives . they also provide monetary awards to recognize excellence in job performance and contributions to organizational goals . nonfinancial incentives could include senior leadership recognizing strong performance in program management and emphasizing the idea that program management is prestigious , challenging , and key to business success . examples of practices used by commercial companies we spoke with are described below . practice #6 — financial rewards for good performance: rio tinto representatives told us that the company offers incentives that are based on performance . the company includes pay raises linked to annual performance ratings , which are determined by the extent to which a program manager meets objectives including cost and schedule goals . according to boeing representatives , the company annually assesses program managers based on technical and financial performance measures and employee feedback . these assessments help determine annual salary increases and bonuses . practice #7 — education subsidies: boeing offers tuition assistance to all people after they have been at the company for at least 1 year . this can support degree programs , professional certificates , and individual courses in fields of study at over 270 colleges and universities . boeing representatives noted that this has helped foster a high degree of loyalty from people .