standard surveys . by law , every nursing home receiving medicare or medicaid payment must undergo a standard survey during which teams of state surveyors conduct a comprehensive on - site evaluation of compliance with federal quality standards . nursing homes with consistently poor performance can be selected for the special focus facility ( sff ) program , which requires more intensive oversight , including more frequent surveys . complaint investigations . nursing homes also are surveyed on an as - needed basis with investigations of consumer complaints . these complaints can be filed with state survey agencies by residents , families , ombudsmen , or others acting on a resident's behalf . during an investigation , state surveyors evaluate the nursing home's compliance with a specific federal quality standard . staffing data . nurse staffing levels are considered a key component of nursing home quality and are often measured in total nurse hours per resident day . higher nurse staffing levels are typically linked with higher quality nursing home care . clinical quality measures . nursing homes are required to provide data on certain clinical quality measures — such as the incidence of pressure ulcers — for all residents to cms . cms currently tracks data for 18 clinical quality measures . cms publicly reports a summary of each nursing home's quality data on its nursing home compare website using a five - star quality rating . the five - star quality rating system assigns each nursing home an overall rating and three component ratings — surveys ( standard and complaint ) , staffing , and quality measures — based on the extent to which the nursing home meets cms's quality standards and other measures . in contrast , nurse staffing levels increased 9 percent from 2009 to 2014 and selected quality measure scores showed decreases in the number of reported quality problems , such as falls resulting in major injury from 2011 to 2014 . in addition , we identified 416 homes in 36 states that had consistently poor performance across the four data sets we examined . of the 416 homes , 71 ( 17 percent ) were included in the special focus facility ( sff ) program at some point between 2005 and 2014 . in our october 2015 report , we found cms's ability to use available data to assess nursing home quality trends was complicated by various issues with these data , which made it difficult to determine whether observed trends reflect actual changes in quality , data issues , or both . cms has taken some actions to address these data complications , however , more work is needed . consumer complaints: the average number of consumer complaints reported per nursing home increased in the 10 years of data we examined , although it is unclear to what extent this can be attributed to a change in quality or to state variation in the recording of complaints . some state survey agency officials explained that changes in how they recorded complaints into cms's complaint tracking system could in part account for the jump in reported complaints .