dod . dod officials told us they do not require this practice because they are still in the process of fully aligning their policy with the guidelines . according to dod , it has determined that impact evaluations are impractical and inappropriate for the planned evaluations ; instead , it plans to conduct only performance evaluations and provide justifications for not conducting impact evaluations , as required by the omb guidelines . dod plans to address the evaluation methodology of pilot programs in future updates , according to officials . however , dod has no specific timelines in place for these updates . hhs . pepfar's m&e documents indicate that pepfar teams are encouraged but not required to evaluate all current pilot programs to see which should be taken to scale for specific populations . officials from hhs and the office of the u.s . global aids coordinator noted that they conduct their own evaluation of pilot programs and use routine program data to inform scaling of programs . however , pepfar policies do not specifically require that such evaluations be like the impact evaluations described in the guidelines . usda . fas's m&e documents indicate that when selecting projects to undergo impact evaluation the agency will consider pilot projects . usda officials told us they have no requirement to conduct impact evaluations on all pilot projects because impact evaluations may be cost prohibitive and project lifecycles are short ( i.e. , 3 to 5 years ) . officials further noted that implementing partners can conduct an impact evaluation on pilot programs , but are not required to do so . although the guideline requirement indicates that agencies can forgo impact evaluations , they must provide a justification in their m&e policy . usda officials have not provided such a justification provided in their m&e policy . establish agencies' roles and responsibilities for evaluation activities when funds are transferred . dod did not include the guideline requirement for agencies to define roles and responsibilities when there are funding transfers between or among u.s. government agencies to ensure accountability for evaluation activities . without defined roles and responsibilities , agencies risk losing accountability over funding and evaluation activities . in addition , they could miss opportunities to collaborate and leverage interagency efforts to facilitate decision - making and address barriers across agency boundaries . evaluate all programs at least once whose dollar value equals or exceeds that of a median sized program within the agency . dod did not include the guideline requirement for agencies to evaluate all programs , at least once during their existence , whose dollar value equals or exceeds that of a median sized program in the agency . without a mechanism to evaluate all these types of programs , agencies risk continuing inefficient , mismanaged , or costly projects . dod officials told us they do not currently require these practices because they are still in the process of fully aligning their policy with the guidelines . they noted that they expect to update the policy to include these requirements , but they have no specific timelines in place .