avoid it . report it.” information campaign alerts homeowners to the availability of free housing counselors who can help with foreclosure issues and provide information on avoiding foreclosure schemes . according to hud , the information campaign merges the efforts of neighborworks , the lawyers' committee , and the homeowner's hope hotline to provide an “early warning system” that helps homeowners protect themselves and their homes , while also providing the tools necessary to report schemes to enforcement authorities . hud targets its information campaign to areas with the highest rates of foreclosure using multiple kinds of outreach . one official told us that in 2011 , the hud campaign delivered information on schemes via television , radio , and print advertisements to the areas affected by high rates of foreclosure . in 2012 , hud shifted its outreach to these areas to digital and radio - based mediums . according to the mfwg strategic scorecard , the mortgage fraud prevention and victim assistance sections of the stopfraud.gov website received over 15,000 hits during fiscal year 2012 . the mortgage fraud and victim assistance sections contain links to foreclosure rescue scheme resources and educational materials created by other federal agencies , such as ftc , sigtarp , and nonprofit organizations such as neighborworks . for example , the mortgage fraud webpage links to sigtarp , cfpb , and treasury's joint alerts titled “tips for avoiding mortgage modification scams” and "avoiding hamp mortgage modification scams ; resources for servicemembers," and directs individuals to the websites of other agencies and nonprofit organizations , such as neighborworks , loanscamalert.org , and the mortgage bankers association consumer help desk . sigtarp officials told us that promoting stopfraud.gov and the associated foreclosure rescue scheme resources allows individuals to better protect themselves from victimization . according to ffetf's first year report , ffetf has also partnered with lmspn members , fannie mae , freddie mac , the lawyers' committee , and neighborworks to support preventloanscams.org , which supports national , state , and local law enforcement efforts to fight mortgage fraud . the website provides tips on how to avoid schemes , information on how to obtain assistance through free housing counseling , and an accessible complaint form that can be filled out online and then entered into the lmspn complaint database . most individual members of mfwg with whom we spoke had also developed web pages that provided information on foreclosure rescue schemes or directed consumers to the lawyers' committee and neighborworks websites on foreclosure rescue schemes . six of the seven mfwg member agencies we spoke with had specific information on foreclosure rescue schemes on their websites , including descriptions of schemes and information on how to submit a complaint . in addition , several agency and nonprofit organizations' websites emphasize that borrowers do not need to pay for loan modification assistance . six of the seven mfwg member agencies we interviewed posted information on their websites about the free assistance that is available to borrowers who are at risk of foreclosure . mfwg member agencies have continued to collect data on foreclosure rescue schemes in order to support efforts to detect and combat them .