( read list . the society stated that it supports the bcrs . american philatelic society officials stated that they had been surprised at stamp collectors' acceptance of the bcrs in particular , and semipostals in general . as we reported in 2000 , the society was opposed to semipostals and believed they were a tax on the hobby of stamp collecting . over time , however , the society has come to believe that the bcrs' strong sales indicate that semipostals are now widely accepted , making them effective fund - raisers . enter one only ) 4 very appropriate 3 somewhat appropriate 2 somewhat inappropriate 1 very inappropriate 5 ( do not read ) would depend on cause / purpose d ( do not read ) don't know / no opinion r ( do not read ) refused ( if q 3 = somewhat inappropriate or very inappropriate , continue ; else skip to q 5 ) . as of april 2003 , the national cancer institute ( nci ) reported that it had funded 86 breast cancer research awards using money transferred to nih by the postal service from the bcrs' surcharge revenue . the awards totaled about $9.5 million and covered research areas that included prevention , nutrition , biology , diagnosis , treatment , prognosis , metastasis , tumorigenesis , and mutagenesis . discounting a single , one - time supplement for $4,300 , individual awards ranged from $47,250 to $142,500 and averaged $111,395 . thirty - two of the 86 awards were noncompetitive continuations of previous bcrs funded awards . according to nih officials , they were in the process of awarding the remaining funds that had been transferred to nih for breast cancer research . table 4 identifies pertinent information about each award , including the amount of the award , research area , principal investigator , sponsoring institution , and the fiscal year of the award . as of april 2003 , the u.s. army medical research and materiel command reported that it had funded 19 breast cancer research awards using money transferred to dod by the postal service from the bcrs' surcharge revenue . the awards totaled about $6.8 million and covered research areas that included genetics , imaging , biology , epidemiology , immunology , and therapy . individual awards ranged from $5,000 to $578,183 and averaged $356,478 . according to dod officials , about $256,000 of the transferred funds had been used for management expenses , and dod was in the process of awarding the remaining funds . table 5 identifies pertinent information about each award , including the amount of the award , research area , principal investigator , sponsoring institution , and the fiscal year of the award . alan n. belkin , kathleen a. gilhooly , kenneth e. john , stuart m. kaufman , roger l. lively , jill p. sayre , and charles f. wicker made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .