resurvey areas . areas that noaa identified as requiring recurring surveys because of changes to seafloors , use by vessel traffic , or other reasons . priority 1-5 areas . areas that do not fall into any of the three categories above are subdivided into five priority areas based on the date of the most recent survey and the level of usage by vessels . until 2012 , according to noaa's standard operating procedure , noaa used the results of its approach for identifying areas most in need of surveying to publish annual hydrographic survey prioritization reports — a component of the overall hydrographic surveying plan . however , noaa officials said they found this approach increasingly outdated because it did not reflect changing ocean and shipping conditions or take advantage of available technology . these officials said they are in the process of developing a new methodology ( described later in this report ) to help identify areas that need surveys . according to noaa officials , they have continued to update computerized mapping files and reports related to hydrographic survey priorities since 2012 but have not published new hydrographic survey prioritization reports . however , these officials said they will provide information to the public upon request . according to noaa's standard operating procedure and noaa officials , once noaa identifies its highest priority areas , the agency compares its priorities to those identified by external stakeholders through noaa's navigation managers and its integrated ocean and coastal mapping program . noaa officials said this input helps them understand potential economic and safety issues , among other things , that may affect hydrographic survey priorities . noaa officials said they look to find areas of intersection between areas identified through the noaa hydrographic survey priorities process and those compiled by noaa's navigation managers and external stakeholders . noaa's standard operating procedure states that when determining which areas to survey , noaa generally gives precedence to survey areas identified through the noaa hydrographic survey priorities process , but stakeholder input may shape survey priorities in unusual cases , such as when hurricane - related requests indicate the need for an immediate resurvey . according to noaa's standard operating procedure and noaa officials , noaa estimates the amount of funds it expects to be available to conduct surveys and develops a preliminary survey plan that seeks to maximize in - house and contractor resources . once funds are appropriated , noaa modifies its preliminary plan to reflect the amounts available for noaa fleet operations and survey contracting . noaa also evaluates survey requirements and in - house and contractor ship availability and capability . as noaa obligates funds for in - house surveys and for contracts , it refines and finalizes the actual amount of surveying to be conducted by both in - house and contractor hydrographers . according to noaa's standard operating procedure and noaa officials , based on an evaluation of the identified hydrographic survey needs , available funding , and vessel availability and capability , noaa develops a hydrographic surveying plan for the coming year . noaa evaluates the mix of available noaa and private sector vessels to meet the highest - ranked survey needs with available funding .