these shortcomings are discussed in more detail in the following section . a key element of an effective information security program is to develop , document , and implement risk - based policies , procedures , and technical standards that govern the security over an agency's computing environment . information security policy is essential to establishing roles , responsibilities , and requirements necessary for implementing an information security program . the supporting procedures provide the information and guidance on implementing the policies . according to nist sp 800-53 , revision 4 , organizations should develop and document procedures to facilitate the implementation of access and configuration management policies and associated controls . although fdic developed and documented many information security policies and procedures that were consistent with the nist risk management framework , its procedure for granting users access to a key financial application did not include responsibilities and steps for ensuring that the level of access provided had been approved by the users' supervisor . as a result , the official granting access to the application — who had institutional knowledge of the privileges that the users would need — granted additional privileges to some users for which they had not been previously approved . until it updates its procedure to include these responsibilities and steps , fdic will continue to face increased risk that users may be granted access to privileges in the application for which they have not been approved . a key element of an information security program is to test and evaluate policies , procedures , and controls to determine whether they are effective and operating as intended . security control testing should include management , operational , and technical controls for every system identified in the agency's required inventory of major systems . although control tests and evaluations may encourage compliance with security policies , the full benefits are not achieved unless the results are used to improve security . fisma requires that the frequency of tests and evaluations of management , operational , and technical controls be based on risks and occur no less than annually . the office of management and budget ( omb ) directs agencies to meet their fisma - required controls testing by drawing on security control assessment results that include , but are not limited to , continuous monitoring activities . according to nist sp 800-53 , revision 4 , continuous monitoring programs facilitate ongoing awareness of threats , vulnerabilities , and information security to support organizational risk management decisions . nist also recommends that organizations monitor security control compliance by external service providers on an ongoing basis . fdic developed a continuous control assessment methodology that defined the controls tested for each information system and the frequency that each control is to be tested . in addition , the corporation tested the effectiveness of the security controls for the three general support systems we reviewed in accordance with the methodology . however , the fdic oig has previously reported weaknesses in fdic's assessments of its outsourced service providers . specifically , in october 2015 , it reported that the corporation had not always ensured that security assessments of outsourced service providers were completed in a timely manner .