regulatory flexibility programs . gao / hrd - 94-51r . washington , d.c.: november 3 , 1993 . ( see app . ii for agency comments. ) washington , d.c.: april 29 , 1994 . education generally agreed with what we presented in the draft report and with the thrust of the recommendation that it better target information to states and districts in the best position to apply for additional flexibility . education noted its continued commitment to better targeting information to states and school districts and stated that it would continue its efforts to refine strategies for informing potential applicants about the new flexibility authorities and their benefits . education also said that once state accountability plans are approved , the timing of flexibility competitions should no longer be an issue . in its comments , education pointed out that “burdens” cited by potential applicants as a reason for not applying were created by statutory , not administrative , requirements . in our report we did not attempt to trace the source of the perceived burdens to either statutory or administrative provisions . rather , we attempted to portray state and school district officials' views on the reasons why they chose not to apply . education officials also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of education and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions or wish to discuss this material further , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 or harriet ganson on ( 202 ) 512-7042 . other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . to identify factors that influenced officials' decisions to apply or not to apply for the programs , we contacted officials from the 1 state and 3 school districts that applied for the programs , all the states and school districts that expressed intent to apply for the programs but did not apply , and a selection of those that neither expressed intent to apply nor applied for the programs . for those that did not express intent to apply we selected 11 states and 26 districts . the 11 states were selected from the census geographic regions , divided into large and small states in terms of total student enrollment . we selected the 26 districts from across the country to include large and small districts — in terms of student enrollment — located in urban and suburban areas and small districts located rural areas . ( see table 3. ) for those that did not apply , we were able to contact and conducted structured interviews with officials from 12 states and 8 school districts that signaled their intent to apply and officials from 9 states and 26 school districts that did not signal their intent to apply . for applicants , we reviewed copies of the four applications submitted for the programs and conducted site visits to two applicants — florida and seattle .