some of its actions have been controversial . although some industry officials have expressed concern that these changes could introduce undue subjectivity to nrc's oversight , given the difficulty in measuring these often intangible and complex concepts , other stakeholders believe this approach will provide nrc better tools to address safety culture issues at plants . nrc officials acknowledge that this effort is only a step in an incremental approach and that continual monitoring , improvements , and oversight will be needed to fully detect deteriorating safety conditions before an event occurs . nrc is devoting considerable effort to overseeing the safe operation of the nation's commercial nuclear power plants , and its process for doing so appears logical and well - structured . this does not mean that nrc's oversight is perfect . however , nrc is also demonstrating that it is aware of this fact and is willing to make changes to improve . its efforts to continuously obtain feedback and consider the need for improvement to the rop are important as nuclear power plants age and the nation considers building new plants . in this regard , its safety culture initiative may be its most important improvement to the rop . as we complete our work , we will be examining whether nrc needs a more formal mechanism to assess the effectiveness of this initiative , including incorporating stakeholder feedback and developing specific measures to assess its performance . it has been more than 4 years since davis - besse , and it appears that nrc is now taking concrete actions to begin incorporating safety culture into the rop . i would also like to point out that the rop is a very open process in that nrc provides the public and its other stakeholders with considerable specific and detailed information on its activities and findings with regard to safety at individual plants . however , to ensure or foster even greater public confidence in safety oversight , as we complete our work , we will be examining whether nrc can make this information more meaningful by providing industry - wide or summary data for key components of its oversight process . this information may provide a useful measure of overall industry performance and allow for comparisons between the safety performance of a specific plant to that of the industry as a whole . nrc is an independent agency of over 3,200 employees established by the energy reorganization act of 1974 to regulate civilian — that is , commercial , industrial , academic , and medical — use of nuclear materials . nrc is headed by a five - member commission . the president appoints the commission members , who are confirmed by the senate , and designates one of them to serve as chairman and official spokesperson . the commission as a whole formulates policies and regulations governing nuclear reactor and materials safety , issues orders to licensees , and adjudicates legal matters brought before it . nrc and the licensees of nuclear power plants share the responsibility for ensuring that commercial nuclear power reactors are operated safely . nrc is responsible for issuing regulations , licensing and inspecting plants , and requiring action , as necessary , to protect public health and safety .