relatively few students were expelled . a large majority of special education students who received an expulsion were provided educational services after the expulsion , consistent with idea requirements that schools continue to provide services to students with disabilities who are expelled . about one - half of regular education students received education services after expulsion . our analysis of the suspension data indicates little difference between the two student categories in terms of the length of suspensions received ( see table 4 ) . about two - thirds of each category of suspended students were suspended for a short period ( 1 to 3 days ) rather than a long period ( 4 or more days ) . what is the role that idea plays in schools' ability to properly discipline students with disabilities who engage in serious misconduct ? although the idea amendments of 1997 required that education collect limited data on certain disciplinary actions for special education students , at the time we did our work this effort had not progressed sufficiently to provide us with any usable data . because of this limitation , we surveyed a nationally representative sample of about 465 public middle and high school principals about discipline of special education as well as regular education students . we did not survey elementary schools because data from department of education and department of justice reports showed that elementary schools were much less likely than either middle or high schools to experience or report any type of serious misconduct . all data from our survey are self - reported , and we did not independently verify their accuracy . we had a response rate of 60 percent for our survey . this response rate is too low to permit us to produce estimates that are nationally representative . nevertheless , the size and geographic location of the 272 responding schools were generally similar to the schools in our sample , and we believe the survey data provide information not available from any other source about idea's impact on school discipline . we also conducted site visits and interviews with principals in louisiana , new york , and wisconsin to help develop our survey instruments and gain a broader perspective on the idea implementation in a variety of settings and in locations where idea and discipline issues were reported to be of significant concern . finally , we reviewed the few available studies on idea and school discipline issues . we incorporated , where appropriate , the results of those studies into the design of our review and the conclusions contained in this report . we conducted our work between january 2000 and december 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i explains our methodology in more detail . idea is the primary federal law addressing the unique educational needs of children with disabilities . millions of youths with disabilities aged 3 through 21 receive educational services under idea each year .