we found the data to be reliable for our purposes . we also reviewed and compared ncic and namus operating manuals and data entry guides to determine the comparability of minimum data requirements for record entry , individual data elements in each system , and their definitions . our review of these documents allowed us to identify details about the purpose and design of each system that may support or preclude data sharing . in addition , we reviewed past and current cjis and nij plans related to sharing information between ncic and namus . we reviewed laws , policies , and information associated with reporting and sharing information on missing and unidentified persons , to include information about the types of users that can access or enter information into each system within three categories: ( 1 ) lea , ( 2 ) non - lea criminal justice agency ( cja ) — such as a court ; and ( 3 ) medicolegal investigator — such as a coroner . to what extent do opportunities exist to improve the use of missing and unidentified persons information contained in ncic and namus ? to describe the access to and use of missing and unidentified persons information contained in ncic and namus , we reviewed and compared ncic and namus operating and policy manuals and data entry guides . in addition , we observed access to and use of missing and unidentified persons information in namus . to corroborate information above , we conducted interviews with officials who access and use ncic and namus , including state criminal justice agencies , state and local law enforcement agencies ( lea ) , medical examiners , and coroners . for example , for a city - wide lea such as the new york city police department , ncic assigns originating agency identifiers ( ori ) numbers to each office within that particular agency , as the ori number is used to indicate the lea office directly responsible for a given ncic record entry . to determine the extent to which opportunities exist to improve the use of missing and unidentified persons information using ncic and namus , we analyzed summary level case data by state for each system for fiscal year 2015 . because of statutory limitations on access to criminal justice information contained in ncic we did not assess record level case data from either ncic or namus . however , we compared ncic summary level data to namus summary level data , and found it sufficient for demonstrating the extent to which information contained in the two systems is similar or different . we assessed the reliability of the data contained in ncic and namus by , among other things , reviewing database operating manuals and quality assurance protocols , and by interviewing officials responsible for managing the systems . we assessed this information against standards for internal control in the federal government and gao's evaluation and management guide for fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . ncic and namus assign user access differently , with ncic assigning access at the agency level , while namus provides access directly to individuals .