tes . treasury is currently examining strategies for homeownership preservation , including maximizing loan modifications , in light of a refocus in its use of tarp funds . treasury's initial focus in implementing tarp was to stabilize the financial markets and stimulate lending to businesses and consumers by purchasing troubled mortgage - related assets — securities and whole loans — from financial institutions . treasury planned to use its leverage as a major purchaser of troubled mortgages to work with servicers and achieve more aggressive mortgage modification standards . however , treasury subsequently concluded that purchasing troubled assets would take time to implement and would not be sufficient given the severity of the problem . instead , treasury determined that the most timely , effective way to improve credit market conditions was to strengthen bank balance sheets quickly through direct purchases of equit in banks . y the standard agreement between treasury and the participating institutions in the cpp includes a number of provisions , some in the “recitals” section at the beginning of the agreement and other detailed terms in the body of the agreement . the recitals refer to the participating institutions' future actions in general terms — for example , “the company agrees to work diligently , under existing programs to modify the terms of residential mortgages as appropriate to strengthen the health of the u.s. housing market.” treasury and the regulators have publicly stated that they expect these institutions to use the funds in a manner consistent with the goals of the program , which include both the expansion of the flow of credit and the modification of the terms of residential mortgages . but , to date it remains unclear how ofs and the regulators will monitor how participating institutions are using the capital injections to advance the purposes of the act . the standard agreement between treasury and the participating institutions does not require that these institutions track or report how they use or plan to use their capital investments . in our first 60-day report to congress on tarp , mandated by the emergency economic stabilization act , we recommended that treasury , among other things , work with the bank regulators to establish a systematic means for determining and reporting on whether financial institutions' activities are generally consistent with the purposes of cpp . without purchasing troubled mortgage assets as an avenue for preserving homeownership , treasury is considering other ways to meet this objective . treasury has established and appointed an interim chief for the office of the chief of homeownership preservation under ofs . according to treasury officials , the office is currently staffed with federal government detailees and is in the process of hiring individuals with expertise in housing policy , community development and economic research . treasury has stated that it is working with other federal agencies , including fdic , hud , and fhfa to explore options to help homeowners under tarp .