a description of each category is below . the office of the deputy chief management officer ( dcmo ) directed the fourth estate organizations to identify areas for savings in their service contracts — generally contracts related to a specific task rather than to a specific product — as part of a series of service requirement review boards . the organizations examined the risk posed to their ability to meet their missions with a 10-percent reduction to service contracts , and then the organizations identified contracts where they could reduce costs . the organizations presented their recommendations for cuts to a senior review panel composed of the dcmo , the principal deputy under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and principal staff assistants . dod officials stated that the senior review panel either approved the proposed cuts or directed alternative reductions . officials stated that the dcmo was tracking service requirement review boards cost savings achieved in fiscal year 2017 , and that the department was conducting another iteration of reviews in which organizations would be required to review additional service contract funding . dod documentation related to service requirement review boards and dod's associated cost savings estimate includes standardized presentations the organizations presented to the senior review panel . the presentations include reduction targets , risk assessments , timelines , and the specific items to be reduced or eliminated . dod documentation also includes a summary of dcmo - directed reductions for the organizations for fiscal years 2018 through 2022 . dod previously reported to us that service requirement review boards would aid in the management and oversight of services' acquisitions . dod also stated that beginning in fiscal year 2016 the department will use service requirement review boards to evaluate proposed contract services within the defense agencies and the senior staffs . according to dod officials , the dcmo and the dod chief information officer identified six information technology optimization initiatives: 1 . military integrated personnel and pay system — according to dod officials , this initiative combines the military departments' personnel and pay systems to achieve savings from using fewer resources , simplifying financial reporting , and having more timely and accurate payroll services . officials stated that the system will leverage commercially available human resource systems . dcmo officials also stated that the system will achieve cost savings beginning in fiscal year 2019 when the current payroll and benefit systems are retired . defense travel modernization — according to dod officials , as part of the initiative to reform travel and modernize dod's travel system , the department is increasing the use of less expensive , non - refundable tickets for select commercial air travel , rather than purchasing the more expensive , fully - refundable tickets . according to dod officials , in certain markets the cost savings achieved with these less expensive fares more than offset the potential fees incurred when travelers make changes to their itineraries , and as a result they expect to achieve cost savings . dcmo officials stated that facilitating the use of these fares requires changes to dod travel software and to the joint travel regulations and that dod will achieve defense travel modernization cost savings beginning in fiscal year 2017 .