, the operator forfeited its assurance ) . state regulatory authority officials in wyoming said they review financial assurance amounts annually , and in 2017 they reduced the financial assurance for one mine by almost $35 million because of a substantial decline in fuel costs and the mine's ability to share the cost of needed reclamation equipment with a neighboring mine . smcra requires osmre to make an average of at least one complete inspection per calendar quarter and one partial inspection per month for each active permit for which it is the regulatory authority to ensure that mines are in compliance with smcra and federal regulations . complete inspections cover all inspection elements in osmre's directive , while partial inspections may instead focus on issues that most frequently result in violations or a specific topic identified for oversight , according to osmre officials . in addition , osmre's directive instructs the agency to inspect a sample of mines annually in states that have primacy to monitor and evaluate approved state programs' compliance with smcra . the total number of inspections osmre is directed to conduct in primacy states is based on the number of inspectable units in each state . complete inspections are to be done on 33 percent of those sites selected for inspection . overall , osmre completed more inspections in primacy states than directed each year for evaluation years 2013 through 2016 , according to agency data . for example , in evaluation year 2016 , osmre's directive called for it to conduct 1,225 inspections and osmre completed 1,388 . as part of a complete inspection , osmre confirms that the operator is following the mining and reclamation plans to assure that the amount of financial assurance in place is adequate , according to osmre officials . smcra requires a mine operator to obtain a permit before starting to mine . the permit process requires operators to submit plans describing the extent of proposed mining operations and how and on what timeline the mine sites will be reclaimed . in general , an operator must reclaim the land to a use it was capable of supporting before mining or to an alternative postmining land use that osmre or the state regulatory authority deems higher or better than the premining land use . in reclaiming the mine site , operators must comply with regulatory standards that govern , among other things , how the reclaimed area is regraded , replanting of the site , and the quality of water flowing from the site . specifically: operators are generally required to return mine sites to their approximate original contour unless the operator receives a variance from the regulatory authority . we included those challenges that were identified by at least 4 of the 13 parties we interviewed . not all parties we interviewed commented on every challenge identified . we conducted this performance audit from january 2017 to march 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .