we do not agree . our report acknowledges that the results of environmental monitoring at small - scale open ocean facilities have found modest impacts . however , as larger facilities begin operating , their impacts could become more pronounced . given that such facilities do not yet exist , it is too early to know what their impacts will be . noaa said that our report did not adequately discuss offshore shellfish aquaculture . we believe that it did . most of the policy issues raised in the report apply equally to shellfish and fish aquaculture . in those cases where the issues differ for shellfish and fish aquaculture , we discussed them separately . noaa also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate . noaa's comments and our detailed responses are presented in appendix iii . epa provided clarifying language regarding their expertise in regulating water quality related to offshore aquaculture , which we incorporated as appropriate . epa's comments are presented in appendix iv . the department of agriculture provided two comments on the report . first , usda mentioned two issues that it did not think were adequately addressed in the report . usda said that a mechanism for a coordinated federal - wide research framework exists through the joint subcommittee on aquaculture . our report acknowledges that usda chairs the interagency joint subcommittee on aquaculture and that the subcommittee is currently working to update the federal strategic plan for aquaculture research . usda also said that it has a wide diversity of aquaculture research that is not limited or directed by whether the fish will be raised in fresh , brackish , or salt water . characterizing all of usda's aquaculture - related research activities was not within the scope of our report . rather , our report is focused on offshore marine aquaculture . as such , we reported what stakeholders told us regarding research related to offshore marine aquaculture . second , usda explained that it did not feel that it was appropriate to respond to our questionnaire on offshore aquaculture because it asked for individual opinions related to policy matters . usda's comments and our detailed responses are presented in appendix v. the department of the army did not have any comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of the army , agriculture , and commerce ; the administrator of the epa ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or mittala@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and of public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . the objective of this report was to identify key issues that should be addressed in the development of an effective regulatory framework for u.s. offshore aquaculture .