what other regulatory alternatives exist ? as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the senate committee on banking , housing and urban affairs ; the house committee on financial services ; the secretary of housing and urban development ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . the report will also be available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the contact named above , lawrence cluff , assistant director ; tania calhoun , emily chalmers , nina horowitz , marc molino , donald porteous , melvin thomas , and patrick ward made key contributions to this report . what could state and federal regulators do to improve coordination ? federal and state investigators have identified two primary types of potentially illegal activities associated with the sale of title insurance . the first involves providing home - builders , real estate agents , real estate brokers , and lenders with potentially unlawful referral fees through captive reinsurer agreements , allegedly inappropriate or fraudulent business arrangements , and free or discounted business services and other items of value . the second involves potential fraud committed by title agents who allegedly misappropriate or mishandle customers' premiums . industry representatives told us that title insurers have begun to address these problems but that clearer regulations and more enforcement are needed . in several states , state insurance regulators identified captive reinsurance arrangements that they alleged were being used by title insurers and agents to inappropriately compensate others — such as builders or lenders — for referrals . in such arrangements , a home - builder , real estate broker , lender , title insurance company , or some combination of these entities forms a reinsurance company that works in conjunction with a title insurer . the title insurer agrees to “reinsure” all or part of its business with the reinsurer by paying the company a portion of the premium ( and ostensibly transferring a portion of the risk ) for each title transaction . investigators alleged that these reinsurance companies did not actually provide reinsurance services in return for this compensation because the amount the reinsurers received exceeded the risk they assumed . the investigators considered these arrangements a way to pay for referrals , a practice that is unlawful under some state anti - kickback and anti - rebating laws as well as under respa . in one investigation , a reinsurer controlled by three title insurance underwriters entered into agreements with lenders , real estate brokerages , and builders to pay part of its premiums to these entities .