cdc had implemented physical security controls . the agency had implemented physical security measures to control access to certain areas and to ensure the safety and security of its employees , contractors , and visitors to cdc facilities . for example , cdc had issued piv cards and cardkey proximity cards to its employees and contractors , and had limited physical access to restricted areas based on the permissions it granted via these cards . however , the agency had not consistently reviewed authorized access lists . in this regard , cdc did not have a process in place for periodically reviewing the lists of individuals with access to rooms containing sensitive resources to ensure that such access remained appropriate . without reviewing authorized access lists , cdc has reduced assurance that individual access to its computing resources and sensitive information is appropriate . nist sp 800-53 states that agencies should encrypt passwords both while stored and transmitted , and configure information systems to establish a trusted communication path between the user and the system . additionally , nist requires that , when agencies use encryption , they use an encryption algorithm that complies with fips 140-2 . the agency also had reviewed and updated the plans annually . however , cdc had not developed security plans for the facilities housing resources for the selected systems . physical security officials stated that they had not developed security plans because they did not have a sufficient number of staff to develop them . without comprehensive security plans for the facilities , cdc's information and systems would be at an increased risk that controls to address emergency situations would not be in place and personnel at the facilities would not be aware of their roles and responsibilities for implementing sound security practices to protect systems housed at these cdc locations . in addition , cdc had not identified at least 30 other staff with significant security responsibilities who required role - based training . specifically , none of the 18 security and database administrators for four selected systems were included among the individuals being tracked , although these administrators had significant security responsibilities . further , the agency provided us with a list of 42 individuals whose job series indicated that they required role - based training . however , 12 of the 42 were not included among the tracked individuals . furthermore , given the number of deficiencies identified and the rapidly evolving nature of cyber threats , cdc's requirement that staff take role - based training only once every 3 years is not sufficient for individuals with significant cybersecurity responsibilities . according to ocio officials , managers are responsible for identifying those individuals with significant security responsibilities . the process used to track training was manual and required an individual's manager to specify training requirements . the officials noted that the agency plans to implement a new hhs annual role - based training requirement in fiscal year 2018 and that they intend to work to enhance oversight as the new requirement is implemented .