al . indiana drug courts: monroe county drug treatment court process , outcome and cost evaluation - final report . portland , or: npc research , 2007 . carey , shannon m. , michael finigan , dave crumpton , and mark s. waller . “california drug courts: outcomes , costs and promising practices: an overview of phase ii in a statewide study.” journal of psychoactive drugs ( november 2006 ) . logan , t. k. , william h. hoyt , kathryn e. mccollister , michael t. french , carl leukefeld , and lisa minton . “economic evaluation of drug court: methodology , results , and policy implications.” evaluation and program planning , 27 ( 2004 ) :381 – 396 . loman , anthony l. a cost - benefit analysis of the st. louis city adult felony drug court . institute of applied research . st. louis , mo: 2004 . lowenkamp , christopher t. , alexander m. holsinger , edward j. latessa . “are drug courts effective: a meta - analytic review.” journal of community corrections . ( fall 2005 ) : 5-28 . mackin , juliette r. , shannon m. carey , and michael w. finigan . harford county district court adult drug court: outcome and cost evaluation . portland , or: npc research , 2008 . mackin , juliette r. , shannon m. carey , and michael w. finigan . prince george's county circuit court adult drug court: outcome and cost evaluation . ( 3 ) are drug courts especially effective or less effective for certain categories of offenders or program characteristics ? ( 4 ) which drug court policies and offender perceptions explain their overall impact ? the madce's major findings can be summarized as follows:  drug courts produce statistically significant reductions in self - reported crime . while both the drug court participants and comparison group participants reported large numbers of crimes in the year preceding the 18-month follow - up , drug court participants reported statistically significantly fewer than the comparison group members . drug court participants were less likely than members of the comparison group to report committing any crimes ( 40 percent vs. 53 percent ) and drug court participants reported committing fewer crimes in the preceding 12 months than comparison group members ( 43 criminal acts vs. 88 criminal acts ) . the difference between the two groups in the probability of an official re - arrest over 24 months was not statistically significant , though the percentage of individuals rearrested was lower for the drug court group than the comparison group ( 52 percent vs. 62 percent ) , as was the average number of re - arrests ( 1.24 vs. 1.64 ) .  drug courts produce statistically significant reductions in drug use . drug court participants were less likely than members of the comparison group to report using any drugs ( 56 percent vs. 76 percent ) and any serious drugs ( 41 percent vs. 58 percent ) , and less likely to test positively for drugs at the 18-month follow - up ( 29 percent vs. 46 percent ) .