dhs concurred with these recommendations . further , to respond to the threat posed by airport workers , the explanatory statement accompanying the dhs appropriations act , 2008 , directed tsa to use $15 million of its appropriation to conduct a pilot program at seven airports to help identify the potential costs and benefits of 100 percent worker screening and other worker screening methods . in july 2009 tsa issued a final report on the results and concluded that random screening is a more cost - effective approach because it appears “roughly” as effective in identifying contraband items at less cost than 100 percent worker screening . however , the report also identified limitations in the design and evaluation of the program and in the estimation of costs . given the significance of these limitations , we reported in september 2009 that it is unclear whether random worker screening is more or less cost - effective than 100 percent worker screening . in addition , tsa did not document key aspects of the pilot's design , methodology , and evaluation , such as a data analysis plan , limiting the usefulness of these efforts . to address this , we recommended that tsa ensure that future airport security pilot program evaluation efforts include a well - developed and well - documented evaluation plan , to which dhs concurred . moreover , although tsa has taken steps to develop biometric worker credentialing , it is unclear to what extent tsa plans to address statutory requirements regarding biometric technology , such as developing or requiring biometric access controls at airports , establishing comprehensive standards , and determining the best way to incorporate these decisions into airports' existing systems . to address this issue , we have recommended that tsa develop milestones for meeting statutory requirements for , among other things , performance standards for biometric airport access control systems . dhs concurred with this recommendation . finally , tsa's efforts to enhance the security of the nation's airports have not been guided by a national strategy that identifies key elements , such as goals , priorities , performance measures , and required resources . to better ensure that airport stakeholders take a unified approach to airport security , we recommended that tsa develop a national strategy that incorporates key characteristics of effective security strategies , such as measurable goals and priorities , to which dhs concurred . federal law and policy establish dhs as the focal point for efforts to protect our nation's computer - reliant critical infrastructures . since 2005 , we have reported that dhs has not yet fully satisfied its key responsibilities for protecting these critical infrastructures and have made recommendations for dhs to address in key cyberscurity areas , to include the five key areas shown in table 1 . dhs has since developed and implemented certain capabilities to satisfy aspects of its responsibilities , but the department has not fully implemented our recommendations and , thus , further action needs to be taken to address these areas . for example , in july 2008 , we reported that dhs's united states computer emergency readiness team did not fully address 15 key attributes of cyber analysis and warning capabilities related to four key areas .