( see fig . according to u.s. census bureau data for 2000 , the most recent census data available , about 56 percent of the cnmi population of 69,221 were not u.s. citizens . according to u.s. census bureau data for 2000 , the median household income in cnmi was $22,898 , a little more than half of the u.s. median household income of almost $42,000 for 2000 . the percentage of individuals in poverty in 2000 was 46 percent , nearly four times the continental u.s. rate of 12 percent in that same year . cnmi's economy depends on two industries , garment manufacturing and tourism , for its employment , production , and exports . these two industries rely heavily on a noncitizen workforce . in addition , oia provides general technical assistance funds for training and other direct assistance , such as grants , to help the insular area governments comply with the act and to improve their financial management systems and environments . the graduate school of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has been working with oia for over a decade through its pacific islands and virgin islands training initiatives ( piti and viti ) to provide training and technical assistance . oia staff members make site visits to cnmi as part of its oversight activities . in our december 2006 report , we recommended that oia develop a standardized framework for its site visits to improve the effectiveness of its monitoring . however , some of the issues continued to exist in 2004 and 2005 . the auditors identified the following issues in fiscal year 2005 that resulted in the most recent qualified audit opinion: ( 1 ) inadequacies in the accounting records regarding taxes receivable , advances , accounts payable , tax rebates payable , other liabilities and accruals , and the reserve for continuing appropriations , ( 2 ) inadequacies in accounting records and internal controls regarding the capital assets of the northern marianas college , and ( 3 ) the lack of audited financial statements for the commonwealth utilities corporation , which represents a significant component unit of cnmi . auditors for cnmi also rendered qualified opinions on cnmi's compliance with the requirements for major federal award programs from 1997 through 2005 . in fiscal year 2005 , the auditors cited noncompliance in the areas of allowable costs , cash management , eligibility , property management , procurement , and other requirements . cnmi has long - standing and significant internal control weaknesses over financial reporting and compliance with requirements for federal grants . table 3 shows the number of material weaknesses and reportable conditions for cnmi for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 . the large number and the significance of reported internal control weaknesses raise serious questions about the integrity and reliability of cnmi's financial statements and its compliance with requirements of major federal programs . furthermore , the lack of reliable financial information hampers cnmi's ability to monitor programs and financial information such as revenues and expenses and to make timely , informed decisions .