respond to cyber threats and attacks . our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify key attributes of cyber analysis and our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify key attributes of cyber analysis and warning capabilities , ( 2 ) compare these attributes with us - cert's current warning capabilities , ( 2 ) compare these attributes with us - cert's current analysis and warning capabilities to identify whether there are gaps , and analysis and warning capabilities to identify whether there are gaps , and ( 3 ) identify us - cert's challenges to developing and implementing key ( 3 ) identify us - cert's challenges to developing and implementing key attributes and a successful national cyber analysis and warning capability . attributes and a successful national cyber analysis and warning capability . to identify key attributes , we identified and analyzed relevant laws , to identify key attributes , we identified and analyzed relevant laws , strategies , policies , reports , and studies ; observed cyber analysis and strategies , policies , reports , and studies ; observed cyber analysis and warning operations at numerous entities ; and interviewed responsible warning operations at numerous entities ; and interviewed responsible officials and experts from federal and nonfederal entities . to determine us - cert's current capabilities and related challenges , we analyzed dhs's policies , procedures , and program plans and interviewed relevant officials . appendix i provides further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . ( 4 ) responding to the threat . federal law and policy direct the department of homeland security ( dhs ) federal law and policy direct the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish such capabilities for our nation . to fulfill this requirement , the to establish such capabilities for our nation . to identify us - cert's challenges to developing and implementing the key attributes and a successful national cyber analysis and warning capability , we gathered and analyzed relevant documents , such as past gao reports and studies by various cybersecurity - related entities , and interviewed key federal and nonfederal officials regarding the challenges associated with cyber analysis and warning . on the basis of the information received and our knowledge of the issues , we determined the major challenges to developing and implementing the key attributes and a successful national cyber analysis and warning capability . we performed this performance audit between june 2007 and july 2008 in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area ; atlanta , georgia ; bloomington , indiana ; pittsburgh , pennsylvania ; and norfolk , virginia ; in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the persons named above , neil doherty , michael gilmore , barbarol james , kenneth a. johnson , kush k. malhotra , gary mountjoy , jennifer stavros - turner , and amos tevelow made key contributions to this report .