dod agreed with our recommendations . our comparison of the strategy against the statutory reporting requirements found that the strategy addresses eight statutory requirements and dod has plans to address two other statutory requirements . for two of the requirements involving strategy implementation , dod has asserted that its normal budgetary process will suffice . while the requirements were met , additional information that could enable dod to successfully implement the strategy was not included . see table 1 for our assessment of the strategy . the contents of the strategy address four primary areas: ( 1 ) short - and long - term goals ; ( 2 ) goal implementation ; ( 3 ) goal assessment ; and ( 4 ) the transition of space s&t technology to space acquisition programs . the strategy outlines a total of 54 space s&t goals — 30 short - term and 24 long - term , and describes existing , routine dod processes such as program planning and budgeting procedures to help implement the strategy . it also mentions that periodic structured and informal programmatic and technical reviews are used to assess progress toward achievement of dod goals and objectives and describes how there is no distinct process for transitioning space s&t products toward ultimate application in acquisition programs , while also describing several examples considered “success stories” in the transition of space s&t . while dod addresses , or plans to address , the statutory requirements , in some instances , the inclusion of more detailed information could have allowed an opportunity for more successful implementation of the strategy . specifically , in relation to the strategy's goals , it does not establish a newly developed implementation plan for the achievement of the goals . instead , the strategy describes a plan for implementation where dod components essentially implement the strategy as a routine element of their existing program planning and budgeting procedures while employing processes that are specifically tailored to each component's mission function . assistant secretary of defense , research and engineering ( asd ( r&e ) ) officials , who served as leads in developing the strategy ( strategy developers ) also cited a program called reliance 21 as helping to manage and implement its entire s&t portfolio , including space s&t . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . in general , the s&t community includes government research laboratories and testing facilities as well as contractors and academic institutions that support these facilities . this community conducts research and development to support military or intelligence applications , such as space or weapon systems . while intelligence community funding levels for s&t are classified , dod uses research , development , test and evaluation ( rdt&e ) funds for s&t work , including space s&t work , some of which is classified . space s&t efforts are undertaken by many government organizations . while dod and the intelligence community comprise the vast majority of organizations involved in space s&t , several civilian government organizations are also involved , including the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the department of energy ( doe ) .