however , omb has not addressed our recommendations . this practice is consistent with the principle of data quality . agency policies and practices with regard to the other four principles were uneven . specifically , agencies did not always have policies or practices in place to address the purpose specification , openness , and individual participation principles with respect to reseller data . the inconsistencies in applying these principles as well as the lack of specific agency policies can be attributed in part to ambiguities in omb guidance regarding the applicability of the privacy act to information obtained from resellers . further , privacy impact assessments , a valuable tool that could address important aspects of the fair information practices , were often not conducted . such a requirement could more readily ensure agencies perform these assessments . further , since omb has not clarified its guidance on this issue , a requirement in law could provide needed direction to agencies . the proposed federal agency data protection act would also require each agency to prescribe regulations that specify , among other things , the personnel permitted to access , analyze , or otherwise use commercial reseller databases . the fair information practices are not precise legal requirements . information resellers provide services based on these technological advances . we use the term “information resellers” to refer to businesses that vary in many ways but have in common collecting and aggregating personal information from multiple sources and making it available to their customers . because omb privacy guidance does not clearly address information reseller data , agencies are left largely on their own to determine how to satisfy legal requirements and protect privacy when acquiring and using reseller data . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . today , after a brief summary of the laws that govern agency use of personal information , i will summarize the information contained in our 2006 report on how the selected agencies used the personal information that they purchased from resellers and the extent to which the agencies had policies and practices that reflected the fair information practices . i will also provide an update on steps taken by the agencies to address the recommendations contained in our 2006 report . finally , i will comment on specific privacy related provisions of the proposed federal agency data protection act . before advanced computerized techniques , obtaining people's personal information usually required visiting courthouses or other government facilities to inspect paper - based public records , and information contained in product registrations and other business records was not generally available at all . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .