program . although the u.s. supreme court ruled in 1999 that the census act prohibited the use of statistical sampling for purposes of apportioning seats in the house of representatives , the court did not specifically address the use of statistical sampling for other purposes . in march 2001 , the acting director of the u.s. census bureau recommended to the secretary of commerce that only unadjusted data be released for purposes of congressional redistricting . the acting director made this recommendation when , after considerable research , the bureau was unable to conclude that the adjusted data were more accurate for use in redistricting . specifically , the acting director cited the apparent inconsistency in population growth over the decade as estimated by the a.c.e. , and demographic analysis , which estimated the population using birth , death , and similar records . he noted that the inconsistency raised the possibility of an unidentified error in either the a.c.e . estimates or the census numbers , and the inconsistency could not be resolved prior to april 1 , 2001 , the legally mandated deadline for releasing redistricting data . later that year , following additional research , the acting director decided against using adjusted census data for nonredistricting purposes , such as allocating federal aid , because a.c.e . estimates failed to identify a significant number of people erroneously included in the census . the acting director noted that “this finding of substantial error , in conjunction with remaining uncertainties , necessitates that revisions , based on additional review and analysis , be made to the a.c.e . estimates before any potential uses of these data can be considered.” as the bureau turned toward the 2010 census , it needed to decide whether it would have a coverage measurement program and how the results would be used . because of the 1999 u.s. supreme court ruling noted earlier , the bureau could not use coverage measurement results to adjust census data for purposes of congressional apportionment . however , adjusting census data for other purposes remained an open question . in our january 2003 report on the objectives and results of the 2000 a.c.e . program , we noted that an evaluation of the accuracy and completeness of the census is critical given the many uses of census data , the importance of identifying the magnitude and characteristics of any undercounts and overcounts , and the cost of the census overall . we cautioned that the longer the 2010 planning process continues without a firm decision on the role of coverage measurement , the greater the risk of wasted resources and disappointing results . consequently , we recommended that the bureau , in conjunction with congress and other stakeholders , come to an early decision on whether and how coverage measurement will be used in the 2010 census . in reaching this decision , we recommended that the bureau ( 1 ) demonstrate both the operational and technical feasibility of its coverage measurement methods , ( 2 ) determine the level of geography at which coverage can be reliably measured , ( 3 ) keep congress and other stakeholders informed of its plans , and ( 4 ) adequately test its coverage measurement methodology prior to full implementation .