the lake . starting in the early 1990s , the lake level has risen dramatically , threatening adjacent roadways . although emergency relief program regulations define a natural disaster as a sudden and unusual natural occurrence , fhwa determined that the gradual and predictable basin flooding at devils lake is eligible for emergency relief program funding . in 2005 , through safetea - lu , congress authorized up to $10 million of emergency relief program funds to be expended annually , up to a total of $70 million , to address an additional problem at devils lake and make repairs to certain roads which were impounding water and acting as dams . in the absence of other authority , this funding must come out of the $100 million annual authorization of contract authority , effectively reducing the annual emergency relief funding available to other states . while officials in each of the three state departments of transportation told us that they conduct final inspections of emergency repairs , we found only two final inspection reports prepared by states in fhwa's records to confirm the completion of emergency repairs within the required time frame . in addition , when we reviewed final inspection reports from one of the state departments of transportation in our review , we were frequently unable to verify completion dates . specifically , 11 of the 12 final inspections performed by officials at new york state department of transportation for projects in our review did not include project completion dates . although the emergency relief manual states that fhwa division offices reserve the right to conduct a final inspection of any emergency relief project , only the fhwa texas division reported conducting spot inspections for a sample of emergency relief projects . in commenting on a draft of this report , dot stated that the fhwa new york state division office uses other means to verify completion of emergency repairs within 180 days . according to dot , the state often submits its ddirs to fhwa after emergency repairs are completed , which allows fhwa to verify the eligibility and completion of an emergency repair when it reviews the ddir . dot reported that the fhwa division office does not sign the ddir until it confirms the work is completed , and that its signature indicates verification that the work was performed within the required time frame . however , our file review found that 14 of the 18 emergency repair projects in new york that were approved for 100 percent federal funding did not have an fhwa signature on the ddir . in addition to a lack of documentation , we found eight instances in which permanent repair projects may have incorrectly received 100 percent federal share reimbursement . according to the emergency relief manual , absent specific legislative approval , permanent repair work is not to be considered emergency repair work even if it is completed within 180 days . however , we found instances in which projects were determined to be permanent repairs based on information in the project files , but were later authorized to receive 100 percent federal share .