timeliness . issuers provided mixed responses about cms's timeliness in responding to current requests for assistance . two issuers told us that the timeliness had improved . however , two other issuers told us that there were still unresolved requests related to data submission issues , even though the relevant submission deadline had passed . we provided a draft copy of this report to hhs for its review and hhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix i. hhs explained that cms implemented the data collection strategy for these programs utilizing new innovative technology as well as existing data systems , and carried out the implementation in a phased approach . hhs indicated that issuer data submissions through the edge server began in september 2014 and cms was on target to meet the regulatory deadline of april 30 , 2015 , to upload final submissions by issuers of claims and enrollment data for benefit year 2014 . further , hhs described cms's efforts to ensure the appropriate level of technical support , including the use of cross - functional teams that include software developers and dedicated account managers for each issuer . hhs noted that cms solicited feedback directly from issuers and provided technical guidance and multiple trainings . in addition , hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of the centers for medicare & medicaid services , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 , or dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of our report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . ( see fig . ppaca directed hhs to consider the design of the medicare risk mitigation programs in developing the ppaca risk mitigation programs , although it also set requirements that differed from the medicare programs . while ppaca established the risk corridors and reinsurance programs as temporary programs for the 3-year period 2014 through 2016 , the medicare part d programs were not required to be temporary and have operated since 2006 . in addition , according to cms , the ppaca risk adjustment and reinsurance programs are budget neutral , in that payments to issuers will be adjusted to reflect , and not exceed , contributions . cms originally indicated that the ppaca risk corridors program would not be operated in a budget neutral manner but subsequently indicated its intent to operate the program as budget neutral in 2014 and 2015 , and then in 2016 , if collections are insufficient to make payments , it would use other sources of funding subject to availability .