ii. ) in some cases , the central bank is a major provider or perhaps the only provider of wholesale payment services . the federal reserve system , as previously noted , is a major provider of wholesale payment services . each of the central banks we reviewed has participated in the design and development of its country's wholesale payment system . for example , the bundesbank collaborated in developing the rtgsplus system . the bank of france played a major role in the development of france's systems . the bank of england cooperated with the clearing house automated payment system ( chaps ) in the development of a new system , newchaps ; the bank of canada assisted in the design and development of the large value transfer system . in the g - 10 countries , the first automated rtgs system was fedwire in the united states , which is owned and operated by the federal reserve system . although there are some net settlement systems for wholesale payments today , many countries are transitioning to rtgs systems . in europe , various decisions over the past 5 to 10 years have encouraged current and potential euro area countries to develop national rtgs systems . the trend toward rtgs systems extends beyond europe's boundaries , as countries worldwide are adopting rtgs systems . central banks we studied played various roles in providing and overseeing wholesale payment services . all central banks provide key settlement services for wholesale payment systems . some central banks own and operate wholesale payment systems that include clearance and settlement while others only provide oversight and settlement , leaving clearance and other processing activities to other parties . there is no clear pattern in the roles played by central banks in clearing wholesale payments . in addition to the united states , two of the central banks we studied , the bundesbank and the bank of france , have full ownership of their respective wholesale payment systems . where we make statements regarding to central banks' authorizing statutes , they are based on these sources rather than on our original legal analysis . to describe the roles of central banks in the wholesale and retail payment systems of other major industrialized countries and the key factors that influence those roles , we reviewed materials available on central bank web sites as well as other articles and publications from various central banks . we reviewed publications available from the bank for international settlements , and also the european central bank's blue book: payment and securities settlement systems in the european union . we also reviewed numerous articles and commentaries on the roles of central banks as well as discussions of recent reform efforts . to enhance our understanding of these materials , we interviewed federal reserve officials , members of trade associations , and officials from private - sector payment providers . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , and new york , n.y. , between june 2001 and january 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the core principles for systemically important payments systems ( core principles ) are shown in table 5 .