nepa . under nepa , federal agencies must evaluate the environmental impacts of their proposed major federal actions using an environmental assessment or a more detailed environmental impact statement , with some exceptions . civil rights act of 1964 . title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 , as amended , prohibits discrimination based on race , color , or national origin in programs or activities that receive federal financial assistance . to carry out and enforce the provisions of the act , federal agencies have developed programs to receive and investigate allegations of discriminatory actions taken by recipients of federal funding . most working group member agencies reported planning and implementing some actions to identify and address environmental justice issues . some examples of key activities include the following: epa mapping tool . in 2015 , epa released its environmental justice mapping and screening tool ( ejscreen ) , a web - based mapping tool that includes environmental and demographic data at a local level . users can identify potential exposure to environmental pollutants and related health risks across different communities . officials from the department of justice told us they regularly use ejscreen to help determine whether cases involve environmental justice issues . incorporating environmental justice in nepa analyses . at least 13 agencies provided examples of efforts to consider environmental justice in their nepa analyses . at the department of the interior ( doi ) , departmental policy requires all bureaus to include consideration of environmental justice in the nepa process , and some bureaus have developed their own guidance for doing so . for example , doi's 2015 national park service nepa handbook requires that the agency's environmental analyses discuss and evaluate the impact of proposals on minority and low - income populations and communities . the department of homeland security also issued an agency - wide directive on nepa implementation in 2014 , and the accompanying 2014 nepa instruction manual included public involvement requirements for populations with environmental justice issues . data initiative and reports on chemical exposure . at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) built a national environmental public health tracking network , which brings together health and environmental data from national , state , and city sources . the cdc also developed a national report on human exposure to environmental chemicals — a series of reports that uses biomonitoring to assess the u.s. population's exposure to environmental chemicals . as we reported in september 2019 , for fiscal years 2015 through 2018 , 11 of the 16 member agencies of the working group reported supporting environmental justice efforts through existing related program funding and staffing resources ( i.e. , resources not specifically dedicated to environmental justice , such as for civil rights or environmental programs ) . epa and the department of energy ( doe ) dedicated resources specifically for environmental justice efforts in their budgets . in fiscal year 2018 , epa provided about $6.7 million and doe provided about $1.6 million .