we incorporated these comments as appropriate . education also suggested that we delay publication of this report until the irs regulations are finalized , as education thought that the report could be more helpful at that time . gao policy is to communicate audit and evaluation results in a timely manner to decision makers and others who either requested the work or may need the information to bring about needed changes . therefore , we are issuing the report as planned . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of education , and the commissioner of internal revenue . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . program name programs available for both individual and business donors alabama educational scholarship program $50,000 or 50% of tax liability , whichever is lower ( individual ) 50% of business tax liability $1,000 ( individual ) 75% of business tax liability $1 million ( individual and business ) $350,000 ( individual and business ) $150 ( individual and business ) $1,000 ( individual ) $100,000 ( business ) 60% of tax liability ( individual and business ) virginia education improvement scholarships tax credits program programs available for individual donors only arizona original individual income tax credit program $81,250 ( individual ) no limit for business donors $555 ( individual ) $552 ( individual ) . maximum donation amounts vary from 50% to 100% of tax liability $510,000 or no more than 10% of program credits 2 percent of wages paid no in oklahoma , pennsylvania , and rhode island , the percentage of donations that can be claimed as a tax credit increases if donors commit to donating for 2 years . in oklahoma , that percentage increases from 50 percent to 75 percent . in the two pennsylvania programs and the rhode island program , the percentage increases from 75 percent to 90 percent . total donations in cy 2016 ( rounded ) . in addition to the individual named above , nagla'a el - hodiri ( assistant director ) , barbara steel - lowney ( analyst - in - charge ) , jeff arkin , and jessica l. yutzy made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were deborah bland , lilia chaidez , sarah cornetto , caitlin cusati , paulissa earl , alison grantham , kirsten lauber , sheila r. mccoy , mimi nguyen , jessica orr , michelle philpott , paul schearf , and andrew j. stephens . we did not conduct an independent review of state laws and regulations . throughout the report , we provide the most recent and complete information available for the various types of information . specifically , unless otherwise noted , student eligibility requirements are as of sy 2017-2018 and tax provisions are as of calendar year ( cy ) 2018 .