on their own , loan volumes can increase subsidy amounts . unsubsidized loan borrowers are responsible for all interest costs . plus loans are variable rate loans that are available to parents of dependent undergraduate students . the interest rates on these loans adjust annually , based on a statutorily established market - indexed rate setting formula , and may not exceed 9 percent . to what extent do repayment options other than consolidation loans allow borrowers to simplify loan repayment and reduce repayment amounts ? our work to answer these questions involved a variety of information sources , including officials from education's office of federal student aid and budget service , as well as representatives of ffelp lenders . to develop information about student borrowers , we analyzed a sample of student loan data from education's national student loan data system ( nslds ) — a comprehensive national database of student loans , borrowers , and other information . the sample was a randomly drawn , representative sample that contained records on approximately 4.4 million loans held by 1.4 million students or their parents . the sample constituted 4 percent of the overall nslds population of approximately 32 million students . how are federal subsidy and administration costs for consolidation loan programs affected by recent interest rate and loan volume changes ? to assess the reliability of the nslds data , we reviewed existing information about the sample and interviewed education officials in washington , d.c. , responsible for performing data accuracy , validity , and integrity tests of nslds data . in addition , we performed electronic testing of key variables in our sample for obvious problems in accuracy and completeness . we determined that the nslds data were sufficiently reliable for this report . our analysis on borrower characteristics focused on borrowers in the sample who originated loans from 1987 ( the year consolidation loans were made available under the program as it is currently structured ) to november 2002 . to develop information about the family income of borrowers and their repayment amounts , we analyzed data provided by the internal revenue service ( irs ) on family income and education on loan repayments for a sample of borrowers who entered repayment in 1999 . our analysis of federal costs of consolidation loans is also based in part on interviews with education officials in washington , d.c. , and a review of relevant analyses prepared by education . we reviewed the hea and related education regulations and other published information to identify the repayment options available to student loan borrowers . we conducted our work from july 2002 through august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . congress created consolidation loans under title iv of the hea to help borrowers combine and reduce monthly repayments so as to help decrease federal loan default costs . consolidation loans are available under education's two major student loan programs — the ffelp and fdlp . under ffelp , private lenders make loans to students with education guaranteeing the lenders loan repayment and a rate of return on the loans they make . under fdlp , the federal government makes loans to students using federal funds .