companies are affected in additional ways . for example , to avoid losing sales and liability issues , companies may increase spending on ip protection efforts . in addition , experts we spoke with stated that companies could experience a decline in innovation and production of new goods if counterfeiting leads to reductions in corporate investments in research and development . another variation in the nature of the effects of counterfeiting and piracy is that some effects are experienced immediately , while others are more long - term , according to the oecd . the oecd's 2008 report cited loss of sales volume and lower prices as short - term effects , while the medium - and long - term effects include loss of brand value and reputation , lost investment , increased costs of countermeasures , potentially reduced scope of operations , and reduced innovation . finally , one expert emphasized to us that the loss of ip rights is much more important than the loss of revenue . he stated that the danger for the united states is in the accelerated “learning effects” — companies learn how to produce and will improve upon patented goods . they will no longer need to illegally copy a given brand — they will create their own aftermarket product . he suggested that companies should work to ensure their competitive advantage in the future by inhibiting undesired knowledge transfer . in addition , private sector organizations have experienced a wide range of incidents involving data loss or theft , economic loss , computer intrusions , and privacy breaches , underscoring the need for improved security practices . the following examples from news media and other public sources illustrate types of cyber crimes . in february 2011 , media reports stated that computer hackers had broken into and stolen proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six u.s. and european energy companies . in mid - 2009 a research chemist with dupont corporation reportedly downloaded proprietary information to a personal e - mail account and thumb drive with the intention of transferring this information to peking university in china and also sought chinese government funding to commercialize research related to the information he had stolen . between 2008 and 2009 , a chemist with valspar corporation reportedly used access to an internal computer network to download secret formulas for paints and coatings , reportedly intending to take this proprietary information to a new job with a paint company in shanghai , china . in december 2006 , a product engineer with ford motor company reportedly copied approximately 4,000 ford documents onto an external hard drive in order to acquire a job with a chinese automotive company . generally , as we reported in april 2010 , the illicit nature of counterfeiting and piracy makes estimating the economic impact of ip infringements extremely difficult , so assumptions must be used to offset the lack of data . efforts to estimate losses involve assumptions such as the rate at which consumers would substitute counterfeit for legitimate products , which can have enormous impacts on the resulting estimates . because of the significant differences in types of counterfeited and pirated goods and industries involved , no single method can be used to develop estimates .