component . ●=fully met — the agency provided evidence that addressed the component . ◐=partially met — the agency provided evidence that addressed about half or a large portion of the ○=not met — the agency did not provide evidence that addressed the component or provided evidence that minimally addressed the component . require delivery of functionality every 6 months . only one of the five agencies — va — fully addressed this policy component by clearly requiring that its projects be completed in increments that must not exceed 6 months . the other four agencies did not address this policy component . three of these agencies — defense , hhs , and dhs — all developed policies that promote the use of incremental development , but these policies do not require functionality to be delivered every 6 months . specifically , with regard to defense , although the department's acquisition framework calls for investments to use incremental development , its policy on it budget submissions encourages investments to deliver functionality every 12-18 months — not every 6 months . according to officials of the defense office of the cio , 12-18 month incremental development is better aligned with the acquisition framework that many of its it acquisitions have used . for hhs , although its policy requires incremental development , its policy recommends — but does not require — that all projects deliver functionality every 3-6 months . according to an hhs office of the cio official , hhs does not require its projects to deliver functionality every 6 months because it wants to provide projects with flexibility . for dhs , in june 2012 , the former dhs cio issued a draft policy encouraging it projects to move towards agile development approaches . additionally , with respect to financial systems modernization programs , dhs's policy calls for providing financial capabilities to the customer in small increments of 6-12 months . according to dhs officials representing the office of the cio , the department is currently developing a departmentwide policy on incremental development ; however , they said that the draft currently encourages investments to deliver the first release 18 months after program initiation and thereafter deploy functionality in cycles no longer than 12 months , but ideally less than 6 months . lastly , transportation also did not address the component because , although transportation has a policy that calls for projects to deliver functionality every 6 months , officials from the office of the cio explained that this policy does not apply to the federal aviation administration ( faa ) . these officials explained that how often faa projects deliver functionality depends on their size , scope , risk , visibility , and interdependencies with other programs . define functionality . only one of the five agencies — va — fully addressed this policy component . va has a policy that defines what it means to deliver functionality — both in terms of what constitutes an increment and what should be delivered at the end of an increment . for example , va defines an increment as the segment of the project that produces , in a cycle of 6 months or less , a deliverable that can be used by customers in an operational environment .