iv ) . in the department's response , the deputy secretary of commerce agreed with our recommendations and identified plans for implementing them . specifically , the department noted that it plans to revise its training process to ensure limited training resources continue to target improvements in nws performance . the department also noted that the concept of operations working team is developing a plan for the prototype and stated that this plan will include the items we recommended . the department also provided technical corrections , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested congressional committees . copies will be made available to others on request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our web site at www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . our objectives were ( 1 ) to evaluate the national weather service's ( nws ) efforts to achieve improvements in the delivery of its services through upgrades to its systems , models , and computational abilities ; ( 2 ) to assess the agency's plans to achieve improvements in the delivery of its services through the training and professional development of its employees ; and ( 3 ) to evaluate the agency's plans for revising its nationwide office configuration and the implications of these plans on local forecasting services , staffing , and budgets . to evaluate nws's efforts to achieve service improvements through system and technology upgrades , we reviewed the agency's system development plans and discussed system - specific plans with nws program officials . we assessed system - specific documentation justifying system upgrades to evaluate whether these upgrades were linked to anticipated improvements in performance goals . we also evaluated nws performance goals and identified the extent to which anticipated service improvements were tied to system and technology upgrades . we interviewed national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and nws officials to obtain clarification on agency plans and goals . to assess nws's plans for achieving service improvements through the training and professional development of its employees , we reviewed nws policies and plans for training and professional development . we reviewed the agency's service performance goals and assessed the link between those goals and planned and expected training and professional development activities . we also interviewed nws officials responsible for training and professional development activities . to evaluate the status and potential impact of any plans to revise the national office configuration , we assessed studies of options for changing the nws concept of operations . the functions of these facilities are described below . 122 weather forecast offices are responsible for providing a wide variety of weather , water , and climate services for their local county warning areas , including advisories , warnings , and forecasts ( see fig .