however , it did not document significant assumptions . first , she questioned whether our reported findings were balanced given the facts and results presented . we clarified our report to ensure that our findings better reflect the information we discussed . universal awards are now expected in march 2007 . gsa's analysis has not been adjusted to reflect additional inflation during this period , which could increase the estimates total by as much as $9 million . finally , gsa has not revised its analysis to reflect an assessment of most likely costs using currently available information . the analysis assumes that reimbursable agency transition costs would be greater than during the previous transition due to growth in the volume of services ordered . while gsa estimated that service levels would grow 60 percent over the previous transition by the time of contract award , as of august 2006 , service levels had actually grown by 55.9 percent and are now expected to remain stable . the overestimation of service growth added approximately $1.7 million to the estimate . estimates are comprehensive when their level of detail ensures that all pertinent costs are included and no costs are double - counted . it is important to ensure the completeness , consistency , and realism of the information contained in the cost estimate . gsa appears to have included all pertinent costs in its analysis ; however , according to officials , a specific agency cost valued at $4.3 million may have been double - counted . for several of the transition costs estimated , gsa based its calculations on the actual charges incurred during the previous transition . however , officials indicated that a specific agency cost that is estimated separately in its current estimate may have already been included in a more general category of its previous costs . despite this uncertainty , gsa calculated the separate total for this specific agency cost based on current service levels and added it to its estimate . as a result , it is likely this specific agency cost is double - counted and therefore overstated . cost estimates are well - documented when they can be easily repeated or updated and can be traced to original sources through auditing . rigorous documentation increases the credibility of an estimate and helps support an organization's decision - making process . the documentation should explicitly identify the primary methods , calculations , results , rationales or assumptions , and sources of the data used to generate each cost element . gsa provided us documentation of its methodology , the calculations it used to derive each cost element , results , and many of the previous transition costs . specifically , gsa did not document the rationale behind its 76 percent transition traffic factor or why it used a 30-month time period for the transition — two key assumptions of its analysis . gsa also did not provide documentation of certain data sources . specifically , program officials could not provide supporting data used to estimate an agency transition cost valued at $4.7 million . in addition , gsa could not document the data sources used to estimate costs for contractor support in planning and implementing the transition .