( see apps . i through vi for each service's june 2001 and february 2002 exhibits. ) dod's june 2001 and february 2002 reports did not provide congress with an actual and complete picture of spare parts spending . the actual amounts reported as spent by the army in total on spare parts and by all services for most of the commodities were estimates . the services' budget offices had computed these estimates using various methods because they do not have a reliable system to account for and track such information.in addition , all the services did not include information on the supplemental operations and maintenance funding they received in their totals , include the quantities of parts purchased , or explain deviations between planned and actual spending as required on the template . these deficiencies limit the potential value of dod's reports to congress and other decision makers . some of dod's purported actual spending data were estimates . all of the army's spending amounts and most of the other services' commodity amounts for prior years were estimates derived from various service methods — not actual obligations to purchase spare parts . the services' headquarters budget offices provided these estimates because they did not have a process for tracking and accumulating information on actual spending by commodity in their accounting and logistics data systems . the services' budget offices were to develop the exhibit op - 31 data using the guidance shown on the template as published in dod's financial management regulation . the department did not provide the services with any other guidance on how to develop information required for exhibit op - 31 reports . the guidance directed the services to prepare reports showing planned and actual funding and quantities of repairable and consumable spare parts purchases by commodity for multiple fiscal years . each service employed its own methodology to estimate the amount of money spent for spare parts as described below: the army used estimates to report its total spending for spare parts and the breakout of spare parts spending for all commodity groups . the army based its estimates on computer - generated forecasts of the spare parts needed to support the current and planned operations . information from cost data files , logistics files , and the operating and support management information system was used to develop a consumption rate for spare parts on the basis of anticipated usage , considering such factors as miles driven and hours flown . the consumption factor was entered in the army's training resources model , which contains force structure , planned training events , and the projected operating tempo . the model used the consumption factor to estimate the total cost and quantities of spare parts that would be consumed . the model also provided the estimated spending for each of the commodities cited in the exhibit . the navy department used unaudited actual obligation data from the major commands as its basis for reporting total spending for spare parts and for some commodity groups . however , the breakout of actual spending data for the aircraft engine and airframe commodities were estimates .