institutions . bop institutions are managed by a warden and other officials , including an executive assistant and associate warden who generally provide overall direction and , in part , administer the institution's human capital policies , including policies on retention incentives . correctional services staff represent the largest segment of each institution's workforce and are responsible for the correctional treatment , custody , and supervision of inmates . central office . the central office serves as bop's headquarters and provides oversight of bop operations and program areas . within the central office is bop's human resource management division ( hrmd ) which is responsible for developing , implementing and administering human resource policies and programs , including the use of retention incentives that meet opm and doj requirements . in addition , the central office's program review division ( prd ) is responsible for assessing bop programs , including human resources , to ensure that they are managed and operated effectively . regional offices . bop has six regional offices that cover the mid - atlantic , north central , northeast , south central , southeast , and western regions of the united states . these offices , each led by a regional director , oversee the operations of the 122 federal institutions within their respective geographic regions of the country . according to bop officials , regional office staff also provide local level oversight of institutions' human capital programs , such as retention incentives , among other things . non - correctional services staff include , among others , those employees assigned to non - correctional services management , facility operations , and the health services unit . workers in health services and psychology services are responsible for providing inmates with medical , dental , and mental health services and include , for example , dentists , pharmacists , physicians , nurses , psychologists , and drug treatment specialists . the federal employees pay comparability act of 1990 first authorized opm to allow federal agencies to give incentives , including retention incentives , to employees . the federal workforce flexibility act of 2004 provided federal agencies increased flexibilities regarding these incentives . for example , individual retention incentives that were capped at 25 percent of an employee's basic pay rate could be increased up to 50 percent in cases of critical agency need with opm's approval . generally , under opm regulations , an agency is authorized to pay a retention incentive to employees . additionally , the four california institutions' retention incentive expenditures remained relatively steady — around $8.1 to $8.2 million during the 5-year period — even though the overall number of employees who received the incentives generally increased . bop officials told us that these california institutions' retention incentive expenditures remained relatively steady in spite of an overall increase in the number of employees receiving incentives , in part , because in fiscal year 2013 bop reduced the retention incentive rate — the percentage of an employee's basic pay that determines the employee's retention incentive — by 3 percent at the four california institutions . bop officials reported using retention incentives primarily at these four institutions to supplement correctional officers' salaries and compensate for the gap between bop's and other institutions' salaries .