( see fig . specifically , fta suggested that economic development impacts and the reliability of forecasts simply be added to the list of criteria considered in developing the project justification rating . the second option would be to develop a broader process to include the evaluation criteria identified by safetea - lu and to organize the measures to support a more analytical discussion of the project and its merits . ( see fig . according to fta , the second option would broaden the evaluation process beyond a computation of overall ratings based on individual evaluation measures and develop better insights into the merit of a project than are possible from using the quantified evaluation measures alone . in addition , the second option would also consider the major uncertainties associated with any of the information used to evaluate the project , such as ridership forecasts , cost estimates , projected land use , and other assumptions . according to fta , understanding a project's uncertainties is needed for informed decision making . in its guidance , fta also identified potential challenges in implementing some safetea - lu changes . in particular , fta described the challenges of incorporating and distinguishing between two measures of indirect benefits in the new starts evaluation process — land use and economic development impacts . for example , fta noted that its current land - use measures ( eg , land - use plans and policies ) indicate the transit - friendliness of a project corridor both now and in the future , but do not measure the benefits generated by the proposed project . rather , the measures describe the degree to which the project corridor provides an environment in which the proposed project can succeed . according to fta's guidance , fta's evaluation of land use does not include economic development benefits because fta has not been able to find reliable methods of predicting these benefits . fta further stated that because safetea - lu introduces a separate economic development criterion , the potential role for land use as a measure of development benefits becomes even less clear , given its potential overlap with the economic development criterion . in addition , fta noted that many economic development benefits result from direct benefits ( eg , travel time savings ) , and therefore including them in the evaluation could lead to double counting the benefits fta already measures and uses to evaluate projects . furthermore , fta noted that some economic development impacts may represent transfers between regions rather than a net benefit for the nation , raising questions of whether these impacts are useful for a national comparison of projects . to address some of the challenges , fta suggested that an appropriate strategy might be combining land use and economic development into a single measure . in our january 2005 report on the costs and benefits of highway and transit investments , we identified many of the same challenges of measuring and forecasting indirect benefits , such as economic development and land - use impacts .