and at the host agency . we received a sufficient we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 to march 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . because the dod program at the army cgsc sends participants directly from an academic program to an interagency rotational assignment , these participants did not have line supervisors immediately prior to their participation . interagency rotation programs , or interagency rotations , are work assignments at a different agency from the one in which the participant is normally employed , with an explicit professional development purpose . as we previously reported , several federal agencies have used interagency rotations to help accomplish their national security missions while also explicitly seeking to develop participants' abilities to collaborate on national security . the state foreign policy advisor ( polad ) program is a 1- to 3-year rotation that places state foreign service officers at the pentagon or at military commands to work alongside dod civilians and military officers . these include foreign policy advisors , state - defense exchange officers , and state positions with joint interagency coordination groups.polad program seeks to provide participants with opportunities to develop their knowledge of military culture , roles , and responsibilities , while providing a foreign policy perspective to military planning and operations . these assignments also are to provide opportunities to establish networks between diplomats and military staff who must work together on global issues . these rotations target mid - to senior - level state foreign service officers . formally established in the early 1960s , the polad program was created to further coordination between state and dod and to ensure that both diplomatic and military strategies were employed to address national security challenges . state officials told us that , over time , they found that the polad program also had become a means for developing foreign service officers' experience and effectiveness in operating in a military environment . the size of the program is also expanding: during the past 4 years , the number of diplomats serving in these positions has more than doubled , to near 90 . these assignments are 1- to 3-year rotations that place state foreign service and civil service personnel at federal agencies or federal learning institutions . participants are to have opportunities to learn about the roles and responsibilities of the host agencies and to establish professional networks with personnel from different agencies working on similar issues . these rotations target mid - to senior - level state foreign service officers and civil service employees , depending on the position . while these assignments are not part of a formal program , state has been sending personnel on assignments to some of the same organizations , such as the national defense university or the national security staff , for more than a decade .