partnership staff . according to the bureau's current planning documents , it will hire nearly twice as many partnership specialists — responsible for building relationships and obtaining commitments from organizations — to support the 2020 census than it hired to support the 2010 census . despite this planned increase in partnership specialists , the bureau's total estimated spending on partnership staff — $248 million — is less than the $334 million the bureau reported spending in the same cost category for 2010 after adjusting for inflation . according to bureau officials , they will initiate much of this spending in may 2019 . this larger figure includes about $152 million for additional contracted services still being planned , but provisionally allocated for various advertising support efforts with the balance for various partnership materials not included in other contracts . the bureau does not plan to repeat its “2010 census road tour” involving a large mobile display and over a dozen cargo vans that were driven to promotional events around the country at a cost of about $16.6 million after adjusting for inflation . while the bureau did not conduct a formal evaluation of the initiative's effectiveness at encouraging response during the 2010 census , bureau officials told us that they do not believe it was as effective a use of resources compared to the other options they are planning for 2020 . an evaluation conducted by the bureau of its 2010 partnership efforts recommended that , for the 2020 census , the bureau hire at least a core group of partnership staff 3 years prior to census day instead of the 2 years prior as was done for the 2010 census . consistent with that recommendation , according to bureau officials , the bureau hired five partnership specialists for the 2020 census in october 2015 — more than 2 years earlier in the decennial cycle than its first hiring of partnership specialists in january 2008 for the 2010 census , as shown in figure 4 . bureau officials told us that this hiring helped the bureau complete tribal consultations earlier than it had for the 2010 census . moreover , the bureau continued its early hiring with 39 more partnership specialists in fiscal year 2017 . bureau officials said that , with the additional year of preparation , these staff initiated outreach to the highest level of government in each of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico , resulting in , as of april 2018 , partnership staff having obtained commitments or statements of interest from all but two state governments to form state complete count commissions / committees . these commissions / committees are intended to help form partnerships at the highest levels of government within each state and leverage each state's vested interest in a timely and complete count of its population . bureau officials said they also recently further accelerated the bureau's planned time frames for hiring partnership specialists . these officials said that with the funds made available in the fiscal year 2018 consolidated appropriations omnibus , the bureau began posting job announcements for about 70 partnership specialists in april 2018 and hopes to begin hiring in july 2018 — 3 months earlier than october 2018 , as had otherwise been planned .