fsis inspects animals both before and after slaughter . the acts also require fsis inspectors to monitor processing plant operations , such as deboning and canning , to ensure that plants are sanitary and adhere to approved procedures and label specifications . the acts do not explicitly set inspection frequencies for meat - and poultry - processing plants ; however , fsis has interpreted the acts as requiring the daily inspection of such plants and has established its regulations accordingly . that is , an fsis inspector must visit each meat - and poultry - processing plant for an unspecified period of time — which may be as little as an hour — each operating day . as shown in figure 3 , about 56 percent of fda's fiscal year 1999 food safety expenditures were for field activities and about 44 percent were for headquarters - based activities of fda's centers . appendix iii provides detailed information on fda's fiscal years 1998 and 1999 activities , expenditures , and staff years . in aggregate , fda's field activities accounted for about $159 million in fiscal year 1999 , or about 56 percent of the agency's total food safety expenditures . the office of regulatory affairs ( ora ) is responsible for conducting field activities designated by the centers . ora's compliance , inspection , and laboratory field staff manage , supervise , and conduct enforcement , compliance , inspection , sample collection and analysis activities , as well as criminal investigation , education , and outreach activities . specifically: the ora - conducted field activities in support of the center for food safety and applied nutrition accounted for about $145 million in expenditures for fiscal year 1999 . using these funds , fda conducted over 14,600 domestic food establishment inspections , including those conducted by states under contract with fda , at a cost of about $2 million ; and about 765 inspections of food importers . about $27 million , or 19 percent , of the $145 million went to domestic and imported seafood hazard analysis and critical control point inspection activities . also included in these total expenditures is more than $40 million for laboratory analysis of about 25,000 domestic and foreign product samples associated with field inspection activities . the ora - conducted field activities in support of the center for veterinary medicine accounted for about $13.5 million in expenditures in fiscal year 1999 . with these funds , fda conducted nearly 3,500 domestic animal drug and feed establishment inspections , including those conducted by states under contract with fda at a cost of about $600,000 . also included in these expenditures is about $2 million for laboratory analysis of about 1,800 feed samples associated with field inspection activities . in aggregate , the headquarters - based activities of fda's centers accounted for about $125 million in fiscal year 1999 , or 44 percent of the agency's total food safety expenditures . specifically: the center for food safety and applied nutrition's activities accounted for about $96 million in fiscal year 1999 , or 34 percent of total agency food safety expenditures . the center operates fda's foods program , which is responsible for ensuring that fda - regulated food is safe , sanitary , wholesome , and labeled properly .