dod has implemented these recommendations . most recently , congress amended the law regarding the promotion criteria for officers being considered for promotion to the general and flag officer pay grades . the goldwater - nichols act established a requirement that officers must have served in a joint position prior to being selected for these promotions . the amendment , contained in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 , will require most officers being considered for appointment to this grade after september 30 , 2007 , to complete the joint education program as well . dod uses a number of multiservice and multinational commands and organizations to plan and support joint matters . since passage of the goldwater - nichols act , officers serving in these commands and organizations have overseen a number of joint and multinational military operations that range from humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping to major operations such as operation desert storm and ongoing operations in afghanistan . in fiscal year 2001 , dod had a total of 9,146 joint positions . the goldwater - nichols act not only defined new duty positions and educational requirements but also envisioned a new culture that is truly oriented toward joint matters . moreover , dod's joint vision 2020 portrays a future in which the armed forces are “fully joint: intellectually , operationally , organizationally , doctrinally , and technically.” the key question , today , is how does dod best seize the opportunity to build on current momentum . in april 2002 , the office of the secretary of defense issued the military personnel human resource strategic plan to establish military priorities for the next several years . the new military personnel strategy captures dod leadership's guidance regarding aspects of managing human capital , but the strategy's linkage to the overall mission and programmatic goals is not stated . dod's human capital strategy does not address the vision cited in joint vision 2020 . dod's human capital approach to joint officer development – if it were linked to its overall mission – would emphasize individuals with the knowledge , skills , and abilities needed to function in the joint environment . dod , for example , has not fully assessed how many joint specialty officers it actually needs . the number of joint specialty officers has decreased by almost 60 percent over the years , from just over 12,400 joint specialty officers in fiscal year 1990 to approximately 4,900 joint specialty officers in fiscal year 2001 , yet dod has a significant backlog of officers who , although otherwise qualified , have not been designated as joint specialty officers . moreover , without knowing how many joint specialty officers it needs , dod's joint professional military education system may not be structured or targeted properly . for example , without first defining how many officers should be joint specialty officers – all officers , most officers , or only those needed to fill joint positions – dod has not been able to determine the number of joint professional military graduates it needs . dod does not know if the total number of available seats is sufficient to meet its needs or if it will need to explore alternatives for providing joint education to greater numbers of officers .