we agree . as treasury noted in its comments , the congress intended that exon - florio be invoked only when other laws are not adequate or appropriate to protect national security , and thus acts as a safety net . however , the two cases in which we raise concerns about granting an extended withdrawal period were the universe of cases in which companies that have already completed the acquisition prior to notifying the committee have requested and been granted withdrawal . likewise , the two cases in which we believe greater specificity was needed in the agreements represent 100 percent of the cases in which exon - florio was the basis for an agreement . as a result , we believe that the current process is not an effective safety net . the departments of treasury and defense stated that our recommendation for interim measures is not necessary . further , the departments said that negotiating interim measures could take considerable time and effort , thus delaying a final review of the acquisition . treasury also said that the committee already has the authority to place conditions on withdrawals without amending the implementing regulations and that by striving to do so , it can conclude its cases more expeditiously without compromising national security or the u.s. open investment policy . we did not intend for the regulations to call for negotiating interim measures , but rather for the committee to use its authority to impose them as a condition of withdrawal under certain circumstances . in one of the cases we identified , the company waited over 9 months to re - file with the committee , and when the committee could not mitigate its concerns about unauthorized transfers of technology , the company agreed to divest . in the other case , the company did not re - file for more than a year after withdrawing the original notification , and has yet to re - file more than a year after the second withdrawal . in these cases , the committee did not use its authority to ensure that the companies re - filed and that the cases were concluded expeditiously . therefore , for those cases in which the acquisitions occur prior to the committee completing its work , we continue to believe revising the implementing regulations to require interim protections prior to granting withdrawal would ensure that cases involving completed acquisitions are concluded more expeditiously . the departments questioned whether greater specificity in the agreements we cited would have provided additional national security protections . in our opinion , greater specificity would provide greater protection by making it easier for agencies to effectively evaluate compliance with agreements . for example , in the instance we noted where an agreement called for a “good faith effort” to sell a subsidiary , the foreign company sold only part of the subsidiary and deemed it a “good faith effort,” even though at least one other company offered to buy the entire subsidiary . further , the foreign company sold the subsidiary in exchange for stock in the acquiring company .