comprehensive . a schedule should reflect all activities as defined in the program's work breakdown structure , including activities to be performed by the government and the contractor ; the resources ( eg , labor , materials , and overhead ) needed to do the work ; and how long each activity will take . we found that the schedule used to support the milestone b decision included the activities to be performed by both the government and contractor for releases 1 through 3 of increment 1 . however , the schedule did not reflect activities to be performed for releases 4 through 6 of increment 1 and for releases 1 and 2 of increment 2 . the deams program manager stated that a comprehensive schedule for increment 1 that included the activities for all six releases would not be completed until mid - 2014 . the program manager also stated that increment 2 had not been included because program officials did not know the detailed activities to be performed that far in advance . to address this issue , the deams program office developed a roadmap depicting releases 1 through 6 of increment 1 and releases 1 and 2 of increment 2 with a full deployment date of fiscal year 2017 . however , the program office did not provide a schedule that supported the estimated dates in the roadmap . a comprehensive schedule should reflect all of a program's activities and recognize that uncertainties and unknown factors in schedule estimates can stem from , among other things , data limitations . as such , a schedule incorporates different levels of detail depending on the information available at any point in time . that is , near - term effort will be planned in greater detail than long - term effort . effort beyond the near term that is less well defined is represented within the schedule as long - term planning packages . planning packages are a summarization of the work to be performed in the distant future with less specificity . planning packages are planned at higher levels such that a single activity may represent several months of effort , generic work to be accomplished , or even a future contract or phase . planning packages can be used as long as they are defined and estimated as well as possible . by not including all work for all deliverables for both increments and all releases , the deams program could incur difficulties resulting from an incomplete understanding of the plan and what constitutes a successful conclusion for the program . deams program officials provided a draft of the schedule management plan that documented their intent to use a planning package approach when updating the deams schedule in the future . resources were identified in the schedule ; however , the resources were not assigned to specific activities in the schedule . although our analysis determined that activity durations were manageable and reasonably estimated , resource availability affects estimates of work and its duration , as well as resources that will be available for subsequent activities . deams program management officials told us that government resource allocations are determined by management as needed .