ii ) . municipal networks are eligible to receive federal funding , but not all municipal networks discussed in this report received federal funding . some municipalities support broadband deployment by funding , building , and operating networks to provide broadband access to their communities , much as some cities offer utilities such as water and electricity . the municipal entity providing this service may be , for example , a department within the city government or a cooperative formed among several communities . communities have used federal funds , issued bonds , and taken out loans to fund the construction of municipal broadband networks . in some instances , voter referendums have been required for the city to take out loans or bonds for this purpose . east - central vermont community fiber - optic network ( ec fiber ) ; publicly owned , privately funded . a group of 23 vermont municipalities collaborated to build this “open - access” fiber - optic network to provide internet and voice service to homes and businesses . ec fiber contracts with a non - profit internet service provider to operate the network . construction costs were approximately $5 million , most of which was financed through local private investors . by december 2013 , ec fiber had 550 subscribers and had raised $4.7 million from 365 investors — 90 percent of whom are residents of towns the network serves or will serve . the founders decided on a local private - funding model after the 2008 financial crisis made private financing from the u.s. capital markets difficult to obtain and after the project did not receive the recovery act's broadband deployment funds . however , project sponsors said one of the challenges of privately funding a publicly owned network was that the time frame for completing the network depends on the rate at which investments can be raised , which can vary according to the economic circumstances of each area's residents . for example , the construction of the network is progressing in phases , with new segments being built as investments are raised by residents , a process that makes rapid expansion difficult . the service provider operating the network leases 39 miles of middle - mile and last - mile fiber - optic capacity from a statewide open access network being built by the vermont telecommunications authority , a state agency that in 2013 provided ec fiber a grant of $167,569 that funded an expansion into unserved portions of two communities . utah telecommunication open infrastructure agency ( utopia ) ; publicly owned , publicly funded . utopia is a local government agency owned by 16 utah municipalities , 11 of which raised public funding through bonds to build a $177-million fiber - optic open - access network over which private providers offer internet , voice , and video services . five municipalities decided not to raise funds , but remain on the network's board and can decide to pursue financing for their cities at a later date . some of the network's municipalities own infrastructure , such as utility poles , which sponsors said helps reduce the cost and increase the speed of deploying broadband .