we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with the four recommendations . the department concurred with our first recommendation to consistently calculate the civilian personnel adjustment and stated that it plans to reevaluate the civilian personnel adjustment to account for categories of services excluded from the spending limit in the future . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from march 2014 through december 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod has implemented a number of initiatives to generate savings from reductions in its civilian and contract workforces in recent years . for example , in august 2010 , the secretary of defense directed dod to undertake department - wide efficiency initiatives to reduce duplication , overhead , and excess across the department . among other things , the efficiency initiatives specified that dod should freeze ( or cap ) the civilian workforce at the fiscal year 2010 levels for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 . in 2012 the senate committee on armed services cited the need to maintain the appropriate balance between the civilian and contract workforce and to achieve the expected savings from reductions in both workforces , and congress enacted provisions to limit dod's service contracts . section 808 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2012 limited dod's total obligations for contract services in 2012 and 2013 to the amount requested for these services in the fiscal year 2010 president's budget request . the limit does not apply to contract services for military construction , research and development , and services funded for overseas contingency operations . additionally , it provides for two adjustments to the spending limit above fiscal year 2010 budgeted levels . dod may adjust contract services spending above 2010 levels to account for ( 1 ) funding increases associated with contract services that were transferred from overseas contingency operations to the base budget and ( 2 ) the cost of additional civilian personnel positions over fiscal year 2010 levels . as shown in table 1 , dod identified an aggregate spending limit of $56.47 billion for fiscal year 2012 and $57.46 billion for fiscal year 2013 . the spending limit identified in the act applied to the entire department ; therefore , components could exceed their individual targets but dod would still be in compliance with the law if total spending for contract services across the entire department was less than the aggregate spending limit . section 808 contract services spending limits ended after fiscal year 2013 , but congress extended the spending limit through fiscal while year 2014 in section 802 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2014.spending limit requirements currently expire at the end of fiscal year 2014 , draft legislation contains a provision to extend the spending limit requirement through fiscal year 2015 .