contractors . pepfar's efforts to develop and augment partner countries' supply chain systems are critical to support continued progress in the fight against hiv / aids because inadequate or poorly functioning supply chains pose risks to individual as well as to public health outcomes . patients on treatment receive daily doses of arv drugs on a continuing , lifelong basis . skipped doses due to gaps in supply and expired or otherwise unusable arv drugs can lead to ineffective treatment and increased viral resistance , necessitating newer , more expensive drugs.health resources . for example , overstocking of drugs can lead to waste as drugs expire and can no longer be used , potentially resulting in fewer patients receiving treatment . our recent reports have concluded that pepfar has helped partner countries expand treatment programs and increase program efficiency and effectiveness . pepfar's per - patient treatment costs have declined significantly , facilitating substantial increases in the number of people on arv treatment . in addition , pepfar has helped partner countries increase the percentage of eligible people receiving treatment and has reported high treatment retention rates at facilities in some countries . pepfar has also worked with u.s. implementing agencies , international donors , and partner countries to increase the efficiency and reliability of arv drug supply chains . according to ogac , pepfar's per - patient treatment costs declined from about $1,053 to about $339 from 2005 to 2011 , based on budget calculations . as we reported , detailed studies of the estimated costs of providing hiv treatment services in eight countries also show declining per - patient treatment costs . purchasing generic arv drugs , together with declining drug prices , has led to substantial savings . ogac estimates that pepfar has saved $934 million since fiscal year 2005 by buying generic versions of arv drugs instead of equivalent branded products . moreover , declining prices for specific arv products have led to declining prices for the arv treatment regimens recommended for use in resource - limited settings . for example , figure 1 shows how average prices have declined for three comparable first - line treatment regimens . pepfar's analyses of data from eight country treatment - cost studies indicate that per - patient costs also declined as programs realized economies of scale while taking on new patients . furthermore , the analyses suggest that costs decreased as countries' treatment programs matured , particularly in the first year after programs expanded , and reduced one - time investments . our recent work also concluded that per - patient cost savings have facilitated substantial increases in the number of people on arv treatment . since the end of fiscal year 2008 – the year it was reauthorized – pepfar has directly supported arv treatment for over 3.3 million additional people . moreover , in fiscal year 2012 , pepfar added more people to arv treatment than in any previous year . in september 2012 , an estimated 8 million were on arv treatment in low - and middle - income countries , of which pepfar directly supported about 5.1 million ( see fig .