completed . hhs reported that cms revised its invoice review policy to better define roles and responsibilities . we reviewed the cms revised invoice review policy and determined that new invoice payment procedures contain clear roles and responsibilities . no action taken . hhs reported that cms revised its invoice review policy . cms's actions are unresponsive to the recommendation . the revised policy does not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit to support the invoices or what would be needed for the project officer , contracting specialist , or contracting officer to validate information in the invoices . no action taken . hhs reported that cms revised its invoice review policy . cms's actions are unresponsive to the recommendation . the revised policy still contains the use of negative certification as a default . this policy does not provide criteria to consider potential risk factors for the use of negative certification in the review of contractor's invoices and discuss circumstances that warrant the use of this method . hhs reported that cms provided invoice review training to the oagm staff and project officers on may 7 and may 15 , 2008 . actions insufficient . actions taken do not achieve intent of recommendation . according to the oagm internal training schedule , they provided training on invoice review procedures . however , since cms has not addressed two of the three recommendations on invoice review — specifically , guidelines to contracting officers on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed and establishing criteria for the use of negative certification ( see above ) — actions taken do not achieve the intent of the recommendation . completed . hhs reported that they have implemented the acquisition career management information system ( acmis ) . acmis is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities . hhs's implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation . actions insufficient . hhs reported that cms developed a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts overdue awaiting closeout and that cms reduced this backlog by the end of fiscal year 2007 from 581 to 407 contracts . cms provided its fiscal year 2009 contract closeout plan ; however , the plan did not include a comprehensive strategy to reduce the backlog of contracts that are eligible and overdue for closeout . for example , it did not contain a workload analysis , such as a list of contracts eligible for closeout by contracting officer or specialist or an estimate of the number of hours or audit funds it would need to close the contracts . the fiscal year 2009 plan only contained three bullets stating that oagm would provide quarterly reports to the division directors and training to oagm staff . it also stated that oagm would establish “a contract closeout day.” furthermore , as discussed in the body of this report , the backlog of contracts overdue for closeout persists . actions insufficient . hhs reported that cms will review the questionable payments identified in gao - 08-54 to determine whether cms should seek reimbursement from the contractors .