( see fig . thus , relatively fewer workers will be available to produce the goods and services that all will consume . lower labor force growth will lead to slower growth in the economy and to slower growth of federal revenues . as noted earlier , these trends have major implications for federal budget policy and will prompt a reexamination of national retirement programs , health care and workforce policies . in part this is a question of time horizons . policy action , or inaction , has implications far beyond today . how can policymaking institutions develop the capacity to consider the implications of actions or inaction for current as well as future generations ? a longer - term perspective may be essential to keeping ahead of the “crisis curve,” but it can also offer other benefits . if the time horizon for policy debates recognized longer - term forces , it would be easier for leaders to make the case for change to the broader public since it permits changes to be phased in over many years . whether it be future labor force trends or long - term health care costs , policymakers will need far better performance and cost information as they take on such broad - ranging issues . to continue to be a leading democracy in the information age may very well mean producing unique public sources of objective , independent , scientifically grounded , and widely shared quality information so that we know where the united states stands now and what the trends are on both absolute and relative bases — including comparisons with other nations . by ensuring that the best facts are made more accessible and usable by the many different members of our society , we increase the probability of well - framed questions and debates along with effective solutions . the stakes are high , including considerations regarding allocating scarce public resources , strengthening the economy , creating jobs , stimulating future industries , enhancing security , promoting safety , protecting privacy , strengthening our competitive edge , and sustaining the environment . addressing newly emergent issues and transformational change calls for a policy process that can look at broader issues across the narrow confines of individual programs , agencies , and tools . many emerging issues are cross - cutting in nature and the policy process will have to be comprehensive enough to address these new tradeoffs . however , federal programs remain highly fragmented , reflecting a policymaking process that is overly stovepiped by agency and program , with insufficient focus on how individual programs contribute to overarching , crosscutting goals and missions . although these individual programs address common or similar performance goals , they result in an overly fragmented delivery network and at times work at cross purposes . for example , federal food safety programs are carried out by 12 agencies with differing enforcement criteria and inspection practices . the government performance and results act ( gpra ) provided for a governmentwide performance plan to address these crosscutting issues , but this plan has not yet been developed by the executive branch .