dhs concurred with the recommendations in our report . two programs were found to be high risk . however , despite these efforts , dhs's independent auditor found that the agency was still not in compliance with ipia as reported in its fiscal year 2006 par , primarily because not all programs subject to ipia were tested , and the population of disbursements tested for some programs was not complete . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or at williamsm1@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . to determine to what extent the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has implemented the requirements of the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) , we compared the ipia legislation , and the related office of management and budget ( omb ) implementing guidance , with dhs improper payment risk assessment methodologies , and ipia performance and accountability report ( par ) information for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 . to analyze dhs risk assessment compliance with ipia , we obtained and reviewed documents regarding its regulations and methodology for identifying programs and activities highly susceptible to improper payments . we reviewed dhs's pars , office of inspector general ( oig ) semiannual reports to the congress , and gao reports for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 for improper payment information . we also reviewed procedures performed by dhs's independent financial statement auditor related to dhs's compliance with ipia . we reviewed the programs that dhs identified as its ipia population and analyzed the risk assessments that were performed during fiscal year 2006 . this allowed us to determine which components did not perform a risk assessment and which programs were not covered . during our review , we noted that the office of grants and training ( gt ) , a dhs component , did not perform an assessment or complete payment statistical sample testing on its grants programs for fiscal year 2006 as required of all dhs programs issuing more than $100 million of ipia relevant payments in fiscal year 2005 . to analyze improper payments related to dhs grantees and highlight the importance of performing ipia testing in this area , we obtained and reviewed fiscal year 2005 single audit reports of these entities . we used fiscal year 2005 reports because that is the most recent year for which complete audit results have been posted to the federal audit clearinghouse ( fac ) .