pub . 107-210 , division a , 116 stat . for this report , we refer to individuals who qualify for the hctc because they lost employment as a result of trade agreements as taa recipients and those who qualify for hctc because they receive payments from pbgc as pbgc beneficiaries . pbgc beneficiaries are individuals who receive payments from pbgc because their pension plan was terminated . the hctc at the time their premium is due each month , thereby lowering the amount they have to pay out of pocket for health coverage . additional data from this survey are included in gao , trade adjustment assistance: reforms have accelerated training enrollment , but implementation challenges remain , gao - 04-1012 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 22 , 2004 ) . geographic regions of the country . from irs , we obtained data on which types of plans states had designated as state - qualified coverage options , which types of coverage advance hctc enrollees purchased , and the cost of coverage purchased by advance hctc enrollees . irs provided these data on a monthly basis from august 2003 through june 2004 and on a cumulative basis from august 2003 through april 2004 . we obtained information about the benefits available to hctc recipients from officials at qualified health plans in the eight states we reviewed , cobra administrators , and the henry j. kaiser family foundation and the health research and educational trust's national survey of employers' health benefits . data on demographic characteristics , types of coverage purchased , premiums paid for coverage , and information on why some potentially eligible individuals did not claim the hctc were not available for end - of - year hctc recipients in 2002 or 2003 . we obtained information about irs's implementation of the hctc from officials at irs , labor , hhs , and pbgc ; a survey we conducted of officials in each state workforce agency ; state workforce , department of insurance , and 10 health plan officials in the eight states we reviewed ; and cobra administrators , representatives from the blue cross and blue shield association , and representatives from the united steelworkers of america , which had members eligible to receive the hctc . we also interviewed officials from accenture , the primary contractor responsible for implementing the advance hctc , and reviewed contract documents . we received an overall response rate of 98 percent ; however , the response rates for specific questions in the survey varied . labor provided us with information on the national emergency grant awards , and hhs's centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) provided us with information on high - risk pool grant awards . we obtained additional information about these grants and why states did not apply for them from our survey of state workforce agencies , officials in the states we reviewed , and officials from the hctc program office and cms . we obtained information from irs officials regarding the data checks and edits they perform on their data and any notable limitations , and determined that the data used in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .