tex . tex . ariz. tex . n.y. ariz. tex . mich. ariz. n.y. tex . tex . calif. mich. mich. tex . this site comprises multiple poes at this location . according to the us - visit program office , us - visit entry capability was installed at the following land poe by december 31 , 2005 . the list is arranged in state alphabetical order . protecting the privacy of visitors to the united states is one of the four stated primary mission goals of the us - visit program . we and others have raised questions in recent years about the potential privacy risks surrounding the use of rfid technology to track the movement of persons , as opposed to goods ; the potential for the technology to be subverted for surveillance purposes , rather than identification ; and the potential for “function creep,” whereby information collected for one purpose gradually develops other secondary uses , such as has occurred with social security numbers . in congressional testimony , we have noted that the use of rfid tags and associated databases raises important security considerations related to the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of the data on the tags and in the databases , and in how this information is being protected . we have noted , as well , that while the federal government had begun using rfid technology for a variety of applications — to track and identify assets , weapons , and baggage on flights , for example — using this technology for generic inventory control did not raise the same privacy issues as using it to track the movement of persons . the us - visit program office has taken steps to meet statutory and congressional requirements protecting the privacy of individuals who would be affected if rfid technology were to be implemented as part of the us - visit exit and re - entry process , and to address the privacy concerns raised by us and others . according to omb guidance , a privacy impact assessment should be conducted before an agency develops or procures an information technology system , such as the proposed rfid system , which collects , maintains , or disseminates information about an individual — in this case , numeric information that may be linked to biographic information contained within databases . in january 2004 , dhs published a privacy impact assessment in the federal register , as required by law , for the initial deployment of us - visit , and published the latest in a series of updated privacy impact assessments in july 2005 , addressing privacy issues related to the proof - of - concept testing of rfid for increment 2c . in its july 2005 privacy impact assessment , dhs said that by design , the information embedded in the rfid - readable i - 94 tag does not compromise a visitor's security , for the following reasons and with the following strictures: passive rfid minimizes privacy impacts and reduces the chance of visitors being surreptitiously tracked because it does not constantly transmit information or “beacon” a signal .