bove . ddress improper pyment or ipia in it par or nnual report for fil yer 2006 , fil yer 2007 , or both . l yer 2007 was the firt yer thi gency was inclded in ocope of review . nnual report was not ilble as of the end of fieldwork . t it wold etimte improper pyment in the fre for thi progrm . see tble 1 of thi tetimony . m no longer susceptible to ignificnt improper pyment . t the nnual improper pyment mont or error rte was zero . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . i for a list of the 39 agencies. ) we reviewed improper payment information reported for 35 of the 39 agencies' fiscal year 2007 pars or annual reports . we also reviewed omb guidance on implementation of ipia and the recovery auditing act . in addition , we reviewed agency office of inspector general ( oig ) reports on management challenges to identify internal control weaknesses and program integrity issues for agency programs reporting improper payment estimates for fiscal year 2007 . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . agencies reported improper payment estimates of almost $55 billion in their fiscal year 2007 pars or annual reports , an increase from the fiscal year 2006 estimate of about $41 billion . the reported increase was primarily attributable to a component of the medicaid program reporting improper payment estimates for the first time totaling about $13 billion for fiscal year 2007 , which we view as a positive step to improve transparency over the full magnitude of improper payments . the $55 billion estimate consists of 78 programs in 21 agencies ( see app . ii for further details ) and represents about 2 percent of total fiscal year 2007 federal executive branch agencies' government outlays of almost $2.8 trillion . in addition , the $55 billion largely consists of improper payments made in eight programs , as shown in figure 1 . collectively , the eight programs account for about $48 billion or approximately 88 percent of the total estimate . also , of the total improper payment estimate of $55 billion , we identified 19 programs and activities that estimated improper payments for the first time in their fiscal year 2007 pars , totaling about $16 billion . of these 19 programs , we identified 6 — including medicaid — that had been required to report selected improper payment information for several years prior to the passage of ipia . in total , these 6 programs represented $14.8 billion , or 94 percent , of the approximately $16 billion in newly reported programs .