drydock obsolescence . several of the shipyards' drydocks are not able to support existing submarine classes , including the los angeles - class attack submarine . other drydocks can support vessels only when assisted by particular equipment or environmental conditions such as tidal schedules ( see sidebar ) . our analysis shows that as the navy retires existing aircraft carriers and submarines and replaces them with newer classes , the shipyards will become increasingly constrained in scheduling and performing maintenance using their existing drydocks . only 11 of the 18 drydocks in use are configured to perform maintenance on the newer ship and submarine classes being procured by the navy , such as the larger ford - class aircraft carrier and the virginia - class submarine ( see figure 5 ) . according to a june 2017 draft drydock study from the navy , without making new investments in drydocks , the shipyards will increasingly encounter scheduling delays waiting for access to the 11 drydocks that are configured for the newer classes . additionally , drydock 1 at portsmouth naval shipyard and drydock 3 at pearl harbor require buoyancy assistance equipment to provide additional lift to reduce the submarine's waterborne draft to move it into the drydock . in its 2017 draft drydock study , the navy reports that , without the use of buoyancy assistance equipment , these two drydocks could no longer dock any of the navy's current submarines . while this workaround allows the shipyards to repair some current classes of submarines , the navy's study says it will not be sufficient in the future for newer classes . additionally , shipyard officials said that drydock 3 at puget sound can move los angeles class submarines in or out only after they have had several tons of weight removed and only during a high tide . this drydock is primarily used for submarine reactor compartment disposal . flooding vulnerabilities . four of norfolk's 5 drydocks face flooding threats from extreme high tides and storm swells and average one major flooding event per year . according to officials , drydock flooding during certain delicate depot maintenance tasks risks personnel safety , catastrophic damage to the ships being repaired , and potential environmental impacts . for example , the navy reported in 2009 that a drydock at norfolk required emergency repairs to prevent flooding while the uss tennessee ( ssbn - 734 ) was undergoing maintenance . according to a 2009 navy incident report , several days of high tides and winds , coupled with multiple leaks in the drydock's granite block joints , resulted in the drydock flooding at an estimated rate of 3,000 gallons per minute before workers could repair it . seismic vulnerabilities . the navy's drydocks were not designed to accommodate the risks posed by seismic events . for example , at puget sound naval shipyard — located in an area identified by the u. s. geological survey as a “high seismic hazard zone” — a 7.0 magnitude or greater earthquake could damage or ruin the only drydock on the west coast that is capable of performing maintenance on aircraft carriers . as recently as 2001 , the puget sound region experienced a 6.8 magnitude earthquake .