gao - 17-262t . washington , d.c.: december 1 , 2016 . i will outline these issues in more detail below . in addition to significant changes to the acquisition strategy for lcs , the program has also deviated substantially from expectations about its cost , schedule , and the capabilities the ship would provide with the seaframes as well as with the modular mission packages . all the while , the navy has continued to request funding to buy more ships and mission packages , and congress has appropriated funds . for lcs 3 , the shipbuilder was responsible for 30 percent of the cost of the first $100,000 in defects — a number the navy surpassed just days after delivery . thus , the navy was 100 percent responsible for the costs of all remaining defects . for lcs 5-8 , the shipbuilder is responsible for some portion of the first $1 million in defects for each ship . time will tell whether this amount is sufficient to account for discovered defects . turning to cost and schedule , our recent work has shown that lcs under construction have exceeded contract cost targets , with the government responsible for paying for a portion of the cost growth . this growth has prompted the navy to request $246 million in additional funding for fiscal years 2015-2017 , largely to address cost overruns on 12 lcs seaframes . similarly , deliveries of almost all lcs under contract at both shipyards ( lcs 5-26 ) have been delayed by several months , and , in some cases , close to a year or longer . navy officials recently reported that , despite having had 5 years of lcs construction to help stabilize ship delivery expectations , the program would not deliver four lcs in fiscal year 2016 as planned . the lcs mission packages have also lagged behind expectations . the navy has fallen short of demonstrating that the lcs with its mission packages can meet the minimum level of capability defined at the beginning of the program . as figure 2 shows , 24 lcs seaframes will already be delivered by the time all three mission packages achieve only a minimum level of capability . since 2007 , delivery of the total initial mission package operational capability has been delayed by about 9 years ( from 2011 to 2020 ) and the navy has lowered the level of performance needed to achieve the initial capability for two packages — surface warfare and mine countermeasures . as the navy continues to concurrently deliver seaframes and develop mission packages , it has become clear that the seaframes and mission package technologies were not mature and remain largely unproven . another area of concern is changes to the lcs concept of operations as a consequence of less than expected lethality and survivability . lcs was designed with reduced requirements as compared to other surface combatants , and over time the navy has lowered several survivability and lethality requirements further and removed some design features — making the ships less survivable in their expected threat environments and less lethal than initially planned . this has forced the navy to redefine how it plans to operate the ships .