gao - 04-234 . washington , d.c.: january 6 , 2004 . d.c. child and family services: better policy implementation and documentation of related activities would help improve performance . gao - 03-646 . washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2003 . cfsa managers said that scheduling of court hearings has improved . scheduling information allows caseworkers to plan their case management duties such that they do not conflict with court appearances . further , the district's office of the chief technology officer ( octo ) , responsible for leading the information technology development for the district's data exchange effort , has developed a prototype , or model , to enable the exchange of data among the police department , social service agencies , and the superior court . while the district has made progress , it has not yet fully addressed or resolved several critical issues we reported in august 2002 . these issues include the need to specify the integration requirements of the superior court and district agencies and to resolve privacy restrictions and data quality issues among district agencies . the district is preparing plans and expects to begin developing a data sharing capability and data warehouses to enable data sharing among cfsa , the department of human services' youth services administration , the department of mental health , and the family court in 2004 . according to the program manager , octo will work to resolve the issues we raised in our august 2002 report and incorporate the solutions into its plans . while the superior court , the family court , and the district have made progress in implementing the d.c. family court act of 2001 , several issues continue to affect the court's progress in meeting all requirements of the act . several barriers , such as a lack of substance abuse services , hinder the court's ability to more quickly process cases . while the superior court and the district have made progress in exchanging information and building a greater capability to perform this function , it remains paramount that their plans fully address several critical issues we previously reported and our prior recommendations . finally , while progress has been made in enhancing the working relationship between the family court and cfsa , this is an area that requires continuous vigilance and improvement in order to ensure the safety and well being of the district's children and families . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . they have been working together to address some of these hindrances . for example , the family court and cfsa participate in various planning meetings . in addition , family court judges and cfsa caseworkers have participated in training sessions together . these sessions provide participants with information about case management responsibilities and various court proceedings , with the intent of improving and enhancing their mutual understanding about key issues .