( app . iii provides additional information on task force initiatives. ) another dod effort to reduce fuel demand is the development of new fuel - efficient generators and environmental control units . a dod joint program organization , the project manager - mobile electric power office , is responsible for providing a modernized standard family of mobile electric power generators to the military services . according to the office , many of dod's generators have been in use for about three decades , exceeding their expected life cycle of 15 years . the office is developing a next generation of generators , called the advanced medium mobile power sources , which employ advanced technologies to achieve greater fuel efficiency and other improvements over current military generators . when fully fielded , the new generators are expected to consume approximately 28 million gallons less fuel per year than the tactical quiet generators currently in use by the army . according to a project manager - mobile electric power official , dod plans to begin procuring these new generators in 2010 at a weighted average cost of about $18,000 per generator . in addition , officials said that the project manager - mobile electric power office intends to replace its current environmental control units with improved environmental control units to provide cooling , heating , and dehumidifying for servicemembers and material systems . the improved units are expected to reduce energy consumption by up to 25 percent over current units . ( see fig . an official told us that one version of the improved units is currently in low - rate initial production and a contract for another version is expected to be awarded in february 2009 . the project manager - mobile electric power office also has initiatives under way to improve the efficiency of power generation . for example , the office has fielded a more fuel - efficient method of generating power , called central power , at tactical operations centers ( command posts ) for the army's 4th infantry division . previously , power for these operations centers was provided by many small generator sets that had a large logistics footprint ; required considerable fuel , maintenance , and personnel to operate ; and were subject to disruptions in continuous power . details about our scope and methodology are contained in appendix ii . at any given time , the united states has a large portion of its military personnel serving abroad in forward - deployed locations . the forward presence of military forces at overseas locations is critical to supporting u.s. strategic interests . forward - deployed forces provide the basic building blocks with which to project military power in crises and strengthen u.s. military access . while the numbers of personnel and locations vary with the frequency and types of military operations and deployment demands , military operations in iraq and afghanistan have led to the creation of several hundred new locations . operational control of u.s. military forces at forward - deployed locations is assigned to the nation's six geographic , unified overseas regional commands , which include central command .