( see fig . newsteps has also reviewed the data definitions used for the data repository to address variability in data collection and reporting among states . aphl officials said that , as a result of this review , newsteps revised guidance documents for its data dictionary to , for example , more clearly separate screening timeliness data for first specimens from data for subsequent specimens . newsteps is working with states participating in the program to help ensure they use these revised definitions consistently when submitting timeliness data to the data repository . aphl officials told us they plan to publish state - specific reports on the newsteps website by early 2017 to promote continuous quality improvement by allowing states and others an opportunity to review states' progress toward meeting the advisory committee's benchmarks . according to these officials , each state will be able to track its progress on a specific time - frame goal over time , as well as examine how its timeliness compares to that of other states . state newborn screening officials identified numerous barriers to timeliness in each of the three stages of the newborn screening process and developed a variety of strategies to address these barriers . hrsa , through its cooperative agreement for newsteps 360 , has been funding activities to provide technical assistance to states to address barriers and improve the timeliness of newborn screening . newborn screening officials from 51 states who responded to the advisory committee's 2014 survey identified numerous barriers to timeliness in each of the three stages of the newborn screening process . examples of barriers include a lack of understanding of the importance of timely screening among providers performing out - of - hospital births ( stage 1 ) , limited courier availability ( stage 2 ) , and insufficient lab operating hours ( stage 3 ) . newborn screening officials in selected states told us they developed a variety of strategies to address these barriers . newborn screening officials who responded to the 2014 survey identified barriers to timely collection of newborn screening specimens . barriers included nursing protocols that are not always consistent with advisory committee time - frame goals , lack of feedback to hospitals on timeliness performance , and lack of understanding of the importance of timely screening for out - of - hospital births . ( see table 6. ) newborn screening officials in the four selected states we interviewed reported developing strategies to address the barriers . newborn screening officials from selected states reported that following nursing protocols that are inconsistent with the advisory committee's time - frame goals can cause delays . for example , according to newborn screening officials in one state , nursing protocols often dictate that specimen collection be performed as late as possible prior to the baby's discharge from the hospital . according to these officials , this protocol can result in late collection of some specimens ; for example , among newborns born via caesarean - section , who often have longer hospital stays .