under the provisions of h.r . 723 , however , brookhaven science associates would be able to limit its payments for civil penalties . this change would result in a more consistent application of civil penalties among nonprofit contractors . modifications to h.r . 723 could help clarify and strengthen the penalty provisions h.r . 723 eliminates both the exemption from paying the penalties provided by statute and the exemption allowed at the secretary's discretion . while addressing the main problems we discussed in our 1999 report , we have several observations about clarifications needed to the proposed bill . the “discretionary fee” referred to in the bill is unclear . 723 , while eliminating the exemption , limits the amount of civil penalties that can be imposed on nonprofit contractors . this limit is the amount of "discretionary fees" paid to the contractor under the contract under which the violation occurs . the meaning of the term “discretionary fee” is unclear and might be interpreted to mean all or only a portion of the fee paid . in general , the total fee — that is , the amount that exceeds the contractor's reimbursable costs — under doe's management and operating contracts consists of a base fee amount and an incentive fee amount . the base fee is set in the contract . the amount of the available incentive fee paid to the contractor is determined by the contracting officer on the basis of the contractor's performance . since the base fee is a set amount , and the incentive fee is determined at the contracting officer's discretion , the term “discretionary fee” may be interpreted to refer only to the incentive fee and to exclude the base fee amount . we have four observations about the specific language in the bill . first , the definition of the amount of fee at risk is unclear . 723 , while eliminating the exemption , provides a limitation on the amount of civil penalties that can be imposed on nonprofit contractors . the bill would limit the amount of any payment for penalties assessed against tax - exempt contractors to a contractor's “discretionary fee.” in general , a contractor's total fee consists of a base fee , which is set in the contract , and an incentive fee , which is based on performance . it is not clear whether the term “ discretionary fee” applies to all , or only a part of , a contractor's fee . second , if the congress decides to limit the amount of fee at risk by specifying that “discretionary fee” means only the incentive fee portion of the total fee , the ability to impose penalties on nonprofit contractors may be limited . two of the nonprofit contractors receive only a base fee ( and no incentive fee ) and , therefore , would continue to be exempt from paying civil penalties . contractors may also try to limit their exposure to penalties by shifting more of their total fee to a base fee and away from an incentive fee . such an action could undermine both the penalty provision and doe's emphasis on performance - based contracting because a lower fee will depend on the contractor's performance .