( see app . i for examples from our prior reports on management weaknesses related to the navy. ) to determine the reasons for shortages of mission - related spare parts for the ea - 6b and the f - 14 , we reviewed requisition data at the naval inventory control point - philadelphia and judgmentally selected 50 parts that affected the capability of the two aircraft to perform their missions . these parts had the largest number of unfilled requisitions at the time of our visit: the end of may and june 2000 for the ea - 6b and the end of july 2000 for the f - 14 . we interviewed the managers responsible for each selected part . to obtain customer views of critical parts problems , we also attended f - 14 and ea - 6b supply conferences . to help validate the reasons inventory managers provided for the parts shortages , we reviewed inventory management documents such as the march 2000 stratification reports , the 5-year demand history , and other relevant supply management documentation , including repair facility production schedules and completion data for the fourth quarter of fiscal year1998 through the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2000 from the naval inventory control point - philadelphia industrial support division . to identify initiatives that the navy and the defense logistics agency have under way or planned to address spare parts shortages for all aircraft , we interviewed navy and marine corps headquarters officials and examined relevant documentation . specifically , we reviewed the navy's logistics transformation plan for fiscal year 2000 and the navy and marine corps reports on the best commercial inventory practices . we also discussed various initiatives with naval supply systems command and naval inventory control point officials . we reviewed our prior reports and relevant navy and department of defense reports and studies , including those published by the naval inspector general , the navy's aviation maintenance - supply readiness study group , and the office of the secretary of defense for program analysis and evaluation . during our audit , we interviewed supply and maintenance officials and obtained information from the following locations: deputy under secretary of defense for readiness ( personnel and readiness ) , arlington , virginia . joint chiefs of staff , logistics directorate , arlington , virginia . joint forces command , logistics directorate , norfolk , virginia . deputy chief of naval operations , fleet readiness and logistics , arlington , virginia . commander in chief , u.s. atlantic fleet , logistics directorate , norfolk , virginia . commander , naval air forces atlantic fleet , logistics directorate , norfolk , virginia . naval supply systems command , mechanicsburg , pennsylvania . naval inventory control point , philadelphia , pennsylvania . naval air systems command , patuxent river , maryland . naval air station , oceana , virginia beach , virginia . marine corps headquarters , aviation supply logistics , arlington , virginia . marine corps forces , atlantic , norfolk , virginia . second marine air wing and squadrons , cherry point , north carolina . defense logistics agency headquarters , alexandria , virginia , and defense supply center richmond , richmond , virginia .