reasonableness of costs . we found that allocating agencies had different ways for determining the reasonableness of project costs . based on our analysis of 58 qaps and our nine site visits , agencies had established various limits against which to evaluate the reasonableness of submitted costs , such as applying limits on development costs , total credit awards , developer fees , and builder's fees . section 42 does not provide a definition of reasonableness of costs , giving allocating agencies discretion on how best to determine what costs are appropriate for their respective localities . discretionary basis boosts . allocating agencies commonly “boosted” the basis for projects , but used widely varying criteria for doing so . section 42 notes that an increase or “boost” of up to 130 percent in the eligible basis can be awarded by an allocating agency to a housing development in a qualified census tract or difficult development area . according to our qap analysis , 44 of 58 plans we reviewed included criteria for awarding discretionary basis boosts , with 16 plans explicitly specifying the use of basis boosts for projects as needed for financial or economic feasibility . the discretionary boosts were applied to different types of projects and on different scales ( for example , statewide or citywide ) . for example , we found one development that received a boost to the eligible basis for having received certain green building certifications , although the applicant did not demonstrate financial need or request the boost . the allocating agency told us that all projects with specified green building certifications received the boost automatically , as laid out in its qap . at the time of our review , agency officials said that the agency had changed its practices to prevent automatic basis boosts from being applied and required additional checks for financial need . in another qap we reviewed , one agency described an automatic 130 percent statewide boost for all lihtc developments . according to the officials , the automatic statewide boost remained in effect because officials made the determination that nearly all projects would need it for financial feasibility . section 42 requires that allocating agencies determine that “discretionary basis boosts” were necessary for buildings to be financially feasible before granting them to developers . section 42 does not require allocating agencies to document their analysis for financial feasibility ( with or without the basis boost ) . however , legislative history for the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 included expectations that allocating agencies would set standards in their qaps for which projects would be allocated additional credits , communicate the reasons for designating such criteria , and publicly express the basis for allocating additional credits to a project . in addition , ncsha ( a nonprofit advocating for state allocating agencies ) recommends that allocating agencies set standards in their qaps to determine eligibility for discretionary basis boosts and make the determinations publicly available . as of march 2017 , in response to our recommendation , irs officials said that they had explored possibilities to improve the database , which not only houses credit allocation information , but also data from noncompliance and building disposition forms .