gao - 03-373 . washington , d.c.: april 7 , 2003 . they also have concerns about compensation for such injuries . volunteers are concerned about the adequacy of cdc's screening process for ruling out volunteers with conditions that may put them at greater risk for severe reactions . for example , cdc recommends screening volunteers for pregnancy or hiv , either of which can put a volunteer at greater risk . however , volunteers do not believe they should have to undertake the effort and expense to independently be tested for these conditions . the provision of free testing for these risk factors as part of the screening process is left to the discretion of the individual participating jurisdictions and institutions . volunteers are concerned that the lack of free , routine testing could hinder identification of potential vaccinees who may not be aware that they are pregnant or have hiv . volunteers who work in hospitals are concerned about the possibility of transmission of vaccinia virus to their patients . cdc asserts that following optimal infection control practices , such as using special bandages and checking them daily , wearing clothing that covers the vaccination site , and hand washing , should essentially eliminate the risk of vaccinated health care workers transmitting vaccinia virus to patients . therefore , cdc guidance does not require that vaccinated workers be kept separate from patients until they can no longer transmit vaccinia virus . volunteers are uncertain whether the practices that cdc recommends will be sufficient . moreover , it is left to the individual participating jurisdictions and hospitals to determine whether any leave taken to avoid contact with patients will be paid for by the institution or the health care worker . thus , workers are concerned that they may lose income if they choose or are required to be kept separate from patients . nursing associations and unions representing health care workers are concerned about the two - pronged needle that cdc provides for use with the smallpox vaccine , noting that it lacks safety features such as a protective sheath available with other needles . health care workers assert that the needles being used in the program may increase the risk of needlesticks and exposure to the blood of vaccinees , both for those administering the vaccine and for those along the path of needle disposal . they have recommended that an alternative needle with safety features be used instead . cdc has stated that it does not provide these alternative needles because it has determined that no commercially available safety - engineered two - pronged needle is an appropriate replacement for the one included in the prepackaged kit it is distributing for the smallpox vaccination program . many of the organizations representing health care workers have expressed support for the goal of the program . however , in the literature some individual physicians have questioned the program and raised concerns that the risks of smallpox vaccination to workers , their families , and patients may outweigh the benefits to society of preparedness for a smallpox attack .