( see fig . o operational o not operational b . does this plant produce the following types of products ? we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at https: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at 202-512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . ( all , more than half , about half , less than half , none ) e. approximately how much of this plant's printing volume is digital printing ? ( all , more than half , about half , less than half , none ) f. approximately how much of this plant's printing volume is duplication ? ( all , more than half , about half , less than half , none ) we asked all survey participants the following questions about any in - house printing plants not listed in the jcp 1990 printing and binding regulations: 7 . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . to address our objectives , we developed working definitions of key printing terms — “printing” , “duplication” , and “printing plant” — to use when surveying and interviewing agencies on their current printing practices . to do this we used existing statutory language for “printing” and “printing plant” from title 44 of u.s. code , public printing and documents , and the joint committee on printing's 1990 printing and binding regulations ( 1990 jcp regulations ) . to define “duplication” we worked with gpo and the interagency council on printing and publication services to update the definition of duplication in the 1990 jcp regulations . we considered volumes above 500 copies of a single page and 2,500 copies in the aggregate of multiple pages “duplication,” and volumes below that “copying” . this allowed us to identify agencies' printing operations that qualified as printing plants rather than lower volume copying operations , sometimes referred to as “copy centers” . in interviews with selected agencies , printing officials expressed confusion over this definition of “duplication” , in part due to the volume limits distinguishing duplication from copying . the volume limits we used were similar but not the same as limits outlined in the 1990 jcp regulations on the number of pages agencies are permitted to produce in - house without prior authority of the jcp ( 5,000 copies of a single page or 25,000 in the aggregate of multiple pages ) . ( all , more than half , about half , less than half , none ) g. approximately how much of this plant's printing volume is duplication ? ( all , more than half , about half , less than half , none ) .