this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . 720 requires that the head of a federal agency submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and to the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . nor did the commission adequately restrict privileges to a system database . in addition , new requests or modifications for user access to the edgar system were not reviewed by its system owner ; nor was current documentation maintained on user privileges granted to individuals based on their roles and divisions . the commission also continued to experience difficulty implementing a process to effectively remove network system accounts from separated employees and adequately controlling access to sensitive information . these conditions provide more opportunities for unauthorized individuals to escalate their privileges and make unauthorized changes to files . physical security controls are important for protecting computer facilities and resources from espionage , sabotage , damage , and theft . these controls restrict physical access to computer resources , usually by limiting access to the buildings and rooms in which the resources are housed and by periodically reviewing the access granted in order to ensure that access continues to be appropriate . at sec , physical access control measures ( such as guards , badges , and locks — used alone or in combination ) are vital to protecting the agency's sensitive computing resources from both external and internal threats . sec policy requires that specific procedures be followed to protect and control physical access to sensitive work areas in its facilities . sec procedures for protecting and controlling physical access to sensitive work areas were not always followed . specifically , the commission had not properly implemented perimeter security at a key location . guards at the location did not inspect photo identification and expiration dates . in addition , the commission did not adequately restrict physical access to its network in public locations . until sec fully addresses its physical security vulnerabilities , there is increased risk that unauthorized individuals could gain access to sensitive computing resources and data and inadvertently or deliberately misuse or destroy them . to protect an organization's information , it is important to ensure that only authorized applications and programs are placed in operation and that the applications are securely configured . this process , known as configuration management , consists of instituting policies , procedures , and techniques to help ensure that all programs and program modifications are properly authorized , tested , and approved . computer - supported federal operations are likewise at risk . our previous reports and reports by several agencies' inspectors general describe persistent information security weaknesses that place a variety of federal operations at risk of inappropriate disclosure , fraud , and disruption . we have designated information security as a governmentwide high - risk area since 1997 .