income data from the ndnh and ssi payments from ssa . as mentioned in our report , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) stated that the data on possible ssn misuse we identified may add to the depth of dhs investigations by identifying indicators of potentially egregious employers who knowingly hire unauthorized workers . we revised the report to clarify gao had national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) data that included fiscal year 2010 . as mentioned in the report , we state that the exact number of individuals who received ssi overpayments and the exact amount of overpayments made to those individuals cannot be determined without detailed case investigations by ssa . gao - 11-724 and gao - 13-635 . in addition to our overall analysis , we randomly selected five individuals for additional review of detailed ssi case - file information from a population of individuals who were reported as receiving wages from four or more states other than the state of residence on their ssa record during the same quarter . because we selected a small number of individuals for further analysis , the result of these five cases cannot be projected to the entire population of individuals . to develop the five cases , we reviewed relevant ssa case - file documents and interviewed ssi program officials . to determine the reliability of the ssa disability records and ndnh data , we reviewed documentation related to these databases and interviewed officials responsible for compiling and maintaining relevant ssi and ndnh data . in addition , we performed electronic testing to determine the validity of specific data elements in the databases that we used to perform our work . we also reviewed detailed ssa case files for the nongeneralizable selection of five individuals selected for additional analysis to corroborate the ndnh and ssa data . on the basis of our discussions with agency officials , our review of related documentation , and our own testing , we concluded that the data elements used for this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . see appendix i for more information on our objective , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . this employer - level information could be useful to dhs as part of its work - site enforcement strategy , which includes focusing on employers who knowingly hire unauthorized workers . however , due to privacy and disclosure laws , ssa is limited in its ability to share this employer - level information with dhs . this leaves the federal government unable to “connect the dots” using data it already has at its disposal . hence , additional actions could facilitate the sharing of this information .