award . epa prepares the grant documents and instructs the grantee on technical requirements , and the grantee signs an agreement to comply with all requirements . postaward . after awarding the grant , epa provides technical assistance , oversees the work , and provides payments to the grantee ; the grantee completes the work , and the project ends . closeout of the award . epa ensures that all technical work and administrative requirements have been completed ; epa prepares closeout documents and notifies the grantee that the grant is completed . epa's grantees are subject to the same type of financial management oversight as the recipients of other federal assistance . specifically , the single audit act requires grantees to have an audit of their financial statements and federal awards or a program specific audit if they spend $300,000 or more in federal awards in a fiscal year . grantees submit these audits to a central clearinghouse operated by the bureau of the census , which then forwards the audit findings to the appropriate agency for any necessary action . however , the act does not cover all grants and all aspects of grants management and , therefore , agencies must take additional steps to ensure that federal funds are spent appropriately . in addition , epa conducts in - depth reviews to analyze grantees' compliance with grant regulations and specific grant requirements . furthermore , to determine how well offices and regions oversee grantees , epa conducts three types of internal management reviews that address grants management: ( 1 ) management oversight reviews , which assess grants management activities in regional offices ; ( 2 ) management effectiveness reviews , which are self - assessments of grants management activities performed by epa's headquarters and regional offices ; and ( 3 ) post - award validation reviews , which assess the effectiveness of initiatives epa has taken to improve oversight efforts . epa has faced persistent problems in managing its grants . epa's inspector general testified before congress in 1996 and again in 1999 that epa did not fulfill its obligation to properly monitor grants . acknowledging these problems , epa identified oversight , including grant closeouts , as a material weakness — an accounting and internal control system weakness that the epa administrator must report to the president and congress . epa's fiscal year 1999 federal managers' financial integrity act report indicated that this oversight material weakness had been corrected , but the inspector general testified that the weakness continued . in 2002 , the inspector general again recommended that epa designate grants management as a material weakness . the office of management and budget ( omb ) also recommended in 2002 that epa designate grants management as a material weakness . in its fiscal year 2002 annual report , epa ultimately decided to maintain this issue as an agency - level weakness , which is a lower level of risk than a material weakness . epa reached this decision because it believes its ongoing corrective action efforts will help to resolve outstanding grants management challenges .