we agree . while we believe the recommendation is appropriately directed to the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , who has oversight and stewardship for the department's centralized domestic violence database , we have expanded our recommendation to include the services . dod partially nonconcurred with our recommendation to establish a communication strategy for informing dod and service officials about new guidance , to include issuing a revised family advocacy program directive and reconsidering the task force recommendation on providing military protective orders to law enforcement and family advocacy officials and communicating associated policies to the services . specifically , dod agreed with the need to issue a revised family advocacy program directive . however , the department disagreed with the need to reconsider the task force's recommendation to provide military protective orders . dod stated that it has considered the issue of providing the protective orders to law enforcement and family advocacy officials and continued to believe there are privacy concerns . given its position , we are no longer recommending that the department reconsider the task force's recommendation in that regard . however , because of inconsistent practices found among the services regarding whether distribution of these orders was allowed to law enforcement and family advocacy personnel , we continue to believe that the department needs to clarify and more effectively communicate its policy on this issue and , therefore , we are revising our recommendation to emphasize this point . dod partially nonconcurred with our recommendation to develop , in concert with the family advocacy director and four service family advocacy program managers , guidance and training materials clarifying chaplain responsibilities regarding privileged communications . dod stated that the family advocacy program managers were not the proponents of chaplains' privileged communications . we agree and have modified our recommendation to include the services , as well as the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . dod also stated that each military department has policy addressing clergy confidentiality and dod does not contemplate developing such a policy . dod further stated that it has issued policy requiring this training and noted that dod and the services will continue to address this issue at relevant training events . because we , like the task force , found some chaplains did not fully understand their responsibilities concerning privileged communications , we continue to believe that dod needs to issue a departmentwide policy on privileged communications , and that dod and the services need to develop training materials that highlight and clarify chaplain responsibilities for these communications . dod nonconcurred with our recommendation to develop , in concert with the family advocacy director , four service family advocacy program managers , and the chaplaincy board , procedures and metrics to ensure that accurate , consistent , and timely domestic violence training data are collected for chaplains . dod stated that the family advocacy program managers were not the proponents of chaplain training and that this recommendation is more appropriately directed to the military departments . we agree . while we believe the recommendation is appropriately directed to the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , who has oversight over domestic abuse matters , we have modified our recommendation to include the services .