cfpb . cfpb enforces , supervises for compliance with , and issues regulations to implement the federal consumer financial laws that address certain firms' and financial institutions' practices , which may include data security . a few of these laws and regulations contain provisions that can help protect the personal information of consumers . cfpb also offers consumer education resources . similarly to ftc , cfpb included information about how consumers can address risks related to exposure of personal information and recover from identity theft in the bureau's overall consumer education activities . cfpb provides consumer education materials related to data breaches and identity theft through its blog and its financial education resource , “ask cfpb.” cfpb also maintains relationships with external groups , such as librarian networks . cfpb provides links to ftc resources about data breaches and identity theft topics on its website , so as not to duplicate efforts , according to cfpb staff . the two agencies also have coordinated some efforts . ftc and cfpb published a jointly produced blog post on september 21 , 2018 , the date the new free credit freeze and 1-year fraud alert provisions took effect . such coordination is consistent with the 2014 executive order , which designated ftc as a centralized source of information about identity theft across the federal government . staff of both agencies said that in developing new resources , they monitor information from a variety of sources , including consumer complaints , news and social media , and reports from other government entities , law enforcement , or nongovernmental stakeholders . other federal and state agencies . irs and the social security administration provide some assistance to consumers for specific types of identity theft . for example , as noted previously , irs provides some taxpayers with pins if they are victims of identity theft tax refund fraud . in addition , states enforce laws and regulations and provide consumer education resources and assistance to consumers at risk of identity theft and other harms as a result of data breaches . for example , the illinois attorney general's office maintains a call - in number for victims of identity theft , and the colorado bureau of investigation can assist residents with identity theft issues . opm offered identity theft services to approximately 22.1 million individuals whose personal information was compromised during the 2015 data breaches at opm . cost . consumers can consider the cost of a service . for instance , consumers can consider whether to pay for commercial identity theft services if they believe the value of the service outweighs the effort of monitoring their accounts on their own . in addition , they may consider that credit freezes now are available for free . convenience . consumers may consider the convenience of a service . for example , while consumers can monitor their own credit reports and accounts , some might prefer not to or may be limited in their ability to do so . in addition , technologies offered through financial institutions that automatically alert customers to any transactions involving their accounts can be a convenient , no - cost way for consumers to monitor their accounts . type of information at risk .