we agreed . we also noted that in july 1999 the army designated its army materiel command as its national maintenance manager with responsibility for overseeing the army's logistics and maintenance support programs and managing maintenance facilities . in doing so , we noted then that while the army recognized that it needed to modify and standardize army data systems to fully account for depot - level maintenance work at all locations , it had not established clear action plans , milestones , and funding requirements for doing so . our september 2003 report on dod's compliance with the 50-50 requirement found that the army's latest reporting on depot - level workloads for fiscal years 2001 and 2002 had utilized a new , more centralized financial system to collect 50-50 data that corrected some of the transcription errors we had found the previous year but that we continued to find errors , omissions , and inconsistencies in its data . moreover , we reported that , as in prior years , the army underreported public - and private - sector depot - level maintenance work at field locations as it continues unfinished efforts to consolidate maintenance activities and better control the proliferation of depot - level tasks at nondepot facilities . although the mandate directed the army to identify the proliferation of depot - level maintenance performed outside the public depots , the army's report on depot - level maintenance proliferation did not fully identify the extent of depot - level maintenance work performed at nondepot facilities . instead , the report estimated that depot - level maintenance work valued at $188.6 million for fiscal year 2001 was not included in the army's depot - level maintenance data and that further validation of this amount was needed . while this estimate may not be fully indicative of depot - level maintenance work being performed outside the public depots , it indicates underreporting in this area that is consistent with the observations we have made in our prior work . although the report recognized that the army has redundant capabilities and capacities , it did not provide any information on the extent of this redundancy or the extent of maintenance activities that could be consolidated . we also have previously reported the existence of this problem . while the army's report provided an estimate of depot - level maintenance work that was not appropriately identified as such in fiscal year 2001 , it acknowledged that the amount was incomplete and needed further validation . the report listed seven specific areas where depot - level maintenance work performed by nondepot facilities was not identified and estimated this amounted to be $188.6 million . as illustrated by table 1 , most of the unidentified amount occurred in field - level facilities that perform depot - level maintenance tasks . according to the report , two categories of work accounted for about 75 percent of the $188.6 million . these were facilities that performed field - level maintenance under the national maintenance program with embedded depot tasks and those under one - time repair authorizations .