( see app . i for a listing of national grantees and funds and positions awarded in program year 2005. ) in program year 2005 , approximately $439 million was appropriated to support about 61,000 scsep positions , through which approximately 100,000 participants are served . ( see app . ii for a listing of funds and positions awarded by state in program year 2005 ) . scsep serves unemployed persons who are 55 years or older whose family incomes are no more than 125 percent of the federal poverty level . participants are placed in part - time community service assignments in a local nonprofit organization or public - sector agency to gain on - the - job experience and prepare for unsubsidized employment . program participants receive training and work experience in a wide variety of occupations , including nurse's aides , teacher aides , librarians , clerical workers , and day care assistants . program participants are paid the highest federal , state , or local applicable minimum wage , or the prevailing rate of pay for persons employed in similar occupations by the same employer . the oaa amendments require that at least 75 percent of scsep funds be used to subsidize participants' wages and fringe benefits and no more than 13.5 percent of the funds may be used for administrative expenses . the remaining funds may be used for other program costs such as assessments , training , job placement assistance , and supportive services . the oaa amendments were designed to make a number of changes to scsep . the amendments contained provisions to establish unsubsidized employment as a program goal , while maintaining the community service aspect of the program ; establish a performance accountability system that held grantees accountable for meeting specific performance measures , including placement and retention of participants in unsubsidized employment , community services provided , customer satisfaction , and number of persons served — - particularly those with the greatest economic and social need or those with poor employment history or prospects , and those over age 60 ; improve coordination between scsep and wia ; and strengthen administrative procedures by defining administrative and program costs and applying uniform cost principles . in addition , the amendments revised the distribution formula by specifying that the first $35 million in funding above the amount to maintain current level of program year 2000 activities be allocated 75 percent to state grantees and 25 percent to national grantees . any additional funds above $35 million will be allocated evenly between state and national grantees . the oaa amendments have had little effect on the distribution of funds between national and state grantees , with the national grantees continuing to receive approximately 78 percent of the funding and state grantees about 22 percent . since the amendments took effect in 2000 , the scsep appropriation has experienced only minor fluctuations , and correspondingly , the total number of positions has remained largely constant . however , the distribution of funding and positions among national grantees has changed substantially .