( see fig . to finance the same level of federal spending as in the previous year , additional revenues and / or increased borrowing will be needed in each subsequent year . by 2018 , social security's cash income ( tax revenue ) is projected to fall below program expenses . at that time , social security will join medicare's hospital insurance trust fund , whose outlays exceeded cash revenues in 2004 , as a net claimant on the rest of the federal budget . the combined oasdi trust funds will begin drawing on the treasury to cover the cash shortfall . at this point , treasury will need to obtain cash for those redeemed securities either through increased taxes , and / or spending cuts , and / or more borrowing from the public than would have been the case had social security's cash flow remained positive . today social security spending exceeds federal spending for medicare and medicaid , but that will change . while social security is expected to grow about 5.6 percent per year on average over the next 10 years , medicare and medicaid combined are expected to grow at 8.5 percent per year . as a result , cbo's baseline projects medicare and medicaid spending will be about 30 percent higher than social security in 2015 . according to the social security and medicare trustees , social security will grow from 4.3 percent of gdp today to 6.6 percent in 2075 , and medicare's burden on the economy will quintuple — from 2.7 percent to 13.3 percent of the economy . gao's long - term simulations illustrate the magnitude of the fiscal challenges associated with an aging society and the significance of the related challenges the government will be called upon to address . figures 2 and 3 present these simulations under two different sets of assumptions . in figure 2 , we begin with cbo's january baseline , constructed according to the statutory requirements for that baseline . consistent with these requirements , discretionary spending is assumed to grow with inflation for the first 10 years and tax cuts scheduled to expire are assumed to expire . after 2015 , discretionary spending is assumed to grow with the economy , and revenue is held constant as a share of gdp at the 2015 level . in figure 3 two assumptions are changed: discretionary spending is assumed to grow with the economy after 2005 rather than merely with inflation and the tax cuts are extended . for both simulations social security and medicare spending is based on the 2004 trustees' intermediate projections , and we assume that benefits continue to be paid in full after the trust funds are exhausted . medicaid spending is based on cbo's december 2003 long - term projections under mid - range assumptions . both these simulations illustrate that , absent policy changes , the growth in spending on federal retirement and health entitlements will encumber an escalating share of the government's resources . indeed , when we assume that recent tax reductions are made permanent and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy , our long - term simulations suggest that by 2040 federal revenues may be adequate to pay little more than interest on the federal debt .