any indication of potential consolidation or bundling . through this approach , we identified one bundled and three consolidated contracts that were not reported as such in fpds - ng . overall , we confirmed 100 consolidated contracts , including two that were also bundled . to determine the extent to which justifications for contract consolidation complied with relevant laws and regulations , we compared contract documents with the requirements established by federal statutes such as the small business act , federal regulations such as sba regulations , the far and agency far supplements , including the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) and the army federal acquisition regulation supplement ( afars ) . to assess the extent to which dod , gsa , and sba addressed potential small business impacts of consolidation and bundling , we reviewed fpds - ng data and contract documentation to identify whether contracts were awarded to large or small businesses . we interviewed officials from dod and gsa office of small business programs , dod service - level contracting officials , and sba officials to understand how small business impacts are addressed . we also reviewed consolidated contracts with requirements that were previously performed by small businesses and identified steps taken to address the potential impacts . to assess the extent to which sba collected and reported information on consolidated contracts that are considered bundled , we reviewed reports sba submitted to congress . we also interviewed sba officials to understand how information is reported . see appendix i for a full description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from december 2012 to november 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . contract consolidation generally occurs when a federal agency combines in a solicitation two or more contract requirements that were previously provided to that agency under separate contracts . agencies may achieve savings and other benefits through contract consolidation , but consolidation may limit small business opportunities to compete for federal contracts . a specific type of contract consolidation , known as bundling , has a more significant effect on small businesses' ability to perform the consolidated contract . bundling generally takes place when two or more requirements that were previously performed by small businesses are combined into a single solicitation and result in a contract that is likely to be unsuitable for small business award . these memorandums included a statement that expected benefits , including savings or other benefits , exceeded the benefits of alternative approaches , and the determination that the consolidations were necessary and justified . in 17 of the contracts we reviewed , however , the consolidation decision was authorized by dod officials , but not at the level specified in regulations.fully comply with dfars consolidation requirements by not identifying alternative contracting approaches that involve less consolidation . dod consolidated contracts also did not the consolidated contracts we reviewed largely addressed expected savings and benefits in quantitative terms .