we disagree . in our report , we note that dodig officials told us that the case management system is to serve as a real - time complaint tracking and investigative management tool for investigators . further , in its comments , dodig highlights the guidance and training it has implemented related to its case management system . during our case file review , we found that personnel uploaded key case documents to the case management system after dodig had closed the case in 77 percent of cases closed in fiscal year 2013 and made changes to case variables in 83 percent of cases in 2014 . dodig staff made these changes at least 3 months after case closure and at least a year after dodig implemented the database in december 2012 , indicating that it was not being used for real - time case tracking for cases closed in fiscal year 2013 . did the responsible management official have knowledge of the servicemember's protected communication or perceive the servicemember as making or preparing to make a protected communication ? would the same personnel action have been taken , withheld , or threatened absent the protected communication ? during the complaint intake process , the investigator is to review the complaint and timeline and conduct an interview with the servicemember to determine whether ( 1 ) the servicemember made or prepared to make a protected communication and ( 2 ) a responsible management official took a personnel action against the servicemember . the investigator is to also assess whether the allegation supports an inference that the responsible management official had knowledge of the protected communication and suggests a causal connection between the protected communication and the personnel action , such as whether the personnel action closely followed the protected communication . if the investigating officer determines there was no protected communication , no personnel action , or no inference of responsible management official knowledge or causation , the investigating officer can recommend that dodig dismiss the case . if a servicemember's complaint contains a personnel action and a protected communication , and an inference of knowledge and causation , the case is to proceed to a full investigation , according to dodig guidance.official would have taken the personnel action if the servicemember had not made a protected communication , the investigating officer is to determine the official's reasons for taking the action , the timing between the protected communication and the personnel action , the official's motive , and whether the servicemember was treated differently than other servicemembers who did not make protected communications . the investigating officer is to determine the case outcome based on a “preponderance of the evidence,” defined by dodig as the degree of relevant evidence that a reasonable person , considering the record as a whole , would accept as sufficient to find that a contested fact is more likely to be true than untrue .