department of defense 2 . we revised the recommendation accordingly . second , sba felt that our report title could be misleading and suggested that our title should be changed to hubzone program suffers from procuring agency reporting and implementation difficulties . we believe our title appropriately captures the findings of our review , with which sba agreed ; therefore , we did not make this change . third , sba took issue with our characterization of the emphasis given to the 8 ( a ) program relative to the hubzone program . sba cited a letter the agency sent to senator bond dated august 17 , 2001 , which states that there is parity between the 8 ( a ) program and the hubzone program , although “regulatory language could be read to give priority to awards to the 8 ( a ) program over hubzone awards.” we noted in our report that regulations allow contracting officer's discretion in deciding on whether to use the 8 ( a ) or hubzone programs when awarding contracts . however , sba's training materials on the hubzone program , which are given to federal agencies , establish an order of precedence giving the 8 ( a ) program priority over the hubzone program . as noted in our report and sba's august 17th letter , sba is drafting changes to its hubzone and 8 ( a ) regulations to clarify that contracting officers have discretion to use either program . therefore , we believe our report accurately reflects sba's guidance at the time of our review . sba's comments and enclosure appear in appendix ii . the office of federal procurement policy generally agreed with our findings . however , based on the office of federal procurement policy's comments , we revised the recommendation on fpdc reported data to clarify the role that the office of federal procurement policy should play in ensuring the accuracy of data that agencies provide to fpdc . to determine whether federal agencies are accurately reporting hubzone contract achievements , we obtained fpdc's database of all reported obligations to federal government contracts during fiscal year 2000 and sba's official list of certified hubzone firms . we reviewed the database and list for three kinds of potential inaccuracies in the fpdc database: ( 1 ) contracts reported as hubzone contracts that were awarded to firms not certified as hubzone firms , ( 2 ) contracts reported as hubzone contracts that were awarded to firms certified after contract award , and ( 3 ) contracts not reported as hubzone contracts that were awarded to firms that were certified hubzone firms . to determine whether federal agencies are having difficulty implementing the hubzone program to award contracts to certified hubzone firms , and if so , the reasons for the difficulty , we reviewed the hubzone act of 1997 and other pertinent legislation ; and hubzone program implementation guidance contained in title 13 , code of federal regulations ( cfr ) , part 126 ( 13 cfr 126 ) , contracting guidance contained in the federal acquisition regulation ( 48 cfr chapter 1 ) , and other relevant guidance issued by sba , fpdc , and the ten program implementing agencies ( listed in appendix i ) .