( recommendation 1 ) . for example , although management often relies on advice of legal counsel on the likelihood of loss and estimate of the amount or range of potential loss , as reflected in the legal representation letter , management is ultimately responsible for determining whether the loss should be recognized as a liability or disclosed in the notes to the financial statements . as such , management may make a different determination as to the likelihood of loss or estimated loss amounts than those in the legal counsel's assessment . also , differences between the government - wide legal representation letter and the significant component entities' legal representation letters can occur in situations in which doj has more current information on the likelihood of loss and estimated loss amounts . however , treasury was not always able to timely determine whether there were appropriate reasons for the differences it identified or whether adjustments were needed to the legal contingency loss information reported in the fiscal year 2018 cfs . based on our work , we found that certain of these differences required correction in the fiscal year 2018 cfs . for example , treasury noted that one significant component entity included estimated loss amounts for reasonably possible cases in its management schedule and that such amounts were not reported in the financial information provided to treasury for consolidation . because treasury was unable to timely resolve the issue , the fiscal year 2018 cfs was not appropriately adjusted to include these amounts . further , doj did not provide us the final government - wide legal representation letter as of our audit completion date . in our report , we acknowledged that treasury addressed the need for certain additional disclosures related to new federal accounting standards and inconsistencies related to restatements , reclassifications , and adjustments to beginning net position in the final fiscal year 2018 financial report . however , addressing the specific issues we identified in the draft fiscal year 2018 financial report does not fully address our recommendations and treasury did not provide sufficient documentation supporting its efforts to develop and implement or enhance procedures or other steps to reasonably assure that the financial report is complete and accurate related to these areas . treasury also stated that it will work on addressing the remaining recommendation . although treasury has procedures for reviewing and analyzing the significant component entities' legal contingency loss information and the government - wide legal representation letter , we found that treasury lacked effective processes and procedures to reasonably assure that appropriate information regarding legal contingency losses was reported in the fiscal year 2018 cfs . specifically , treasury did not have sufficient processes and procedures to obtain the needed information in a manner that would facilitate the timely compilation of the legal contingency loss information for inclusion in the fiscal year 2018 cfs or for timely resolving issues identified during its review . for example , as part of treasury's procedures , it compares the estimated loss amounts for reasonably possible and probable cases included in the significant component entities' management schedules with the financial statement information that the significant component entities report for inclusion in the fiscal year 2018 cfs .