( see fig . with input from hhs , dhs leads the first step in the process to assess , on an ongoing basis , the threat of cbrn agents and determine which of these agents pose a material threat to national security , as required by the project bioshield act . the material threat assessments ( mta ) that dhs issues examine the threat posed by given cbrn agents or classes of agents for plausible , high - consequence scenarios and provide estimates of the number of people exposed to different dose levels of an agent in the scenarios . since 2004 , dhs has determined that 13 of these cbrn agents pose a material threat , based on the mtas . in the second step , hhs and its phemce partners use the data from the mta scenarios to assess the public health and medical consequences of an attack using these agents . public health consequence modeling estimates the number of individuals who may become ill , be hospitalized , or die from exposure to and infection with cbrn agents , with or without medical intervention . hhs established phemce in 2006 . phemce is a federal interagency decision - making body responsible for providing recommendations to the secretary of hhs on ( 1 ) prioritized requirements for cbrn medical countermeasures , ( 2 ) coordination of medical countermeasure development and acquisition activities to address the requirements , and ( 3 ) strategies for distributing medical countermeasures held in the u.s. strategic national stockpile ( sns ) , the national repository of medications , medical supplies , and equipment for use in a public health emergency . as required by the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act of 2006 , phemce also conducts annual reviews of the sns , the results of which are used to make necessary additions or modifications to its contents . phemce is composed primarily of officials from hhs's aspr , barda , cdc , fda , and nih , which also have specific agency responsibilities for countermeasure development and acquisition . in addition , phemce includes officials from dhs , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of veterans affairs , the department of agriculture , and the executive office of the president . within hhs , aspr is responsible for leading federal government efforts to research , develop , evaluate , and acquire public health emergency medical countermeasures to prevent , treat , or mitigate the potential health effects from exposure to cbrn agents . under the project bioshield act , hhs is responsible for arranging for the acquisition of certain medical countermeasures , some of which may not yet be fda - approved or licensed . these countermeasures also include those for children and other vulnerable populations , such as those for the elderly and immunocompromised individuals . the project bioshield act authorized the special reserve fund for acquisition of these countermeasures . within aspr , barda — established by the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act of 2006 — is responsible for overseeing and funding advanced development and acquisition of cbrn medical countermeasures . cdc is responsible for maintaining the sns .