however , weaknesses existed in each of these areas . , investigations ) help an organization to determine whether a particular individual is suitable for a given position by attempting to ascertain the person's trustworthiness and appropriateness for the position . the exact type of screening that takes place depends on the sensitivity of the position and any applicable regulations by which the agency is bound . in 2000 , we testified that faa had failed to conduct background investigations on thousands of contractor personnel . they assist agencies in identifying , assessing , prioritizing , and monitoring the progress in correcting security weaknesses that are found in information systems . according to omb circular a - 123 , agencies should take timely and effective action to correct deficiencies that they have identified through a variety of information sources . to accomplish this , remedial action plans should be developed for each deficiency , and progress should be tracked for each . faa policy requires remediation reports to address the results of tests and evaluations . although the agency has developed a remedial action tracking system , which included remedial plans , for weaknesses identified through previous reviews in order to help it monitor the progress in correcting security weaknesses , these remedial plans did not address all identified weaknesses , and some deficiencies were not always corrected in a timely manner . even strong controls may not block all intrusions and misuse , but organizations can reduce the risks associated with such events if they promptly take steps to detect and respond to them before significant damage is done . further , according to the testimony , many reinvestigations — which are required every 5 years for top secret clearances — were never completed . since our 2000 testimony , the agency has made improvements to its background investigation program . for example , according to agency officials , it has completed background investigations for 90 percent of its contractor personnel and has implemented an automated system to track and report when reinvestigations are required . although faa has recently made improvements to its background investigation program , the agency has not always properly designated sensitivity levels for positions involving tasks that could have a major impact on automated information systems . according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , positions with major responsibility for the design , testing , maintenance , operation , monitoring , or management of systems hardware and software should be designated as “high risk.” however , faa has designated some of these types of positions as “moderate risk ; ” all 20 individuals that we identified as having system responsibilities with potentially significant access were designated as moderate risk or below . further , opm recommends a minimum background investigation for moderate risk positions . nonetheless , faa had been requiring only a national agency check and inquiry , a less stringent investigation . without properly designating position sensitivity levels and performing the appropriate background investigations , the agency faces an increased risk that inappropriate individuals could modify critical information and systems or disrupt operations .