epa provided comments on a draft of this report . specifically , we received a letter from the acting assistant administrator of oswer , an enclosure with additional technical comments from oswer , and an enclosure from the national ombudsman containing general and technical comments . ( see table 1. ) the amount of time spent on ombudsman duties also varies widely from region to region . during fiscal year 2000 , for example , estimates of the percentage of time devoted to ombudsman - related work ranged from about 2 percent to 90 percent . figure 1 summarizes the estimated time spent on regional ombudsman duties during calendar years 1999 and 2000 . when asked how they are able to ensure their independence in light of their dual roles , 7 of the 10 regional ombudsmen either did not perceive their multiple responsibilities as hampering their independence or cited direct access to regional management as a way of dealing with potential conflicts . the regional staffs are considered part of the national ombudsman's office and report directly to the national ombudsman . in each case , the national ombudsman has responsibility for the hiring , supervision , and removal of all staff within his office , including regional staff , and the regional operations are included in his office's budget request . since the ombudsman function was first created within oswer , epa has issued and proposed guidance that calls for coordination between the national and regional ombudsmen . epa's hazardous waste ombudsman handbook , which was published in 1987 and remains in effect , states that close cooperation between the national and regional ombudsmen is important . in february 1998 , after some misunderstandings developed between the national and regional ombudsmen regarding their respective roles and responsibilities , oswer's acting assistant administrator issued a memo that attempted to clarify the situation . most significantly , the memo stated that the regional ombudsmen would take the lead on all superfund - related matters and would refer to the national ombudsman only those cases that the regional ombudsmen believe are “nationally significant” — and only with the concurrence of the assistant administrator of oswer . although epa officials generally agree that this policy was never implemented , the regional ombudsmen believed , until at least 1999 , that the policy was in effect and that the coordination called for in the policy was supposed to be occurring . the new guidance recently proposed by oswer is , in part , another effort to delineate the roles and responsibilities of the national and regional ombudsmen , particularly with regard to the selection and referral of cases for investigation . notwithstanding the guidance , the extent to which the national and regional ombudsmen actually coordinate is unclear and is the subject of disagreement among the parties . according to the national ombudsman , he notifies his regional counterparts of all inquiries he receives and refers many of them to the regions for follow - up . however , he said that he rarely receives any information on how the inquiries were resolved .