( see fig . since the beginning of the program , all 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and u.s. territories all have received some fhwa emergency relief funds . the majority of emergency relief program funding for the 9-year period of 1998 through 2006 , the time frame for which fhwa had data on individual disaster events , has gone to 5 states as a result of series of extraordinary disasters including the world trade center terrorist attacks , florida's 2004 hurricanes , and hurricanes katrina and rita , among others . these very large events have each totaled from over $100 million to over $1 billion , as figure 2 illustrates . these very large disasters can be considered extraordinary events in the context of the emergency relief program because each of them exceeded the $100 million annual program authorization . also , individual events exceeding $100 million in emergency relief allocations to a state require congressional legislation that exempts the state from the statutory limitation that no state may receive more than $100 million in emergency relief funds in 1 year for any single event . specifically , when repair and restoration of a damaged facility are possible , but the state prefers to build a replacement facility , emergency relief funding can be limited to what the program would have contributed to the cost of repairing the damaged facility . fhwa estimated the cost to repair the original bridge to be $179 million . fhwa division officials were in discussions with the florida dot about the level of emergency relief program funding for the project when , in december 2004 , passage of the consolidated appropriations act of 2005 directed that replacement of the escambia bay bridge be federally funded . because fhwa officials do not maintain historical reimbursement backlog data , we relied on periodic references to reimbursement backlogs in the legislative history . to examine the scope of activities eligible for emergency relief program funding and the extent to which the scope of eligible activities has changed in recent years , we obtained and reviewed program manuals , guidance , and documentation for program eligibility criteria and policies and requirements . we also interviewed fhwa officials at u. s. department of transportation headquarters who are responsible for providing guidance and policies for the emergency relief program and the emergency relief program for federally owned roads . the program would fund 90 percent of the project cost , the federal share for work on interstate highways . as of december 2006 , the bridge is under construction , with one of the spans nearing completion , and fhwa officials informed us the entire bridge project is expected to be finished ahead of the scheduled december 2007 completion date at an estimated cost of $245 million . although fhwa could have limited the emergency relief program's participation to 90 percent of the prospective repair cost of the escambia bay bridge , congressional action ensured that the emergency relief program would have a larger financial commitment in the project .