however , they do so to the pab rather than the mspb . generally , our mission staff are all in pay bands whereby they currently receive the annual across - the - board base pay increase and locality pay increase similar to the gs pay system , along with performance - based annual increases that are based on merit . generally , our mission support staff , with some exceptions , remain in a system similar to the gs pay system with its annual across - the - board pay increases , locality pay , quality step increases , and within grade increases . we are currently in the process of migrating the mission support staff into pay bands and a pay for performance system . our wage grade staff will continue to be covered by the federal compensation system for trade , craft , and laboring employees . we are also committed to leading by example in all major management areas . given gao's role as a key provider of information and analyses to the congress , maintaining the right mix of technical knowledge and subject matter expertise as well as general analytical skills is vital to achieving the agency's mission . carrying out gao's mission today is a multidisciplinary staff reflecting the diversity of knowledge and competencies needed to deliver a wide array of products and services to support the congress . among other things , it granted the comptroller general authority to appoint , promote , and assign employees without regard to title 5 requirements in these areas ; set employees' pay without regard to the federal government's general schedule ( gs ) pay system's classification standards and requirements ; and establish a merit pay system for appropriate officers and employees . by excepting our agency from the above requirements , the gao personnel act of 1980 allowed us to pursue some significant innovations in managing our people . one key innovation was the establishment of a “broad banding,” or “pay banding,” approach for classifying and paying our analyst and attorney workforce in 1989 . this was coupled with the adoption of a pay for performance system for this portion of our workforce . therefore , while other agencies are only now requesting the authority to establish broad banding and pay for performance systems , gao has had almost 15 years of experience with such systems . although gao's personnel and pay systems are not similar to those of many executive branch agencies , i must emphasize that in important ways , our human capital policies and programs are very much and will continue to remain similar to those of the larger federal community . gao's current human capital proposal will not change our continued support for certain national goals ( eg , commitment to federal merit principles , protection from prohibited personnel practices , employee due process through a specially created entity — the personnel appeals board ( pab ) , and application of veterans' preference consistent with its application in the executive branch for appointments and all appropriate reductions - in - force ) .