iii ) . this report is one in a series of reviews focusing on dod's logistics and maintenance operations . in april 2008 , we briefed your office on the preliminary results of our work on the military departments' depot capital investments . in july 2008 , we reported on the increased carryover work occurring at the five army depots . in december 2008 , we reported on the implementation and impact of performance - based logistics arrangements on weapon system support costs . in may 2009 , we reported on dod's efforts to establish the required core capability for fielded , new , and modified systems . in conducting our work , we analyzed the services' depot maintenance strategic plans to determine if they were consistent with criteria for developing a comprehensive results - oriented management framework and addressed osd's criteria for developing a strategic plan . we discussed these plans with officials from the army , the marine corps , and the office of the under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness . to gain further perspective on the plans and related issues that affect the depots' posture for meeting future maintenance requirements , we visited the army's five maintenance depots ( anniston , corpus christi , letterkenny , red river , and tobyhanna ) and both of the marine corps' maintenance depots ( albany and barstow ) . we also obtained data on the depots' workload and workforce trends , as well as information on actions aimed at improving depot productivity . although each of the military services was required to submit its depot maintenance strategic plan to osd , we decided to focus our initial work on the army's and marine corps' plans because of these services' significant role in supporting overseas contingency operations in iraq and afghanistan . as agreed with your offices , we plan to report separately on the air force and navy depot maintenance strategic plans . we conducted this performance audit from august 2007 through september 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . the army and marine corps maintain organic depot maintenance capabilities that are designed to retain , at a minimum , a ready , controlled source of technical competence and resources to meet military requirements . in fiscal year 2008 , dod budgeted about $5.6 billion for the five army and two marine corps maintenance depots and maintained a workforce of about 26,000 personnel at these facilities . depot - level maintenance and repair involves materiel maintenance or repair requiring the overhaul , upgrading or rebuilding of parts assemblies and subassemblies , and testing and reclamation of equipment as necessary , regardless of the source of funds for the maintenance or repair or the location at which the maintenance or repair is performed .