frequency of monitoring . some great lakes states are monitoring their high - priority beaches almost daily , while other states monitor their high - priority beaches as little as one to two times per week . the variation in monitoring frequency in the great lakes states is due in part to the availability of funding . for example , state officials in michigan and wisconsin reported insufficient funding for monitoring . methods of sampling . most of the great lakes states and localities use similar sampling methods to monitor water quality at local beaches . for example , officials at 79 percent of the beaches we surveyed reported that they collected water samples during the morning , and 78 percent reported that they always collected water samples from the same location . great lakes states varied considerably in the depths at which they sampled water , with some sampling occurring at 1-6 inches and other sampling at 37-48 inches . public notification . local officials in the great lakes differ in the information they use to decide whether to issue health advisories or close beaches when water contamination exceeds epa criteria and in how to notify the public of their decision . these differences reflect states' varied standards for triggering an advisory , closure , or both . local officials also reported a need for funding to identify and address sources of contamination . furthermore , at epa's national beaches conference in october 2006 , a panel of federal and academic researches recommended that epa provide the states with more freedom on how they spend their beach act funding . to address this issue , we recommended that as the congress considers reauthorization of the beach act , that it should consider providing epa some flexibility in awarding beach act grants to allow states to undertake limited research to identify specific sources of contamination at monitored beaches and certain actions to mitigate these problems , as specified by epa . _ _ _ _ _ in conclusion , mr. chairman , epa has made progress in implementing many of the beach act's requirements but it may still be several years before epa completes the pathogen studies and develops the new water quality criteria required by the act . until these actions are completed , states will have to continue to use existing outdated methods . also , we found that states' and localities' means of notifying the public of health advisories or beach closures vary across the great lakes . some states post water quality monitoring results on signs at beaches ; some provide results on the internet or on telephone hotlines ; and some distribute the information to local media . to address this variability in how the states are implementing their beach act grant funded monitoring and notification programs , we recommended that epa provide states and localities with specific guidance on monitoring frequency and methods and public notification . further , even though beach act funds have increased the level of monitoring being undertaken by the states , the specific sources of contamination at most beaches are not known .