progress is being made in that area . in december 2005 , according to fema , more than 70 percent of hurricane katrina claims had been paid , totaling more than $11 billion , some of them using expedited procedures to assist policyholders who were displaced from their homes . in the longer term , congress and the nfip face a complex challenge in assessing potential changes to the program that would improve its financial stability , increase participation in the program by property owners in areas at risk of flooding , reduce the number of repetitive loss properties in the program , and maintain current and accurate flood plain maps . these issues are complex , interrelated , and are likely to involve trade - offs . for example , increasing premiums to better reflect risk may reduce voluntary participation in the program or encourage those who are required to purchase flood insurance to limit their coverage to the minimum required amount ( i.e. , the amount of their outstanding mortgage balance ) . this in turn can increase taxpayer exposure for disaster assistance resulting from flooding . there is no “silver bullet” for improving the current structure and operations of the nfip . it will require sound data and analysis and the cooperation and participation of many stakeholders . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you and the committee members may have . contact point for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact norman rabkin at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or rabkinn@gao.gov , or william o. jenkins jr. at ( 202 ) 512-8757 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . this statement was prepared under the direction of christopher keisling . key contributors were john bagnulo , christine davis , and deborah knorr . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . fema did not agree with our recommendation . it noted that its current sampling methodology of selecting a sample based on knowledge of the population to be sampled was more appropriate for identifying problems than the statistically random probability sample we recommended . although fema's current nonprobability sampling strategy may provide an opportunity to focus on particular areas of risk , it does not provide management with the information needed to assess the overall performance of private insurance companies and adjusters participating in the program — information that fema needs to have reasonable assurance that program objectives are being achieved . as of january 2006 , fema had not yet fully implemented provisions of the flood insurance reform act of 2004 . among other things , the act requires fema to provide policyholders a flood insurance claims handbook ; to establish a regulatory appeals process for claimants ; and to establish minimum education and training requirements for insurance agents who sell nfip policies . we expect to report on this matter later this year .