be published . as required by statute , cpsc disclaims any responsibility to guarantee the accuracy of a report . the submitter of an incident report on saferproducts.gov must fit into one of five categories: ( 1 ) consumers ; ( 2 ) local , state , and federal government agencies ; ( 3 ) health care professionals ; ( 4 ) child service providers ; and ( 5 ) public safety entities . cpsc regulations specify that “consumers” include , but not be limited to , users of consumer products , family members , relatives , parents , guardians , friends , attorneys , investigators , professional engineers , agents of a user of a consumer product , and observers of the consumer products being used . cpsia requires the following information when submitting a report of harm: ( 1 ) description of the consumer product sufficient to distinguish the product as a product or component part regulated by cpsc ; ( 2 ) identity of the manufacturer or private labeler by name ; ( 3 ) description of the harm related to use of the consumer product ; ( 4 ) approximate or actual date of the incident ; ( 5 ) category of submitter ; ( 6 ) submitter's contact information ; ( 7 ) submitter's verification that the information contained therein is true and accurate ; and ( 8 ) consent to publication of the report of harm . § 2055a ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ; c.f.r . subject to §§ 1102.24 and 1102.26 , cpsc will publish reports of harm containing all the required information . required to contact the submitters for further information.transmits a copy to manufacturers , importers , and private labelers identified in the reports , to provide them with the opportunity to comment . qualifying reports and manufacturer comments submitted for publication are then available on saferproducts.gov ( see fig . cpsc's efforts to promote saferproducts.gov formed part of a larger effort to increase the public's awareness of the agency . cpsc has taken a variety of approaches to inform the public about saferproducts.gov , many of which are consistent with key practices for consumer education planning . however , cpsc has not established metrics for its efforts . as a result , the agency does not know which of its efforts have had the most impact on increasing awareness and use of saferproducts.gov . cpsc's efforts to inform the public about saferproducts.gov have been part of a larger effort to increase the public's awareness of the agency . according to cpsc officials , certain segments of the public may not be aware of the agency or its mission in product safety , much less be aware of saferproducts.gov . likewise , roughly one - third of the 37 consumers who participated in our website usability tests were aware of cpsc or its mission . to promote awareness of cpsc , officials have conducted public information campaigns related to various product safety hazards such as fire hazards and those involving children's products , issued press releases about product recalls , and used social media .