we agree . thus , these actions , if implemented effectively , should address the intent of the recommendation . dhs partially concurred with the fourth recommendation , to implement goals for administrative cost percentages and monitor performance to achieve these goals . specifically , dhs stated that it agrees that setting goals and monitoring performance for achieving these goals is a good practice in any program and can help ensure more effective and efficient operations . however , dhs stated that it plans to conduct a review to better understand and describe its current measures . dhs stated that a number of factors affect administrative costs , which can present difficulties when trying to implement a simple measure of percentage of administrative costs to total costs . for example , dhs noted that the types of assistance provided and the location of the jfo would affect the percentage of administrative costs . dhs also stated that establishing meaningful administrative cost percentage goals will be challenging because of the many factors involved and that a suite of measures to track administrative cost percentages could help ensure more effective and efficient operations . thus , dhs is pursuing development of such a suite of measures . we agree that a number of factors affect the percentage of administrative costs and that establishing meaningful administrative cost percentage goals can be challenging . in developing a suite of measures , it is important that fema's leadership be able to use them to effectively monitor a disaster declaration's overall administrative costs in addition to the factors that affect administrative costs . if these measures allow fema to monitor overall administrative costs as well as the factors that affect such costs , then development and implementation of such measures should meet the intent of the recommendation . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , the fema administrator , and appropriate congressional committees . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . disaster declarations can take a decade or more to close because of a number of factors , including the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) reimbursement process for public assistance ( pa ) infrastructure projects , which can take a long time to finish . in addition , some projects are delayed because of disagreements , and sometimes litigation , over the appropriate amount that should be obligated , according to fema officials . as shown below in table 9 , the oldest open disaster dates back to 1992 , making it 20 years old , and only 54 percent of disaster declarations from fiscal year 2001 were closed as of january 31 , 2012 . all disaster declarations prior to fiscal year 1992 are closed .