dhs . because dhs's transfers to the cnmi government of vocational educational funds collected through the cw - 1 work permit fee are not subject to reporting requirements , the cnmi government has not submitted any performance or financial reporting on its use of these funds . however , according to cnmi legislative staff , the cnmi governor has communicated plans to the cnmi legislature for the use of $1.5 million of the $1.8 million in dhs - transferred vocational educational funding in fiscal year 2013 . dol . cnra required that the secretary of labor , in consultation with the secretaries of homeland security , defense , the interior , and the governor of the cnmi , ascertain the current and anticipated labor needs of the cnmi and determine whether an extension of the transition period by up to 5 years at a time is necessary to ensure that an adequate number of workers will be available for legitimate businesses in the cnmi . dol must determine the extension no later than 180 days before the end of the transition period . dol is to base its decision on the labor needs of legitimate businesses in the cnmi and may consider a number of factors , such as cnmi unemployment rates and efforts to train u.s. citizens , lawful permanent residents , and unemployed foreign workers in the cnmi . ( see app . iii for a list of the factors that cnra states dol may consider. ) doi . cnra required that the secretary of the interior , in consultation with the governor of the commonwealth , the secretary of labor , the secretary of commerce , and cnmi private sector representatives , provide technical assistance to the cnmi , including assistance for recruiting , training , and hiring of workers to assist employers in the cnmi to hire u.s. citizens and nationals and legal permanent residents . technical assistance must also be provided for identifying economic opportunities and for job skills identification and curricula development . in addition , cnra required that the secretaries of homeland security , labor , the interior , and state negotiate and implement interagency agreements to assign their respective duties in order to ensure the timely and proper implementation of cnra requirements . in our august 2008 report , we found that the interaction of dhs and dol decisions — on how many cnmi transitional work permits to allocate annually and whether to extend the transition period , and therefore the cnmi transitional work permit program , past 2014 — would significantly affect employers' access to foreign workers . we also found that because of the prominence of foreign workers in the cnmi labor market , any substantial and rapid decline in permits for foreign workers would have a negative effect on the size of the cnmi economy . however , a more modest reduction in the annual permit allocations would result in minimal effects on the cnmi economy . to illustrate a range of possible effects on the cnmi economy given varying rates of reduction in the annual allocation of cnmi transitional work permits for foreign workers , for our 2008 report we generated simulations that estimated the impact on the cnmi's economy by an index representing total gdp .