same as rail . same as rail . same as rail . projects include interoperable communications , evacuation plans , and antiterrorism security enhancement measures for low - density stations . in addition to the contact named above , dawn hoff , assistant director ; daniel klabunde , analyst - in - charge ; and martene bryan , senior analyst , managed this assignment . jason berman , charlotte gamble , and su jin yon made significant contributions to the work . chuck bausell and william chatlos assisted with design , methodology , and data analysis . tsa nd t i gennd . dhs nno llon , bu not flied . when trit gencielfill ll grnt reqirement nd fema complete review , fnd re released . their project when the rd nnonced . tier i gencieve 90 d to detil how they will implement the project . for fiscal year 2007 , dhs had 75 days to release the grant guidance once the appropriations act had passed , and for fiscal year 2008 , dhs had 30 days to release the grant guidance once the appropriations act had passed . beginning in fiscal year 2009 , tier i transit agencies submit specific project information for award decisions prior to dhs award announcements . using the tsgp risk analysis model , dhs develops risk scores , which are used to identify the highest - risk regions and the transit agencies within those regions that are eligible for funding . these regions are then placed into one of two tiers based on their risk scores to determine initial funding allocations ; however , these allocations may change when dhs begins reviewing projects . tier i: dhs determines the regions at the highest risk of a terrorist attack and selects transit agencies within those regions eligible to receive tier i funding . each tier i region is given a target allocation based on its share of risk ( as determined by the model ) . each region , through discussions among transit agencies and tsa officials in the regional transit security working groups ( rtswg ) , decides which projects to fund on a collaborative basis . each tier i region has a rtswg that includes eligible transit agencies , law enforcement agencies , and amtrak ( if stations exist in the region ) . tier ii: lower - risk regions and certain transit agencies in those regions make up the tier ii group . the tier ii allocation is a set amount of funding allocated for all tier ii regions combined . once the application period closes for tier i and ii , the dhs appropriations act states that dhs has 60 days to act upon the application , which dhs has defined as the length of time taken to review the applications , make the award decisions , and announce final allocations . during site visits to mass transit and passenger rail agencies , we interviewed grant managers and transit agency security officials responsible for developing tsgp grant applications . further , we interviewed state administration agency officials directly involved in the tsgp to determine how the administration of the program worked between the state administration agencies and tsa and fema .