according to the u.s . intellectual property rights coordinator , industries that relied on ip protection were estimated to account for over half of all u.s. exports , represented 40 percent of u.s. economic growth , and employed about 18 million americans in 2006 . however , the economic benefits that copyrights , trademarks , and patents bring are threatened by the fact that legal protection of ip varies greatly around the world , and several countries are havens for the production of counterfeit and pirated goods . the global illicit market competes with genuine products and it is difficult to detect and take actions against violations . although the public is often not aware of the issues and consequences surrounding ip theft , counterfeit products raise serious public health and safety concerns , and the annual losses that companies face from ip violations are substantial . the organization for economic cooperation and development recently estimated that international trade in counterfeit and pirated products in 2005 could have been up to $200 billion . eight federal agencies as well as entities within them undertake a wide range of activities in support of protecting ip rights , as shown in figure 1 . these are the departments of commerce , state , justice , health and human services , and homeland security ; the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) ; the copyright office ; the u.s. international trade commission ; within justice , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) ; and within commerce , the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) . in addition , two entities coordinate ip protection efforts: the national intellectual property law enforcement coordination council ( niplecc ) , created by congress in 1999 , and the strategy for targeting organized piracy ( stop ) , initiated by the white house in 2004 . ( these are discussed later in this testimony. ) u.s. agencies use policy initiatives and enforcement activities to improve ip protection in the united states and abroad . policy initiatives include reviewing ip protection undertaken by foreign governments and negotiating agreements that address intellectual property . trade policy initiatives to increase ip protection and enforcement are primarily led by ustr , in coordination with the departments of state , commerce , uspto , and the copyright office , among other agencies . enforcement activity in the united states includes detecting and seizing ip - infringing goods at the u.s. border and investigating and prosecuting those who engage in ip - infringing activities . the department of justice , including the fbi , and the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp ) and immigration and customs enforcement take actions such as engaging in multicountry investigations involving intellectual property violations and seizing goods that violate ip rights at u.s. ports of entry . the food and drug administration ( fda ) also investigates intellectual property violations for fda - regulated products as part of its mission to assure consumer safety . u.s. intellectual property is increasingly at risk of theft as u.s. firms become more integrated into the world economy and the production of more sophisticated processes and investments move overseas .