we added this information to the report . we agree and have noted the limitation in the report . we added this information to the report . some specialties are difficult to fill . in 2000 , a un report found critical shortfalls in key areas including procurement , finance , budget , logistics support , and engineers . in addition , a 2006 un report found a 50 percent vacancy rate for procurement officers in the field . the un also has difficulty retaining the existing civilian staff in peacekeeping operations . about 80 percent of international staff have appointments of 1 year or less , and the turnover rate in the field is approximately 30 percent . in addition , about half of professional staff serving in peacekeeping operations have 2 years or less experience . in september 2008 , we reported that limited career development opportunities have contributed to the un's difficulties in attracting and retaining qualified field procurement staff . according to un officials , turnover among field procurement staff has continued to hurt the continuity of their operations and peacekeeping missions continue to face challenges in deploying qualified , experienced procurement staff , especially during the critical start - up phase . the un has identified several problems in obtaining and retaining civilian staff for peacekeeping . first , nearly all civilian staff deployed to un operations hold appointments limited to specific missions or are on loan from other un offices as temporary duty assignments . most of these civilians cannot be redeployed from one mission to another in response to urgent needs at one of the operations , which limits the un's ability to launch new operations . second , the un has reported that the terms and conditions of service for civilians at field missions create inequities in the field . in march 2008 , the un reported that it has nine different types of employment contracts for field civilians , which set differing terms of service . some operations do not offer the incentive of hardship pay . according to a un official , it would be difficult to attract international staff and contractors to the potential new operation without better conditions of service . the un has developed proposals to address these challenges . for example , in 2006 , the un secretariat proposed establishing 2,500 career - track positions for expert and experienced technical civilian staff to serve in field missions . these staff would have the flexibility to move to different operations as needed . the un secretariat also proposed reducing the types of contracts offered to civilian staff and harmonizing conditions of service so that civilians serving in un operations have similar benefits . as of september 2008 , the un was considering these proposals , according to a state official . the recent experiences of other un operations in sub - saharan africa illustrate the challenges the potential new operation may face in terms of logistical requirements . first , it is likely that the un will not be able to draw upon preexisting buildings for office space and staff accommodations .