other social effects . in the wilmington district study , the corps considered security of life , health , and safety ; preservation of historic significance ; and the impacts to cultural resources . according to a 2009 corps handbook , considering the other social effects analysis has great potential value for better ensuring that water resources solutions address a broad array of issues and concerns that better meet stakeholder needs and expectations . in most of the studies we reviewed , the corps recommended the alternative plan with the greatest net economic benefits based on the results of its economic analyses . in some cases , however , the corps relied on other analyses to address different project objectives or the preferences of the local nonfederal sponsors . the corps' planning guidance directs that the project alternative with the greatest net economic benefit , consistent with protecting the nation's environment , be selected for recommendation unless an exception is granted . the assistant secretary of the army for civil works has the authority to grant exceptions if federal , state , local , or international concerns exist . the planning guidance states that projects may deviate from the alternative plan with the maximum net benefits if requested by the nonfederal sponsor and approved by the assistant secretary of the army for civil works . such plan alternatives are referred to by the corps as the locally preferred plan , with the nonfederal sponsor responsible for any project costs in excess of the costs of the plan with the highest net benefits . the corps conducted economic analyses in each of the eight studies we reviewed , resulting in a wide range of monetary benefits and costs for the recommended project plan alternatives . table 5 shows the monetized benefit and cost information that helped the corps select recommended plans in the eight studies . the annualized project benefits ranged from approximately $500,000 to $210.6 million , and annualized project costs ranged from about $1 million to $65 million , resulting in annual net benefit estimates ranging from approximately - $500,000 to $146 million . for five of the eight studies we reviewed , the corps primarily used the results of the economic analysis of benefits and costs to recommend a plan with the greatest net benefits from among the alternatives , in accordance with the planning guidance . for the transparency element , corps officials acknowledged that transparency could be improved through its review process . according to our assessment methodology , an economic analysis should state the action examined and the justification for the action . in addition , the objective of the analysis should be stated ; the scope of the analysis should be designed to address the objective ; and the analysis period should be long enough to encompass the important economic effects of the proposed action . we found that all eight analyses generally met this key element . for example , all eight economic analyses indicated that the actions examined included the evaluation of flood risk management improvements for resolving flooding problems .