areas . for example , according to data used in the national broadband map , nearly 100 percent of urban residents have access to 3 mbps or higher download speeds , and about 94 percent of nonurban residents have access to such speeds . likewise , wireline broadband access is available to 99 percent of urban populations and 82 percent of nonurban populations . the unserved and underserved areas that remain in the united states tend to be where conditions increase the cost of broadband deployment , and the difficulty in recouping deployment costs makes it less likely that a service provider will build out or maintain a network . these conditions include: service gaps exist primarily in nonurban low population . the limited number of potential subscribers in an area makes it difficult for providers to recoup the costs of building a network . the definitions of unserved and underserved were part of a notice of funds availability announced by ntia and designed to implement grant programs under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( 74 fed . reg . 33104 , july 9 , 2009 ) . the speeds in these definitions are much lower than the fcc's broadband benchmark of 4 mbps download and 1 mbps upload . according to the notice of funds availability , an unserved area is one in which at least 90 percent of households cannot subscribe to the minimum broadband speed and service , defined as advertised speeds of at least 768 kbps download and at least 200 kpbs upload . an underserved area is one in which ( 1 ) 50 percent or less of households have access to the minimum broadband speed , ( 2 ) no provider offers service speeds of at least 3 mbps , or ( 3 ) 40 percent or less of the households choose to subscribe to a broadband service . the availability of , or adoption rates for , satellite broadband service are not considered in determining whether an area is unserved or underserved . difficult terrain . challenging terrain , such as mountains , may increase construction costs for wireline service and can affect wireless service by creating physical barriers or otherwise limiting the ability to transmit data . natural disasters . satellite . this wireless service transmits data to and from subscribers through a receiver dish to a satellite in a fixed position above the equator , eliminating the need for a copper wire or coaxial cable connection . wireless . in the joint notice of funds availability , ntia and rus provided that projects should be completed within 3 years of receiving an award . 74 fed . reg . 33104 , july 9 , 2009 . as part of btop , in support of broadband adoption , ntia awarded grants to public computing centers and sustainable broadband adoption projects that funded access to broadband , computer equipment , and job training . the connect america fund is part of ongoing universal service fund reform aimed at eventually replacing existing high - cost support mechanisms . the high - cost program within the universal service fund ( usf ) provides subsidies to telecommunications carriers that serve rural and other remote areas with high costs of providing telephone service .