in some cases the same families were displaced by both dams . the crow creek reservation lost 94 percent of its timberland and the fort berthold reservation lost 100 percent of its irrigable land . in addition to the direct damages , congress has recognized that the tribes also suffered indirect or intangible damages for the loss of assets of unknown value . these losses included spiritual ties to the lands ( for example , cemeteries and tribal monuments ) ; tribal claims to a homeland ; and benefits derived from living along the missouri river . the tribes at the seven reservations that lost land due to the flood control projects on the missouri river originally received compensation for their damages between 1947 and 1962 , and they subsequently requested and received additional compensation between 1992 and 2002 ( see table 2 ) . for the tribes at the five reservations that we have reported on in the past , the original compensation was based on detailed assessments by the u.s. government and the tribes of the damages caused by the dams and , in some cases , protracted settlement negotiations over how much the tribes should be compensated for their losses . individuals making key contributions to this testimony and our 2006 additional compensation report are greg carroll , tim guinane , susanna kuebler , jeffery d. malcolm , and carol herrnstadt shulman . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the settlement negotiations for the cheyenne river sioux tribe lasted about 4 years from the date settlement negotiations were authorized to the date the settlement legislation was enacted . the settlement negotiations for the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes involved two dams and stretched over about 9 years , from 1953 through the enactment of their settlement legislation for the big bend dam in 1962 . the results of the settlement negotiations were that the u.s. government and the tribes were unable to reach an agreement . as a result , the settlements were left for congress to decide . for each of the tribes at the five reservations that we have reported on in the past , the original compensation provided was less than what the tribes' believed their lands were worth . during our prior reviews , we have recognized the problems with the original settlement negotiations , namely that the tribes may have been at a disadvantage during the negotiations and that they were not willing sellers of their land . we also recognized the inherit difficulties with trying to perform new economic analyses on the damages the tribes sustained 50 years after the fact .