( fig . 3 is a simplified diagram depicting the interrelationships among the views. ) the operational architecture view defines the operational elements , activities , tasks , and information flows required to accomplish or support an organizational mission or business function . according to dod , it is useful for facilitating a number of actions and assessments across dod , such as examining business processes for reengineering or defining operational requirements to be supported by physical resources and systems . the systems architecture view defines the systems and their interconnections supporting the organizational or functional mission in context with the operational view , including how multiple systems link and interoperate , and may describe the internal construction and operations of particular systems . according to dod , this view has many uses , such as helping managers to evaluate interoperability improvement and to make investment decisions concerning cost - effective ways to satisfy operational requirements . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact either of us at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or ( 202 ) 512-9095 . we can also be reached by e - mail at hiter@gao.gov or kutzg@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were robert l. crocker , jr. , jean k. lee , madhav s. panwar , sanford f. reigle , phillip e. rutar , and darby w. smith . the objectives of our review were to determine ( 1 ) the status of dod's efforts to develop and implement a departmentwide financial management enterprise architecture to guide and constrain its modernization program and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of dod's structures and processes for managing this architecture . to determine the status of dod's efforts to develop this architecture , we reviewed relevant federal and dod enterprise architecture policy and guidance , including omb memorandums and circulars , the cio council's federal enterprise architecture framework version 1.1 , and dod's command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) architecture framework , version 2.0 . in addition , we identified the dod organizations involved in efforts to reform and modernize dod financial management operations and systems , as well as organizations responsible for dod policy and guidance on enterprise architectures , including the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( command , control , communications and intelligence ) ; the dfas office of the director , information and technology ; and the dfas office of the director for systems integration . from each of these organizations , we solicited information on plans and activities that defined the form and content of these reform and modernization efforts . we then questioned officials from each organization about planned and existing architectural documents and obtained copies of all such plans and architectural documents .