costs of the fund . doe , in conjunction with its contractor officials responsible for conducting the cleanup work at the three uranium enrichment plants , provided cost estimates for all anticipated activities that will be paid for from the fund starting in fiscal year 2004 , and that will carry forward until all cleanup activities have been completed at each of the three plants . cost estimates included ( 1 ) reimbursements to uranium and thorium licensees and ( 2 ) costs to complete the cleanup at the three uranium enrichment plants . reimbursements to uranium and thorium licensees . the energy policy act authorized reimbursements to uranium licensees not to exceed $350 million and reimbursements to the thorium licensee not to exceed $365 million for the portion of their cleanup costs associated with the sale of these materials to the federal government . the remaining unused authorized amounts are adjusted annually based upon the consumer price index . we assumed that the annual reimbursement amount will be fixed at the fiscal year 2004 level and will carry forward until the total amount authorized by law has been allocated . based on the current balance of the fund , anticipated revenues , and the total available reimbursement amount remaining , we determined that the fund would be sufficient to cover the reimbursements to the uranium and thorium licensees . cleanup costs at the three uranium enrichment plants . cleanup costs for decontamination and decommissioning ( d&d ) work were kept separate from all other cleanup cost activities , which include remedial actions , waste management , surveillance and maintenance , and other ( including all other activities the fund supports such as litigation fees and funds to support site - specific advisory boards ) . because doe has not determined when the final decommissioning and decontamination work for the paducah and portsmouth uranium plants will begin and when it will be completed , doe , in conjunction with its contractor officials , developed two additional cost series for the paducah and portsmouth plants that varied in the start and completion dates for the final d&d work , which we then incorporated into our accelerated and deferred models . the completion of all d&d activities in the accelerated model was reduced by 20 years from 2044 to 2024 , and increased by 8 years in the deferred model to 2052 . the accelerated cost series was developed under the assumption that final d&d could be completed faster than under the baseline model , given unconstrained funding . for the accelerated approach , paducah's final d&d work would begin in 2010 and end by 2024 ; portsmouth's final d&d work would begin in 2007 and be completed by 2024 . these time frames were determined in consultation with doe and contractor officials . they represent the soonest the d&d work would most likely start , according to doe and its contractor officials , and represent the earliest likely time frame that the total d&d and other associated cleanup work could be completed . these are the most likely time frames for completing the final d&d work , based on discussions with doe and contractor officials . cost uncertainties .