ii. ) five of the 16 states ( georgia , new hampshire , north carolina , tennessee , and texas ) reported the highest percentages of inspections that were conducted by 14- and 15- year - olds - - 73 percent to 94 percent . ( see fig . four of the 5 states also reported that a large proportion of their fiscal year 1998 inspections were conducted by 14- and 15-year - olds . tennessee and texas officials told us they did not purposely try to recruit large numbers of 14- and 15-year - olds . research suggests that some clerks may sell minors tobacco products because they have difficulty quickly determining an individual's age from a date - of - birth on his or her identification . according to hhs , because of safety concerns , samhsa recommends that minors not carry identification but answer truthfully about their age if asked by a store clerk . research also suggests that the sex of the minor inspector can bias the inspection result . for example , when controlling for the effects of both age and sex of the inspector , one researcher found that girls were able to purchase at a 39-percent rate compared to boys who had a 28-percent purchase rate . unlike previous research , this research controlled for the effects of both age and sex . samhsa approved four states' retailer violation rates for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 that were inaccurately calculated because they included inspections in which the ages of minor inspectors and the inspection results were not known . samhsa requires states to report the ages of minor inspectors in part to confirm that the ages of the inspectors are within an acceptable range . when the ages of minors used in state inspections are unknown , samhsa officials told us that they consider the inspections invalid , and the inspection results should be excluded from the violation rate computation . however , we found that samhsa approved and published violation rates reported by florida , kansas , louisiana , and minnesota that included inspection results in which the ages of the minor inspectors were unknown . moreover , three of these states' violation rates included some inspections where neither the age of the minors nor the outcomes of the inspections were known . had the invalid inspections been excluded , the violation rates for florida , louisiana , and minnesota would have been higher ( see table 1. ) however , none of the four states would have missed its target based on the recalculated rate . samhsa officials said that there were reasons for accepting the states' violation rates . for example , they said that they did not exclude kansas' invalid inspections because the state provided the outcomes of the inspections . even though florida's retailer violation rate was based entirely on inspections in which the ages of the inspectors and the outcomes by age were unknown , samhsa accepted the rate because of the large number of inspections the state conducted and its low reported violation rate . samhsa did not ensure that the accuracy of the data that states used to support their fiscal year 1998 and 1999 estimates of retailer violation rates was verified .