there is good reason for this . over the past decade , federal agencies have substantially increased their purchases of services , particularly for information technology and professional , administrative , and management support . in fiscal year 2001 alone , the federal government acquired about $109 billion in services . this money , however , is not always well - spent . our work , as well as the work of other oversight agencies , continues to find that millions of service contract dollars are at risk at defense and civilian agencies because acquisitions are poorly planned , not adequately competed , or poorly managed . first , the proposed bill also encourages greater use of performance - based contracting . performance - based service contracting is a process where the contracting agency specifies the outcome or result it desires and leaves it to the vendor to decide how best to achieve the desired outcome . historically , the government has not widely used this strategy , but it is beginning to move in that direction in an effort to attract leading commercial companies to doing business with the government , gain greater access to technological innovations , and better ensure contractor performance . second , the bill would create a chief acquisition officer within each agency . we support the concept of a chief acquisition officer . our discussions with a number of officials from private sector companies about how they buy services indicate that a procurement executive or a chief acquisition officer plays a critical role in changing an organization's culture and practices . the bill , however , differs from the approach taken by leading companies in terms of the scope and the decision - making authority of this position . specifically , at the leading companies , these officials were corporate executives who had authority to influence decisions on acquisitions ; implement needed structural , process , or role changes ; and provide the necessary clout to obtain initial buy - in and acceptance of reengineering efforts . under sara , it is not clear that the chief acquisition officer would have comparable responsibility and authority . in addition to our work on best service acquisition practices , we are performing a number of evaluations related to specific proposals in the services acquisition reform act , including those on ( 1 ) acquisition workforce , ( 2 ) performance - based contracting , and ( 3 ) share - in - savings contracting . i would like to highlight what this work entails and how it can be of use to the subcommittee as it moves forward on the bill . the proposed bill contains several provisions to address the challenges being faced in the acquisition workforce . procurement reforms and technological changes have placed unprecedented demands on the acquisition workforce . contracting personnel are now expected to have a much greater knowledge of market conditions , industry trends , and technical details of the commodities and services they procure . we believe it is essential for agencies to define the future capabilities needed by the workforce and to contrast these needs with where the workforce is today .