the program has not been rebaselined . the ispan inc 4 program's current cost estimates have not changed since their first estimate . the ispan inc 4 program's current schedule estimates have not changed since their first estimate the ispan inc 4 program was still early in development and system performance data was not yet available . the jms inc 2 program is expected to replace the legacy space defense operations center hardware and services with extensible and sustainable infrastructure . the effort is planned to integrate components of the space situational awareness mission applications and command and control capabilities into the joint space operations center to create timely , actionable knowledge necessary for maintaining space superiority and exercising command and control capabilities of space forces . program essentials ( as of october 2016 ) dod component: air force program owner: air force space command prime contractor: n / a , managed by federal government total number of contractors ( as of may 2016 ) : 7 as of march 2016 , the jms inc 2 program was in the engineering and manufacturing development acquisition phase . this report is the fifth in a series of annual assessments . our objectives for this review were to ( 1 ) describe the extent to which selected mais programs had changed their planned cost and schedule estimates , and met technical performance targets and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which selected mais programs have used leading it acquisition practices , including requirements and risk management , and systems testing and integration . to address the first objective , we used dod's official list of 35 mais programs , as of may 1 , 2016 , to establish a basis for selecting programs . we selected 18 of 35 mais programs based on our criteria that programs must be unclassified and have a first acquisition program baseline that could be used as a reference point for evaluating cost , schedule , and technical performance characteristics . we then compared each program's cost ( in then - year dollars ) and schedule estimates established in the first acquisition baseline to the latest total life - cycle cost and schedule estimates . in addition , to determine whether technical performance targets were met , we reviewed each program's initial and the most recent baseline targets . we summarized the results of our analyses for each individual mais program . to address the second objective , we selected 5 programs for a more in - depth review from among those used by at least two military services and that had not been included in a gao assessment in the past year to focus on programs that have not been recently evaluated . using these criteria , we selected the 5 programs listed in table 1 . to evaluate dod's approach in managing the acquisition of mais systems , we identified risk management and requirements management practices from the software engineering institute's capability maturity model® integration for acquisition ( cmmi - acq ) , and assessed each of the programs against these leading practices .