after management review , nrc issues rais to licensees . nrc generally agreed with our findings and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . nrc's comments are reprinted in appendix i . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees and the chairman of the nuclear regulatory commission . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . most licensees we interviewed told us that they found nrc guidance to be helpful ; such guidance includes regulatory documents , procedural documents , and memorandums . nrc incorporated changes contained in the april 2016 expectations memorandum into a new edition — version five — of lic - 101 in january 2017 . the office of nuclear reactor regulation's management also issued a memorandum in august 2016 to all operating reactor licensees that stated , among other things , that staff will actively seek opportunities to conduct an on - site audit or a public meeting in order to reduce the number of rounds of rais . in the office of new reactors , office instruction document nro - reg - 101 provides information to guide staff in the processing of rais . for example , the majority of the licensees we interviewed that worked with the office of nuclear reactor regulation said that the office's april 2016 expectations memorandum was a positive step by the agency and an improvement in the rai process . specifically , one licensee told us that the policy of ensuring that rais ask for information needed to fill a gap in the safety evaluation report — as outlined in the memorandum — was an appropriate procedure . some licensees also said that they found it particularly useful when nrc reviewers identified for them specific passages of a guidance document relevant to the licensing action or rai . licensees we interviewed also identified nrc's openness to communication and engagement as a strength of the rai process . most licensees we interviewed said that communication with nrc staff during the process to develop and issue rais was helpful , including pre - application meetings , informal interactions via phone or e - mail , and coordination with project managers . as mentioned above , pre - application meetings provide an opportunity for the licensee and nrc to clarify potential issues or questions before the initial license application is submitted and rais are issued . of those licensees we interviewed who participated in a pre - application meeting , the majority said that the meeting helped to either resolve or clarify issues before the acceptance review .