rate increases . tva's plans include annual rate increases not to exceed 1.5 percent of the retail rate as needed to maintain its debt reduction trajectory . according to tva officials and documents , tva's plans included rate increases of 1.5 percent for about $200 million in annual revenue . tva can use increased revenue to refinance existing debt or to fund certain expenditures rather than taking on new debt , but tva's board must approve rate increases . tva increased rates each fiscal year from 2014 through 2017 . according to tva officials , annual rate increases through 2023 could result in the reduction of debt to about $19.8 billion by fiscal year 2023 , which would exceed the agency's debt reduction goal . limits in the growth of operating expenses . tva plans to continue evaluating its operations and to limit the growth of its operating expenses . having fewer operating expenses frees up revenue from rates that tva can use to repay outstanding debt or fund certain expenditures without taking on new debt . in fiscal year 2016 , tva's o&m expenses totaled about $2.8 billion — a reduction of about 18 percent from $3.4 billion in fiscal year 2013 . as part of its cost - reduction initiatives , tva eliminated 2,200 positions through attrition and elimination of vacant positions . tva plans to pursue additional workforce reductions to offset increases in retirement benefit and labor costs . according to tva documents , reductions in expenses associated with coal plant closures will offset some of the increase in labor - related costs but other reductions will be required . tva officials said that additional reductions could involve contract labor in its nuclear group . in july 2016 , tva offered a voluntary reduction - in - force program to all 3,500 employees in its nuclear group , providing an opportunity to retire or depart ; as of january 2017 , tva officials had not provided information on the number of employees participating in this program . in fiscal year 2016 , tva's workforce included 10,691 employees and 12,729 contractors . according to tva documentation , as a major component of its o&m costs , tva continuously evaluates its staffing levels , both employees and contractors . tva plans are being finalized , over the next several years , to decrease the overall workforce through various mechanisms as tva aligns its workforce with changes to its generating assets ; these mechanisms may include reductions - in - force , attrition , and elimination of vacant positions . however , early retirements and severance associated with workforce reductions could also pose additional expenses . reductions in capital expenditures . tva plans to reduce its capital expenditures through fiscal year 2023 . over the past decade , tva's capital expenditures increased by over 180 percent — from about $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2006 to about $3.4 billion in fiscal year 2015 . tva aims to decrease capital expenditures to about $1.8 billion by fiscal year 2023 ( see fig .