ii. ) we did our work from may 2002 through july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the resources that hospitals and their emergency departments would require for responding to a large - scale bioterrorist attack are far greater than those needed for everyday performance . the specific equipment , supplies , and facilities needed could vary depending upon what type of attack occurred , but many scenarios anticipate that the demand for health care could quickly outstrip the ability of hospitals to respond . for example , the topoff 2000 exercise testing terrorism preparedness included a bioterrorism scenario of an attack using pneumonic plague released at a public event in a single location in one city . in this exercise , officials found that by the third day following the covert release , 500 persons with symptoms had been reported and antibiotic and ventilator shortages were beginning to occur . by the end of this day , nearly 800 cases were identified and over 100 persons had died . in each of the succeeding 2 days , the situation worsened and medical care in the city was described as beginning to shut down , with insufficient hospital staff , beds , ventilators , and drugs . at the conclusion of the exercise , 1 week after the attack , an estimated 3,700 cases of plague had been reported , with 950 to 2,000 deaths , including cases in other cities and abroad . in the early stages of the epidemic , hospitals were seeing 2 to 3 times their normal volume of patients and later in the exercise up to 10 times normal volumes were arriving at hospitals . hospitals were not able to effectively isolate patients to prevent the spread of the disease to hospital staff . in order to be adequately prepared for bioterrorism , hospitals would need to have several basic capabilities , whether they possess them directly or have access to them through regional agreements . plans that describe how hospitals would work with state and local officials to manage and coordinate an emergency response would need to be in place and to have been tested in an exercise , both at the state and local levels and at the regional level . regional plans can help address capacity deficiencies by providing for the sharing , among hospitals and other community and state agencies and organizations , of resources that , while adequate for everyday needs , may be in short supply on a local level in an emergency . in addition , hospitals would need to be able to communicate easily with all organizations involved in the response as events unfold and critical information is acquired . staff would need to be able to recognize and report to their state or local health department any illness patterns or diagnostic clues that might indicate an outbreak of a disease caused by a biological agent likely to be used by a terrorist . finally , hospitals would need to have the capacity and staff necessary to treat large numbers of severely ill patients and limit the spread of infectious disease .