charging for services . for example , irs provides paid preparers with information on federal debts owed by taxpayers seeking refund anticipation loans . although irs has implemented important elements of the bsm program , much work remains . in particular , the bsm program remains at high risk and has a long history of significant cost overruns and schedule delays . furthermore , budget reductions have resulted in significant adjustments to the bsm program , although it is too early to determine their ultimate effect . irs has long relied on obsolete automated systems for key operational and financial management functions , and its attempts to modernize these aging computer systems span several decades . irs's current modernization program , bsm , is a highly complex , multibillion - dollar program that is the agency's latest attempt to modernize its systems . bsm is critical to supporting irs's taxpayer service and enforcement goals . irs is currently evaluating alternative approaches to addressing these weaknesses . reductions in planned functionality . according to irs , the fiscal year 2006 funding reduction will result in delays in planned functionality for some of its bsm projects . for example , irs no longer plans to include form 1041 ( the income tax return for estates and trusts ) in the fourth release of modernized e - file , which is expected to be implemented in fiscal year 2007 . the bsm program is based on visions and strategies developed in 2000 and 2001 . the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) of 1995 requires federal agencies to be accountable for their it investments and responsible for maximizing the value and managing the risks of their major information systems initiatives . the clinger - cohen act of 1996 establishes a more definitive framework for implementing the pra's requirements for it investment management . it requires federal agencies to focus more on the results they have achieved and introduces more rigor and structure into how agencies are to select and manage it projects . in addition , leading private - and public - sector organizations have taken a project - or system - centric approach to managing not only new investments but also operations and maintenance of existing systems . as such , these organizations identify operations and maintenance projects and systems for inclusion assess these projects or systems on the basis of expected costs , benefits , and risks to the organization ; analyze these projects as a portfolio of competing funding options ; and use this information to develop and support budget requests . this focus on projects , their outcomes , and risks as the basic elements of analysis and decision making is incorporated in the it investment management approach that is recommended by omb and gao . by using these proven investment management approaches for budget formulation , agencies have a systematic method , on the basis of risk and return on investment , to justify what are typically substantial information systems operations and maintenance budget requests . in our assessment of irs's fiscal year 2003 budget request , we reported that the agency did not develop its information systems operations and maintenance request in accordance with the investment management approach used by leading organizations .