( see app . i for more information on nursing home workload by network and setting. ) overall , long - stay care accounted for nearly 90 percent of va's total nursing home workload in fiscal year 2012 ( 31,750 of the 36,250 residents for whom va provided or paid for care each day ) , and long - stay care accounted for at least three - quarters of all workload in each of va's three nursing home settings . ( see fig . percentages are assigned in increments of 10 percent . we previously found that va did not collect data on veterans' eligibility status and length of stay for all three nursing home settings . specifically , in 2004 , we found that va lacked such data for community nursing homes and state veterans' nursing homes , and concluded that gaps in va data impeded va's oversight of its nursing home program . in addition , in 2006 , we found that va did not compile information on key characteristics of nursing home residents — including age and eligibility status — and that va needed this information to plan for nursing home care . we recommended that va collect and report on these measures to improve on the completeness of data needed for va's oversight . va implemented these recommendations and now has such data for planning and budgetary purposes . in this report , we use the term expenditures to refer to obligations , which va reports in its budget justification . obligations refer to a definite commitment creating a legal liability to make payments immediately or in the future . an obligation is incurred , for example , when an agency awards a contract to a private entity . encourages agencies to provide information on workload and unit costs , such as per diem expenditures , in budget justifications to the maximum extent possible to justify staffing and other requirements . omb states in guidance to agencies that providing more detailed information on federal programs and spending can improve congressional decision making . as a result , va nursing home workload and expenditure data are important to congress in providing oversight of budgeting and health care services , and understanding how the budget they approve is allocated for nursing home care by length of stay , mandatory and discretionary veterans , and age . in recent years , we have identified weaknesses regarding va's inclusion and presentation of health care information in its budget justification , including nursing home care , and made recommendations to improve the information included and how it is presented . you asked us to conduct a review of va's nursing home care provided in the three settings to better understand differences in spending and the type of care provided in each setting . in this report we examine: ( 1 ) the factors considered in deciding the nursing home setting in which veterans receive care ; ( 2 ) va's nursing home workload in each setting , by length of stay and resident characteristics ; and ( 3 ) va's expenditures for nursing home care in each setting , by length of stay and resident characteristics .