the enterprises held some of the mortgages that they purchased in their portfolios . however , most of the mortgages were packaged into mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) , which were sold to investors in the secondary mortgage market . in exchange for a fee ( the guarantee fee ) the enterprises guaranteed the timely payment of interest and principal on mbs that they issued . the charter requirements for providing assistance to the secondary mortgage markets specify that those markets are to include mortgages on residences for low - and moderate - income families . in 1992 , congress instituted authority for requiring the enterprises to meet numeric goals set by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) on a yearly basis for the purchase of single - and multifamily conventional mortgages that serve targeted groups . while the enterprises operated profitably for many years , their structures long have been in question . for example , critics questioned the extent to which private for - profit corporations could be expected to serve a federally mandated housing mission . furthermore , critics stated that the federal government's sponsorship conveyed certain financial and other advantages to the enterprises that encouraged them to engage in riskier activities than otherwise would be the case . as already discussed , the enterprises' large retained portfolios exposed them to significant interest - rate risk , and they misapplied accounting rules that governed the hedging techniques necessary to manage such risks . nevertheless , successfully managing a large conventional mortgage purchase and mbs issuance business still may be a complex and challenging activity for a government entity , and the failure to adequately manage the associated risks could result in significant losses that could be the direct responsibility of taxpayers . for example , the enterprises' substantial losses in recent years have been credit - related ( due to mortgage defaults ) , including substantial losses in their mbs guarantee business . this risk may be heightened if a government entity were expected to continue purchasing mortgages and issuing mbs during stressful economic periods when the potential for losses may be greater than would otherwise be the case . as discussed previously , ginnie mae provides only a limited model for the establishment of such a government corporation or agency . ginnie mae guarantees the timely payment of principal and interest on mbs collateralized by mortgages , but federal agencies insure or guarantee such mortgages and lenders issue the mbs . furthermore , ginnie mae is not responsible for establishing credit underwriting standards or monitoring lenders' adherence to them ; rather , these functions are carried out by fha , va , pih , and usda / rd . in contrast , a government entity that issued mbs collateralized by conforming mortgages as is the case with the enterprises would be responsible for managing credit risk , including setting appropriate guarantee fees to offset such risk . as described in our previous work on fha , government entities may lack the financial resources necessary to attract the highly skilled employees needed to manage complex business activities or the information technology necessary to help do so .