government contribution . the following formula is used to determine the government's contribution amount: the government contribution represents the portion of nc not covered by participants' contributions . lump sum pay out . this may occur upon the dissolution of marriage either through divorce or death of spouse . payroll contributions cease , but previous contributions remain in jsas . also , if there is no eligible surviving spouse or child upon the death of the judicial official , the lump sum pay out to the judicial official's designated beneficiaries is computed as follows: lump sum pay out equals total amount paid into the plan by the judge plus 3 percent annual interest accrued less 2.2 percent of salaries for each participating year ( forfeited amount ) . in effect , the interest plus any amount contributed in excess of 2.2 percent of judges' salaries will be refunded . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . aggregate funding method . this method , as used by the jsas plan , defines the normal cost as that level percentage of future salaries , which will be sufficient , along with investment earnings and the plan's assets , to pay the plan's benefits . the formula is as follows: the present value of future normal costs ( pvfnc ) equals present value of future benefits ( pvfb ) less net asset value . the present value of future normal costs is the amount that remains to be financed by the judges and the government . normal cost percentage ( nc percent ) equals pvfnc divided by present value of future salaries ( pvfs ) . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to daily e - mail alert for newly released products” under the gao reports heading . another significant change was an increase in benefits for survivors of retired judges . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request .