gsa has since implemented this recommendation . according to gsa documentation and officials , gsa conducts regular vulnerability scanning of the equipment and systems involved in the smart buildings program . for example , according to gsa regional staff , a recent vulnerability in the gsa system that manages maintenance requests was identified by gsa central office and was remedied through a software upgrade . gsa faces smart building technology implementation challenges related to the limited technological proficiency of or lack of buy - in from some gsa building managers and operations and maintenance services contractors , but the agency is taking steps that are intended to engage these stakeholders and ensure they are learning to use the smart buildings program's technologies . gsa regional staff acknowledge that there can be inconsistencies among building managers and operations and maintenance services contractors in terms of their familiarity and comfort with using computers and computer - based analytical tools . according to gsa officials , gsalink proficiency and adoption varies by building and as such , some buildings may obtain greater benefits from the system than others . a lack of proficiency among building managers in smart building technologies not only affects gsa , but is also an industry - wide concern , according to industry stakeholders we interviewed . industry stakeholders we interviewed stated that operations and maintenance services contractors are generally not well trained on smart building operations or the differences between managing a smart building and managing a traditional building . gsa regional staff and gsalink's support contractor we interviewed also identified operations and maintenance services contractors' limited buy - in to the smart buildings technologies as a challenge affecting implementation of the program . according to gsa officials , this limited buy - in to the smart buildings technologies could potentially lead to loss of support for the program among operations and maintenance services contractors , posing a risk to the program's successful implementation . gsa officials , regional staff , and gsalink's support contractor acknowledge it is important to demonstrate how gsalink , for example , can make the operations and maintenance services contractors' jobs easier . performance measures also show the progress the agency is making toward achieving program goals . we have previously reported that performance measurement gives managers crucial information to identify gaps in program performance and plan any needed improvements . we conducted this performance audit from october 2016 to january 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . gsa maintains custody and control of real property for many civilian federal agencies and has a large portfolio of federally owned and leased properties that gsa rents to its federal agency customers . it is responsible for approximately 1,600 federally owned buildings , and the agency generally provides operations and maintenance services for building systems — such as heating , cooling , and lighting systems — used in building operations .