no further updates have been made . as the current national geospatial strategy document , fgdc's 1997 plan is out of date . first , it does not reflect the recent broadened use of geospatial data and systems by many government agencies . second , it does not take into account the increased importance that has been placed on homeland security in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks . geospatial data and systems have an essential role to play in supporting decision makers and emergency responders in protecting critical infrastructure and responding to threats . finally , significant governmentwide geospatial efforts — including the geospatial one - stop and national map projects — did not exist in 1997 , and are therefore not reflected in the strategic plan . in addition to being out of date , the 1997 document lacks important elements that should be included in an effective strategic plan . according to the government performance and results act of 1993 , such plans should include a set of outcome - related strategic goals , a description of how those goals are to be achieved , and an identification of risk factors that could significantly affect their achievement . the plans should also include performance goals and measures , with resources needed to achieve them , as well as a description of the processes to be used to measure progress . while the 1997 nsdi plan contains a vision statement and goals and objectives , it does not include other essential elements . these missing elements include ( 1 ) a set of outcome - related goals , with actions to achieve those goals , that would bring together the various actions being taken to coordinate geospatial assets and achieve the vision of the nsdi ; ( 2 ) key risk factors that could significantly affect the achievement of the goals and objectives ; and ( 3 ) performance goals and measures to help ensure that the steps being taken result in the development of the national spatial data infrastructure . fgdc officials , in consultation with the executive director of geospatial one - stop , usgs , and participating fgdc member agencies , have initiated a “future directions” effort to begin the process of updating their existing plan . however , this activity is just beginning , and there is no time frame as to when a new strategy will be in place . until a comprehensive national strategy is in place , the current state of ineffective coordination is likely to remain , and the vision of the nsdi will likely not be fully realized . omb circular a - 16 directs federal agencies to coordinate their investments to facilitate building the nsdi . the circular lists 11 specific responsibilities for federal agencies , including ( 1 ) preparing , maintaining , publishing , and implementing a strategy for advancing geographic information and related spatial data activities appropriate to their mission , in support of the nsdi ; ( 2 ) using fgdc standards , including metadata and other appropriate standards , documenting spatial data with relevant metadata ; and ( 3 ) making metadata available online through a registered nsdi - compatible clearinghouse site .