resources . the community spouse may retain an amount equal to one - half of the couple's combined countable resources , up to a state - specified maximum resource level . if one - half of the couple's combined countable resources is less than a state - specified minimum resource level , then the community spouse may retain resources up to the minimum level . the amount that the community spouse is allowed to retain is generally referred to as the community spouse resource allowance . income . the community spouse is allowed to retain all of his or her own income . states establish a minimum amount of income — the minimum monthly maintenance needs allowance ( for this report we will refer to it as the minimum needs allowance ) — that a community spouse is entitled to retain . the amount must be within a federal minimum and maximum standard . if the community spouse's income is less than the minimum needs allowance , then the shortfall can be made up in one of two ways: by transferring income from the institutionalized spouse ( called the “income - first” approach ) or by allowing the community spouse to keep resources above the community spouse resource allowance , so that the additional funds can be invested to generate more income ( the “resource - first” approach ) . federal law limits medicaid payments for long - term care services for persons who dispose of assets for less than fair market value within a specified time period to satisfy financial eligibility requirements . as a result , when an individual applies for medicaid coverage for long - term care , states conduct a review , or “look - back,” to determine whether the applicant ( or his or her spouse , if married ) transferred assets to another person or party and , if so , whether the transfer was for less than fair market value . generally , the look - back period is 36 months . if an asset transfer for less than fair market value is detected , the individual is ineligible for medicaid long - term care coverage for a period of time , called the penalty period . the penalty period is calculated by dividing the dollar amount of the assets transferred by the average monthly private - pay rate for nursing home care in the state ( or the community , at the option of the state ) . for example , if an individual transferred $100,000 in assets , and private facility costs averaged $5,000 per month in the state , the penalty period would be 20 months . the penalty period begins at approximately the date of the asset transfer . as a result , some individuals' penalty periods have already expired by the time they apply for medicaid long - term care coverage , and therefore they are eligible when they apply . federal law exempts certain transfers from the penalty provisions . exemptions include transfers of assets to the individual's spouse , another individual for the spouse's sole benefit , or a disabled child .