documenting decisions . internal control standards require documentation of significant management decisions , which can be documented with decision memorandums , memorandums of understanding , or meeting minutes indicating acceptance of data source recommendations , or other documentation of senior management approval for deciding upon a specific data source . we found that at the time decisions were made , the bureau did not document management approval in support of sourcing decisions for any of the data sources discussed above . bureau officials provided extensive documentation on gss - i , which indicated that governments across the country would be playing a major role as partners with the bureau by providing data: however , there was no formal decision documenting ( as an accountability check ) that senior bureau leadership had agreed that the net benefits of these sources are greater than alternative data sources . regarding the decision to rely on several federal agencies for various types of geospatial data , the bureau similarly lacks a formal record establishing the bureau's approval of these sources as official inputs to the 2020 census . commercial sources . federal agencies . bureau officials have decided that some address , aerial , and spatial data will be collected from other federal agencies . thus far , bureau officials indicated that the federal agency data being used to update the maf / tiger address and spatial data for 2020 includes address data from the usps delivery sequence file , and satellite imagery provided by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) national agriculture imagery program and the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) . these address , aerial , and spatial data are used to identify areas with growth or reduction in the number of housing units . bureau officials have decided to use a commercial imagery service , giving the bureau the capacity to store and manage imagery it has already collected from other sources — such as local governments — and the ability to use imagery provided from the commercial vendor for areas where the bureau lacks imagery data . while the bureau has taken some positive that provide steps , such as preparing a series of planning documentshigh - level examples of measurable goals , schedules , and deadlines , it has not put in place all elements integral to large complex projects . the absence of detailed goals , schedules , deadlines , metrics , or data on monitoring progress toward outcomes and the absence of a detailed integrated plan that incorporates these elements means any limitations of the gss - i strategy may not be fully known or apparent until late in the decade . without these elements , it will be difficult for the bureau to ensure that it evaluates the costs and benefits of alternative data sources and measures and reports the bureau's progress . it will also be difficult to hold managers accountable for results . additionally , the bureau may be lacking the information necessary to make its remaining 2020 address and mapping decisions . as a result , the bureau is at risk of experiencing increased costs to obtain data for remaining gaps in address and mapping data .