sec did not collect any money from the violator . according to sec officials , although sec may not collect the entire amount of disgorgement ordered in such cases , disgorgement can be a deterrent to future violations and limit the violator's ability to raise funds to engage in new frauds . this contrasts with the way sec seeks fines against violators of securities laws . when seeking fines , sec can take into account a violator's ability to pay or other factors such as the severity of the violation and the degree to which the violator cooperates with sec . for example , the court can state that a fine is merited but not levy any amount based on the violator's lack of ability to pay . according to sec officials , the fact that fines are assessed this way is one reason why sec's collection rate is significantly higher for fines than for disgorgement ; in a recent report , gao calculated the collection rate for fines at approximately 91 percent . sec officials also said that they are more successful in collecting fines than disgorgements for at least two other reasons . first , disgorgement orders are often much higher than fines , and the larger amounts are more difficult to collect . second , many violators fined by sec are current members of the securities industry and are motivated to pay their fines in order to maintain their reputation within the industry . but many of the violators who are ordered to pay large disgorgement orders are either not members of the securities industry or have no desire to remain so . securities law violators can lack the ability to pay for a variety of reasons . in many cases , for instance , violators have few or no assets left and may have used the proceeds of their illegal activity on nonrecoverable expenses . for example , in 21 of 37 cases we reviewed in which violators did not pay all the disgorgement ordered , sec staff said that disgorgement was not collected because the violators had already spent the money on personal or business expenses that sec could not recover . in one case we reviewed , the violator had spent $175,000 on custom - made furniture , which the case's court - appointed receiver was able to sell for only about 10 percent of its original cost . in addition , disgorgement orders may be obtained against defunct companies . in two of the cases we reviewed , disgorgement orders were obtained against shell companies , one for $1.6 million and one for $1.5 million . in each case , sec staff knew that the company was defunct and most likely did not have any assets but obtained the disgorgement order to prevent the company from becoming involved in future fraudulent activities . further , a violator's assets may already have been used to pay other judgments , leaving little for sec to collect . he added that disputes over how he handles a case could cost his firm time and money that are often not reimbursable under the receivership .