only the most promising projects are to be chosen for ldrd funding . most projects cost $100,000 to $300,000 and last 2 to 3 years . the laboratories pay for these projects by assessing their regular programs' budgets a maximum of 6 percent — except for fiscal year 2000 , when the congress limited the amount to 4 percent — and putting that money into a separate ldrd account . all nine of doe's multi - program national laboratories fund ldrd projects . while these laboratories conduct research in several program areas , three focus primarily on national security issues ; one focuses on environmental issues ; and the other five conduct a wide range of science and technology research . concerned that some laboratories may have been funding ldrd projects that did not meet doe's guidelines , you asked us to determine how much doe's multi - program national laboratories have spent on ldrd projects since fiscal year 1992 ( when the ldrd program was created ) , evaluate whether ldrd projects meet doe's selection guidelines , and provide observations on how the program might be improved . generally , the laboratories target the smallest amount of funding to projects that are the highest risk and most cutting - edge as shown in the following examples: the lawrence livermore national laboratory has three main categories of funding . strategic initiatives projects represent 27 percent of all ldrd funds , focus on research addressing national needs in support of the laboratory's strategic vision , and are larger multidisciplinary projects . exploratory research projects received 67 percent of the funds , support the strategic vision and competencies building of programs and directorates across the laboratory , and are smaller than the strategic initiatives projects . laboratory - wide projects received about 6 percent of the funds , are designed to encourage creativity of individual scientists in the pursuit of innovative research , and are funded at a maximum of $180,000 . a category of funding that receives less than 1 percent of the laboratory's ldrd funds — definition and feasibility study projects — provides the seeds for new research ideas and are usually funded for less than 6 months and $50,000 . the los alamos national laboratory has two categories of ldrd projects . directed research projects received about two - thirds of the funds , support the laboratory's strategic plan , are typically multidisciplinary , and generally cost $1 million or more . exploratory research projects received about one - third of ldrd funds , are usually smaller and the most innovative , and generally cost $250,000 or less . the pacific northwest national laboratory has three categories for ldrd projects . laboratory - level projects received about two - thirds of the laboratory's ldrd funds and are for projects that directly align with the laboratory's primary research areas , are generally multiyear and multidisciplinary , and cost from $100,000 to $250,000 . division - level projects received about one - third of the ldrd funds , are aimed at developing new ideas in a particular mission area , have intermediate and near - term mission relevance , and cost from $80,000 to $100,000 .