( see app . v for a list of these organizations. ) of these 11 organizations , 4 are ultrasound - related medical societies that do not credential sonographers or accredit facilities that conduct ultrasound procedures and the remaining 7 do . representatives from these organizations said that to conduct diagnostic ultrasounds , sonographers need to be trained and have broad knowledge , good judgment , and discretion . representatives from the society for vascular surgery stated that , because some procedures were done by inadequately trained technical staff or by facilities with little or no quality control , there are a “disturbing number” of patients who have ( 1 ) missed or delayed treatment of major health issues or ( 2 ) undergone unnecessary treatment due to abnormal results being classified normal or normal results being classified as abnormal . an article in a peer - reviewed journal reported that 91 percent of members of the society for vascular ultrasound and the society of diagnostic medical sonography agreed that adding requirements for sonographer credentialing and facility accreditation would improve the quality of vascular ultrasound procedures . some representatives of ultrasound equipment manufacturers and mobile ultrasound providers we interviewed also generally support sonographer credentialing . however , two of the manufacturer - related organizations we contacted and one provider were concerned that requirements for credentialing or accreditation could result in significant shortages of sonographers . representatives from these manufacturer - related organizations noted that a phase - in period for establishing new requirements for sonographers would help prevent any potential access problems . similarly , representatives of ultrasound - related professional organizations that we interviewed emphasized the importance of a phase - in period to allow time for sonographers to become credentialed . federal requirements relating to the qualifications of sonographers are inconsistent . this variation calls into question whether all sonographers paid by medicare have appropriate and sufficient skills , knowledge , and experience to serve beneficiaries . variation in federal requirements is also more of a concern because none of the states require that sonographers register or obtain a license from the state prior to providing ultrasound services , according to ultrasound - related professional organizations . at the federal level , cms has not developed a national policy , such as an ncd , regarding the qualifications needed by sonographers as a condition for payment of ultrasound services . in the absence of an ncd for sonographers' qualifications , carriers have established local coverage determinations ( lcd ) for different types of diagnostic ultrasound procedures . allowing carriers to develop their own lcds has resulted in varying medicare requirements in different states for sonographers who perform particular types of diagnostic ultrasound procedures . for example , as of april 2007 , carriers in 24 states and the district of columbia have established one or more lcds that require that noninvasive vascular diagnostic ultrasound procedures be performed by a credentialed sonographer ( one that has undergone a certification process ) or in an accredited facility that may require sonographers to meet certain qualification requirements . carriers' rationale was that the quality of these ultrasound procedures depends on the knowledge , skill , and experience of the sonographer .