loan flipping . mortgage originators may refinance borrowers' loans repeatedly in a short period of time without any economic gain for the borrower . with each successive refinancing , these originators charge high fees that “strip” borrowers' equity in their homes . fraud and deception . predatory lenders may perpetrate outright fraud through actions such as inflating property appraisals and doctoring loan applications and settlement documents . lenders may also deceive borrowers by using “bait and switch” tactics that mislead borrowers about the terms of their loan . unscrupulous lenders may fail to disclose items as required by law or in other ways may take advantage of borrowers' lack of financial sophistication . prepayment penalties . penalties for prepaying a loan are not necessarily abusive , but predatory lenders may use them to trap borrowers in high - cost loans . balloon payments . loans with balloon payments are structured so that monthly payments are lower but one large payment ( the balloon payment ) is due when the loan matures . for example , an official with the kansas office of the state banking commissioner told us that in 1999 the kansas legislature created the division of consumer and mortgage lending , which provides additional staff for examination and enforcement activities . similarly , an official from the idaho department of finance told us that the state created the consumer finance bureau in 2000 to oversee and conduct routine examinations of mortgage brokers and mortgage lenders . state law enforcement agencies and banking regulators have also taken a number of actions in recent years to enforce existing state consumer protection and banking laws in cases involving predatory lending . for example , an official from the washington department of financial institutions reported that it has taken several enforcement actions in recent years to address predatory lending . in one such action , a california mortgage company that allegedly deceived borrowers and made prohibited charges was ordered to return more than $700,000 to 120 washington state borrowers . according to officials of the conference of state bank supervisors , states reported that in addressing predatory lending they have usually relied on general state consumer protection laws in areas such as fair lending , licensing , and unfair and deceptive practices . in some states , consumer protection statutes do not apply to financial institutions , so state banking regulators , rather than the attorneys general , typically initiate enforcement activities . because allegations of predatory practices often involve lending activities in multiple states , states have sometimes cooperated in investigating alleged abuses and negotiating settlements . for example , in 2002 a settlement of up to $484 million with household finance corporation resulted from a joint investigation begun by the attorneys general and financial regulatory agencies of 19 states and the district of columbia . state agencies have also conducted investigations in conjunction with the federal government . states have varied in their approaches to addressing predatory lending issues . we reviewed legislative and enforcement activities related to predatory lending in two states , north carolina and ohio , to illustrate two different approaches . north carolina has enacted two separate laws to address concerns about predatory lending .