the security problem has an impact on the other problems that have been discussed . for example , to the extent that funding will be needed for a sustained investment in security , the funding available for repair and restoration , preparing excess property for disposal , and improving real property data systems may be further constrained . furthermore , security requires significant staff time and other human capital resources and thus real property managers may have less time to manage other problems . in past high - risk reports , we called for a transformation strategy to address long - standing real property problems . while the administration's current approach is generally consistent with what we envisioned and the administration's central focus on real property management is a positive step , certain areas warrant further attention . specifically , problems are exacerbated by underlying obstacles that include competing stakeholder interests and legal and budgetary limitations . for example , some agencies cited local interests as barriers to disposing of excess property . in addition , agencies' limited ability to pursue ownership often leads them to lease property that they could more cost - effectively own over time . another obstacle — the need for improved long - term capital planning — remains despite omb efforts to enhance related guidance . some major real property - holding agencies reported that competing local , state , and political interests often impede their ability to make real property management decisions , such as decisions about disposing of unneeded property and acquiring real property . for example , va officials reported that disposal is often not an option for most properties because of political stakeholders and constituencies , including historic building advocates or local communities that want to maintain their relationship with va . data on the four performance measures were not included in the frpp report . adding real property asset management to the pma has increased its visibility as a key management challenge and focused greater attention on real property issues across the government . other agencies cited similar challenges related to competing stakeholder interests . if the interests of competing stakeholders are not appropriately addressed early in the planning stage , they can adversely affect the cost , schedule and scope of a project . despite its significance , the obstacle of competing stakeholder interests has gone unaddressed in the real property initiative . it is important to note that there is precedent for lessening the impact of competing stakeholder interests . officials noted that the backlog does not reflect the impact of 2005 base realignment and closures ( brac ) or related strategic rebasing decisions that will be implemented over the next several years . for energy , the backlog in fiscal year 2005 for a portfolio valued at $85.2 billion was $3.6 billion . for interior , officials reported an estimated maintenance backlog of over $3 billion for buildings and other structures . gsa's current maintenance backlog is estimated at $6.6 billion . for state , the maintenance backlog is estimated at $132 million , which includes all of the deferred / unfunded maintenance and repair needs for prior fiscal years .