workforce . gao - 03-883 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2003 . supplemental security income: ssa could enhance its ability to detect residency violations . gao - 03-724 . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2003 . ( 2 ) what key themes have affected dhs's implementation of its mission and management functions ? dhs's major mission and management areas include border security ; immigration enforcement ; immigration services ; aviation security ; surface transportation security ; maritime security ; emergency preparedness and response ; critical infrastructure and key resources protection ; science and technology ; and acquisition , financial , human capital , information technology , and real property management . this report also identifies the key cross - cutting themes that have affected the department's efforts to implement its mission and management areas . these key themes include agency transformation , strategic planning and results management , risk management , information sharing , and partnerships and coordination . we primarily focused the performance expectations on dhs's homeland security - related functions . we generally did not identify performance expectations related to dhs's nonhomeland security functions , although we did identify some performance expectations that relate to these functions . we also did not apply a weight to the performance expectations we developed for dhs , although qualitative differences between the expectations exist . we recognize that these expectations are not time bound , and dhs will take actions to satisfy these expectations over a sustained period of time . therefore , our assessment of dhs's progress relative to each performance expectation refers to the progress made by the department during its first 4 years . our assessment of dhs's progress relative to each performance expectation is not meant to imply that dhs should have fully achieved the performance expectation by the end of its fourth year . to identify the performance expectations , we examined responsibilities set for the department by congress , the administration , and department leadership . in doing so , we reviewed homeland security - related legislation , such as the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , the homeland security act of 2002 , the maritime transportation security act of 2002 , the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 , and the aviation and transportation security act . we also reviewed dhs appropriations acts and accompanying conference reports for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 . we did not consider legislation enacted since september 2006 in developing the performance expectations . to identify goals and measures set by the administration , we reviewed relevant homeland security presidential directives and executive orders . for the goals and measures set by the department , we analyzed the dhs strategic plan , performance budget overviews , performance and accountability reports , and component agencies' strategic plans . for management areas , we also examined effective practices identified in our prior reports . we analyzed these documents to identify common or similar responsibilities for dhs mission and management areas and synthesized the responsibilities identified in the various documents to develop performance expectations for dhs . we obtained and incorporated feedback from our subject matter experts on these performance expectations .