fish and wildlife service . initiated the implementation on 61 of the 199 reasonable and prudent alternatives included in the biological opinion for the federal columbia river power system that apply to bor , including dam operations ; water conservation ; water quality ; hatchery operations ; tributary habitat improvements ; and research , monitoring , and evaluation . developed , in conjunction with the federal caucus , the all - h strategy for restoring threatened and endangered salmon and steelhead . worked with the idaho legislature and local water masters in idaho and oregon to meet flow augmentation standards required by the 1995 biological opinion . completed nine consultations for biological opinions and other purposes . prepared tributary enhancement water conservation demonstration project reports for the lemhi river basin in idaho and the wallowa and john day river basins in oregon . conducted studies on dissolved gas abatement and management at grand coulee dam . designed and built fish screens and fish passage facilities for irrigation diversions on authorized bor projects . provided federal and state agencies , tribes , irrigation districts , and watershed councils with technical assistance to replace or improve fish screens and fish ladders at diversions in the lemhi river basin in idaho ; in the deschutes , john day , umatilla , wallowa , and willamette river basins in oregon ; and in the mid - columbia , okanogan , and yakima basins in washington . initiated the water conservation field services program to encourage the efficient use and conservation of water at federal reclamation projects . this program provides water districts and water users with technical and financial assistance and supports watershed partnerships to improve fish and wildlife habitat . funded and worked with numerous indian tribes , including the nez perce , shoshone bannock , umatilla , yakama , warm springs , colville , nisqually , elwha , and colville , to improve migration , water quality , and spawning and rearing habitat in support of treaty obligations . under the clean water act , the environmental protection agency is authorized to establish water quality standards and to issue permits for the discharge of pollutants from a point source to navigable waters . the act also authorizes epa to approve the total maximum daily load standards established by states . these standards determine the maximum amount of a pollutant that a water body can receive and still meet water quality standards for specified uses , including for fish and wildlife . the agency participated in the following actions to meet its obligations and / or to benefit salmon and steelhead in the columbia river basin: participated in developing the all - h strategy to ensure that endangered species act actions would be coordinated with ongoing and future water quality efforts in the columbia river basin . negotiated an agreement with other federal agencies and the council on environmental quality for the 2000 federal columbia river power system's biological opinion to efficiently integrate esa and clean water act implementation efforts . worked closely with the federal caucus and the federal regional executive forums to provide a unified federal voice for columbia river decisions .