paul . however , other hub airports with high rj traffic are not likely to have new runways by 2003 . similarly , other hub airports that have runways unsuitable for rjs ( i.e. , those that are long enough for turboprops but too short for rjs ) are not likely to have those runways lengthened by 2003 . what factors have affected the airlines' decisions in deploying regional jets ? what effects have regional jets had on air traffic and airport congestion , according to published studies and experts in the field ? to determine the status of the airlines' regional jet service , we analyzed historical airline service data , as well as current airline schedule information . our analysis excluded those carriers that do not have regional affiliates that operate regional jets . we defined regional jets as newer jet aircraft that have been placed into service since 1993 and are designed to seat 70 or fewer passengers . in addition , our analysis included only those markets that had a minimum of 20 monthly regional jet departures — the equivalent of 1 departure per business day . to determine the factors that have affected the airlines' deployment of regional jets , we interviewed airline and industry officials and reviewed airline , government , and consultant documents . to ascertain industry experts' views on the effects of regional jets on air traffic and airport congestion , we reviewed studies and consulted with federal aviation administration ( faa ) and industry officials . we conducted our work from march 2000 to february 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . additional information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . regional jets ( rj ) carry fewer passengers than mainline jets but generally travel at similar speeds , cruise at similar altitudes , and require runways of about the same length as mainline jets . the most common rj models in service today are 50-passenger aircraft — the bombardier crj100 and crj200 and the embraer erj - 145 . most rjs have a maximum flight range between 900 and 1,700 nautical miles . ( see app . ii for more detailed information about these aircraft. ) most rjs are operated by regional affiliates of major airlines rather than by the major airlines themselves . the relationship between the major carrier and the regional carrier can take several forms . some relationships are contractual ; for example , united airlines ( united ) contracts with atlantic coast airlines to fly passengers to and from united's hub at washington dulles international airport . by contrast , other carriers own all or some of their regional affiliates . for example , american airlines ( american ) and continental airlines ( continental ) own many of the carriers that operate for their regional affiliates , american eagle and continental express . likewise , delta air lines ( delta ) purchased two of its regional affiliates , comair and atlantic southeast airlines , in 1999 . major carriers may also purchase a partial interest in a regional carrier , as northwest airlines ( northwest ) has done with mesaba airlines . rjs are part of a u.s. air transportation structure dominated by “hub - and - spoke” networks .