funding . delays at pine bluff and johnston atoll occurred because dod redirected fiscal year 2002 destruction program funds to acquire $40.5 million worth of additional emergency protection equipment for anniston . to cover this unfunded budget expense , the army reduced pine bluff's budget by $14.9 million and johnston atoll's budget by $25.1 million , leading to systemization and closure milestone slippages , respectively , at these sites . program officials told us that the total cost of this schedule slip would ultimately be $116 million due to the extended period before closure . the program is likely to face unfunded requirements as programwide funding requests continue to exceed budgeted amounts . as of october 2003 , according to preliminary estimates from fema , unfunded csepp requirements for all sites are expected to amount to $39.4 million and $49.0 million for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , respectively . unlike the incineration sites , the two bulk - agent only sites , aberdeen and newport , have experienced delays but have not breeched their schedule milestones . in 2002 , dod approved using an alternative technology ( neutralization ) , instead of incineration , at these two sites . this technology is expected to accelerate the rate of destruction at these two sites . the army estimated that this process would reduce the scheduled end of operations at both sites by 5 years , from 2008 to 2003 at aberdeen and from 2009 to 2004 at newport . however , aberdeen has encountered unanticipated problems with the removal of residual agent from bulk containers and has extended its planned completion date by 6 months , from october 2003 to march 2004 . in addition , newport has faced construction delays and community resistance to offsite treatment of waste byproducts . as a result of these delays , newport has extended its planned start date for agent operations by 5 months , from october 2003 to february 2004 . at two sites , pueblo , colorado , and blue grass , kentucky , no milestones were set in the 2001 schedule because dod had not yet selected a destruction technology . dod has now selected a destruction technology for these sites , but it made decisions several months later than estimated . more importantly , dod has set initial schedule milestones for these two sites that go beyond the extended april 2012 cwc deadline . according to dod officials , these milestones are preliminary and will be reevaluated once contractors finish initial facility designs . the chem - demil program has faced continued delays with the program largely because dod and the army have not yet developed a risk management approach to proactively anticipate and address potential problems that could adversely affect program schedules , costs , and safety . such an approach could also leverage knowledge of potential problems gained at other sites . instead , according to a dod official , the program has used a crisis management approach , which has forced it to react to , rather than control , issues . the program had drafted a plan in june 2000 that was intended to address these issues .