surveys of importers . these surveys are performed as a result of an assertion or allegation , such as an e - allegation , with an objective to obtain an understanding of a company's importing practices to determine if there are concerns that merit future cbp consideration . regulatory audit officials we met with in los angeles and new york told us that the majority of their assignments are made up of quick response audits and surveys . according to cbp officials , the audits and reviews can result in the collection of additional revenue . for example , regulatory audit in headquarters reported that for fiscal year 2015 , it identified , through its audit recommendations , over $109 million of revenue owed by importers and was able to collect almost $60 million that year . the audits and reviews also provide informed and enforced compliance to the trade community and act as a deterrent by discouraging potential violators . in addition to activities carried out by regulatory audit , the centers also conduct validation and compliance checks by reviewing post - entry importer records . all centers have a division that conducts validation and compliance checks to ensure importer compliance . the checks are mainly carried out by teams of import specialists that specialize in different commodity types within their industry section . for example , by reviewing an importer's post - entry summary records , the center may validate that the entry complied with all conditions to be treated as a specific commodity under free trade agreements in which the united states is a party . when prompted by mandatory targeting rules , import specialists at the centers are also responsible for reviewing the importers' post - entry documentation and recording in the automated targeting system whether any potential violations were found . some officials from targeting groups that we met with told us that import specialists are inconsistent about recording the results of the reviews they conduct , which impedes the targeting groups' ability to assess the effectiveness of their targeting rules . according to center procedures , import specialists are responsible for working with importers to ensure future compliance if violations have occurred and goods are seized or penalties are issued . cbp can take actions against noncompliant importers when applicable . for example , cbp can seize imported goods if it believes there is a violation of a trade law . the types of seized shipments range across the different priority trade issue areas such as intellectual property rights , textiles , wearing apparel , and import safety ( see fig . for instance , according to cbp , 28,865 shipments were seized based on intellectual property rights violations in fiscal year 2015 . the top five categories for intellectual property rights seizures include consumer electronics and pharmaceuticals , each of which often involve shipments that pose threats to consumer safety . according to cbp , as part of the seizure process , the office of field operation's fines , penalties and forfeitures office will send the importer or another relevant party a notice of seizure . any interested party may file a petition for relief from seizure within 30 days , according to cbp .