security directives . tsa updated a security directive in 2018 to mitigate potential insider threats by , among other things , requiring airport operators to post signs at sterile area entry points accessible by credentialed aviation workers . these signs advise individuals that they may be subject to inspection , among other things . additionally , airport operators are required to conduct random inspections of vehicles when entering secured areas . information circulars . tsa issued information circulars in 2018 and 2019 that ( 1 ) recommended that airport operators and air carriers with exclusive area agreements conduct a vulnerability assessment of insider risks and develop a risk mitigation plan , and included best practices for the mitigation plan , and ( 2 ) described measures to prevent unauthorized access to aircraft and the flight deck . sterile areas . areas that , in general , provide passengers access to boarding aircraft and to which access is controlled through the screening of passengers and property . figure 1 illustrates the variety of security - restricted areas of a typical larger airport , such as a category x or i airport , and aviation stakeholders' primary responsibilities for securing the area . tsa's insider threat program , which was established in 2013 , consists of offices across tsa conducting different portions of the insider threat mission , with tsa's law enforcement / federal air marshal service office serving as the program lead . the program's mission is to deter , detect , and mitigate insider threats to the nation's transportation sector personnel , operations , information , and critical infrastructure . other tsa offices that have key responsibilities in the insider threat program include tsa's security operations ; enrollment services and vetting programs ; inspection ; intelligence and analysis ; and policy , plans , and engagement , among others . to support inter - office coordination , tsa established the insider threat advisory group in 2015 , which is a multi - office team of experts who review and analyze the program's activities , identify gaps , and develop mitigation strategies , among other activities . the group is co - chaired by two tsa offices — law enforcement / federal air marshal service and intelligence and analysis . tsa's insider threat unit , which operates within the law enforcement / federal air marshal service office , serves as the focal point for all referrals of potential insider threat incidents . according to tsa , an insider threat includes direct risks to tsa's security operations , as well as indirect risks that may compromise critical infrastructure or undermine the integrity of the aviation security system . tsa augmented the vetting process for aviation workers , described above , in 2018 to include an evaluation of publically available social media information for individuals who match against a federal watch list and are applying for unescorted access to security - restricted areas of an airport . tsa uses information about the individual , including the social media information , to conduct the security threat assessment and determine whether to approve or deny the application . proposed requirement for rap back enrollment .