see also below . list of plants scheduled for closing , as of may 2009 . st. louis assembly plant south in fenton , mo , closed october 2008 . assembly plant in newark , de , closed in december 2008 . st. louis assembly plant north in fenton , mo , was to close by the end of september 2009 . ( 2 ) how has restructuring affected auto supply sector pension plans ? ( 3 ) what are the impacts on pbgc and plan participants should auto industry pension plans be terminated in the next 5 years ? ( 4 ) how is the federal government dealing with the potential tensions between its multiple roles as pension regulator and insurer , and its new roles as shareholder and creditor ? to describe how restructuring has affected gm's and chrysler's pension plans and the plans' funding going forward , we interviewed officials from each automaker . they provided us with an overview of their pension plans as well as a number of documents , including detailed actuarial information about their pbgc - insured pension plans . we interviewed department of treasury ( treasury ) officials who are responsible for overseeing the assistance to gm and chrysler ( referred to as treasury's “auto team” ) in treasury's program office for tarp , the office of financial stability . these officials provided information on treasury's involvement in the restructurings and how it considered future plan funding when structuring the financing packages for the companies . we interviewed other treasury officials , as well as officials at pbgc , and the department of labor ( labor ) . we also interviewed the international union , united automobile , aerospace and agricultural implement workers of america ( uaw ) , which represents a significant number of the participants in the collectively bargained pension plans , and asked for their views on restructuring efforts and their effect on pension plans . additionally , we reviewed materials related to restructurings , including corporate annual reports and bankruptcy documents , as well as relevant federal laws and regulations , and other materials related to defined benefit plans and plan funding , such as pension consulting briefs . to describe how restructuring has affected the auto supply sector and its pensions , we interviewed officials from pbgc , treasury , and the motor and equipment manufacturers association . we also reviewed materials related to key production parts suppliers in the auto industry , including corporate annual reports , bankruptcy filings , pbgc press releases , and industry publications . to determine the potential consequences of plan termination for pbgc and plan participants , and to describe the tensions and challenges faced by the federal agencies responsible for the regulation and oversight of qualified defined benefit plans , we interviewed officials from gm , chrysler , uaw , pbgc , and the board representatives for pbgc's board of directors , comprised of the secretaries of commerce , labor , and treasury , the primary agencies charged with pension regulation and overseeing pbgc . we requested additional actuarial information from the automakers in certain instances and reviewed bankruptcy documents related to the individual automaker restructurings .