all programs and 31 . low income public 32 . section 8 tenant 33 . section 8 project development block grant ( entitlement grants , states / small cities ) x 2003 ( in millions ) will estimate within the next 6 years 37 . all programs and 39 . federal employees' 41 . all programs and 42 . all programs and education grants and cooperative agreements 44 . ( app . ii lists the agencies and programs. ) in november 2002 , the congress passed the ipia . 7 ( a ) business loan security income program 2003 ( in millions ) narcotic and law enforcement affairs - narcotics program information program - u.s. speaker and specialist program 65 . earned income tax 10 agency did not address improper payments or the ipia requirements for this program in its fiscal year 2004 par . the following is gao's comment on omb's letter dated march 25 , 2005 . in our review of these agencies' fiscal year 2004 pars , we determined that assessments were not completed for all programs and activities . in addition to those named above , lisa crye , bonnie mcewan , and donell ries made important contributions to this report . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) . each weekday , gao posts newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence on its web site . to have gao e - mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to updates. appendix i contains further details on our scope and methodology . omb provided written comments on a draft of this report that are reprinted in appendix v . the pma issued in 2001 targeted improper payments as an area with opportunities for improvement . the pma included five governmentwide initiatives — one of which is improved financial management , which expressly addresses improper payments as a priority . this initiative called for the administration to establish a baseline on the extent of erroneous payments . under it , agencies were to include in their 2003 budget submissions to omb information on improper payment rates , including actual and target rates where available , for benefit and assistance programs over $2 billion . the pma also noted that using this information , omb will work with agencies to establish goals to reduce improper payments identified in their programs . in july 2001 , as part of its efforts to advance the pma initiative , omb revised circular no .