gao - 16-430 . washington , d.c.: may 12 , 2016 . employers not considered educational institutions . in other cases , state officials reported that their laws specified that certain types of employers are not included in the definition of an educational institution and that teachers working for these specific types of employers are potentially eligible for ui benefits over summer breaks . for instance , officials in 10 states for head start and 4 states for ece reported that community action groups operating head start or other ece programs are not included in the definition of an educational institution . therefore , the general restriction against employees of educational institutions getting ui benefits during summer breaks does not apply to these teachers . for example , kansas officials reported that private for - profit institutions are not considered educational institutions , and california officials reported that non - profits are not considered educational institutions . head start and ece teachers in these types of programs may be eligible for benefits . officials in 17 states reported that ui eligibility for head start teachers can be affected by the program's relationship to a school or board of education , and officials in 11 states reported similar restrictions for ece teachers . for example: program is an “integral part” of a school or school system . officials in some states reported that teachers who worked for head start and ece programs that operated as integral parts of a school or school system could be affected by eligibility restrictions . for example , illinois officials specified in their response to our survey that “integral part” means the head start program is conducted on the premises of an academic institution and that the staff is governed by the same employment policies as the other employees of the academic institution . program's relationship with a school board . in other states , officials reported potentially allowing or restricting eligibility for head start and other ece programs based on the program's relationship with a board of education . west virginia officials reported that if a teacher works for a head start program that is “under the influence or authority” of a county board of education , and his or her wages are reportedly paid by the board of education , the teacher is generally considered a school employee and is therefore not eligible for ui benefits over the summer break . colorado officials told us that “educational institution” does not include head start programs that are not part of a school administered by a board of education . we estimated that approximately 44,800 of the nearly 90,400 head start teachers across the country may have been eligible for ui benefits during their summer breaks in 2015 . among the teachers who were likely ineligible for ui benefits , we estimated that about 14,150 were likely not eligible because they work in school systems or charter schools , which we assumed would be included in the states' definitions of educational institutions . we also estimated that about 28,940 head start teachers did not have summer breaks long enough to allow them to collect ui benefits .