most other ir funds do not have this authority . the treasury franchise fund service , for example , contains multiple business units operating under the brand name fedsource . fedsource offers various human capital services such as recruitment , employee assistance , position classification , and alternative dispute resolution through contracts with multiple vendors experienced in providing human capital services in the federal sector . cooperative administrative support units ( casu ) have provided services since 1986 and most operate under the authority of the economy act of 1932 as amended . casus are entrepreneurial organizations that provide the full range of support services on a reimbursable basis to federal agencies . federal agencies in a local community identify services that they would like to share under the leadership of one or more host agencies . the host agency is reimbursed for all costs incurred in providing the services to customer agencies . several casus provide services in conjunction with a franchise fund and operate under the authority of the franchise fund , which allows them to make use of provisions more expansive than those of the economy act , including permitting the customer agency's fiscal year funds to remain obligated to pay for services when delivered , even after the end of the fiscal year . the southeast regional casu ( ser - casu ) is an example of a chartered unit within the national casu network . ser - casu offers human capital services , such as employee assistance program support and training services . 2 for more details. ) opm's tma program may be appropriate when agencies have a need for ( 1 ) outside expertise to help define human capital needs and frame requirements , ( 2 ) help doing something the agency has never done before , ( 3 ) short - term help to get a specific task accomplished because internal resources are not available , ( 4 ) long - term supplemental assistance to accomplish ongoing , mission - critical objectives and activities , and ( 5 ) plans to competitively source certain learning or human capital activities or functions . usitc , for example , used tma to screen and qualify a select group of contractors to assist the agency in its workforce planning initiatives . the agency's human resources director said tma facilitated usitc's ability to appropriately identify a contractor that could work best in the agency's culture . she also noted that the tma program assists smaller agencies in gaining clout with contractors because of the program's large volume of contracts . the training and management assistance ( tma ) program , a fee - based interagency contract service program , provides comprehensive , end - to - end service that agencies can use for their training and human capital needs . products and services: agencies can receive customized and integrated services in areas such as knowledge management , training , compensation , and performance management . process: tma project managers work with agencies on: 1. developing statements of work , 2. completing interagency agreements , 3. selecting providers , 4. attending project kick - off meetings , 5. reviewing and approving management plans , and 6. monitoring projects to completion .