collect information . the collect information leading practice involves capturing information about events in the area of interest , which can be achieved through various methods . asd ( sustainment ) , the military departments , and dla energy officials told us that they collect information for utilities privatization lessons learned through activities such as data calls , working groups , workshops , studies , conferences , and meetings . specific examples of dod demonstrating this leading practice are as follows: according to an asd ( sustainment ) official , since about 1997 , their office has sponsored a monthly utilities privatization working group attended by representatives of the military departments and dla energy officials . the purpose of the working group is to provide a collaborative forum to adjudicate issues and share lessons learned from utilities privatization activities . for example , topics of discussion on the april 2019 agenda included issues or challenges associated with developing an execution framework , methodologies to implement utilities privatization guidance , and updates on current utilities privatization activities from the military departments and dla energy . in 2019 , asd ( sustainment ) added a requirement to its guidance for an annual utilities privatization program review with each military department to address portfolio lessons learned . according to asd ( sustainment ) officials , their office , the military departments , and dla energy officials plan to work together to develop a strategy for complying with the guidance . according to an army official , the army established a tri - military department annual utilities privatization post - award workshop in 2014 that discusses post - award issues among the military departments , dla energy , and contractors . each military department has hosted a workshop . an air force official stated that lessons learned are collaboratively shared annually and have revealed lessons learned to improve the contracting process . this has led to updates of air force request for proposals template . the 2016 navy study not only collected data on utilities privatization but also provided analysis to understand the opportunities , costs , and benefits associated with privatization . the navy used the study to enable decisions about whether privatization is the appropriate strategy to reduce life - cycle expenditures on utility infrastructure . the analysis performed for the study resulted in multiple products and findings . for example , the navy created an excel - based tool to consolidate utility data , organize data , and prioritize installations for evaluation of the potential to privatize . technical complexity . according to utilities privatization officials , the technical complexity of the utilities privatization effort can also affect how long it takes to award a utility services contract . at fort riley , dla energy officials , installation officials , and contractor representatives shared with us that the complexity of the regulated environment of some utilities had an effect on the time to award . for example , a contractor representative stated his regulated utility company was one of the potential contractors vying for a utility services contract at fort riley , and this required additional approval from the state's utility regulatory commission .