protocols for decontamination . the plans in place at each airport were developed by , or in collaboration with relevant airport stakeholders , including airport operators , first responders , state and local public health representatives , and officials from cdc and cbp , as applicable . not all airports had a separate communicable - disease preparedness plan that alone addressed all six high - level components . for example , when asked about communicable - disease preparedness planning , representatives from 11 of the 14 airports reported that the procedures for responding to these threats at their airport were contained in multiple documents , ranging from a general emergency preparedness plan , such as the airport - emergency plan ( aep ) — required by faa regulations , but not required to specifically address communicable diseases — to a disease - specific preparedness plan , such as a pandemic influenza response plan . other types of documents included a checklist for first responders ; standard - operating procedures for a specific disease , such as ebola ; and cdc's communicable - disease response plans ( which are discussed more below ) . during the ebola outbreak , representatives from eight airports that we reviewed reported developing an additional ebola - specific response plan or adapting an existing plan . all three of the airlines we reviewed have a preparedness plan for responding to communicable disease threats . the plans themselves were not available to us because of their proprietary nature ; however , based on our conversations with airline representatives and a review of summary information regarding their plans , we can report that the three airlines' plans addressed the following four high - level components: 1 . establishment of emergency response team and designation of emergency response center . description of the triggers that inform the level and nature of a response . activation triggers for the response team and response center . identification of roles and responsibilities for relevant stakeholders . furthermore , all three airlines stated that they carry universal precaution kits that include equipment to respond to suspected communicable diseases onboard aircraft flying internationally . as noted above , some airports have in place a cdc communicable - disease response plan ( cdrp ) — specifically 18 total airports that currently have ( or had ) a cdc quarantine station on site , 11 of which were included in our review . cdrps fulfill part of who's ihr obligations for establishing core capacity at designated points of entry . the cdrps , according to cdc officials , were developed in coordination with relevant stakeholders and partners at each airport and based on a framework provided by cdc to airport quarantine stations . the existence of a cdrp at an airport does not preclude an airport operator or other airport stakeholders from developing and maintaining one or more additional preparedness plans or documents . in fact , representatives from all but one of the airports that we reviewed that have a cdrp reported having additional preparedness documents ( 10 of 11 airports ) . representatives from 3 of those 10 airports that reported having plans contained in multiple documents do not view the cdrp as the airport's main preparedness plan for communicable diseases .