committee . the report's other recommendations for agency action generally are in the planning or initiation stages . the agencies plan to have the joint advisory committee functioning by late spring or early summer 2010 , but have not set timelines for implementing the other recommendations that do not require statutory changes . could not address all areas of difference through the joint report's recommendations . cftc and sec officials said they did not explicitly define the term “harmonization” and focused on jurisdictional disputes and broad differences in regulation , which agency officials viewed as encompassing differences in the regulation of economically equivalent products . what progress have cftc and sec made towards implementation of the joint report's recommendations ? what additional steps , if any , could cftc and sec take to eliminate or reduce inconsistencies in oversight , and enhance regulatory efficiency and effectiveness , as well as market transparency ? reviewed and analyzed the sec / cftc harmonization report , documentation of public input obtained by cftc and sec through joint public meetings and a public comment period , and preliminary analyses conducted by cftc and sec on relevant differences in their statutes and regulations ; interviewed cftc and sec officials about how they identified and assessed harmonization opportunities and developed recommendations ; progress made on the report's recommendations ; and additional harmonization opportunities that may exist ; reviewed provisions in proposed legislation that may address sec / cftc recommendations for statutory changes ; obtained the views of market participants and other experts on the report's recommendations and additional opportunities for harmonization ; and reviewed prior gao work and other relevant studies . cftc was created in 1974 with the mandate to regulate commodity futures and commodity options markets . cftc's mission is to protect market users and the public from fraud , manipulation , and abusive practices related to the sale of commodity and financial futures and options , and to foster open , competitive and financially sound futures and options markets . futures markets serve to provide a means for risk management and price discovery . sec was created in 1934 to oversee the securities markets . sec's mission is to protect investors , maintain fair , orderly , and efficient markets , and facilitate capital formation . while both cftc and sec seek to promote market integrity and transparency , securities markets are concerned with capital formation . certain securities markets , such as securities options and other securities derivatives markets , also facilitate the transfer of risk . although cftc and sec generally oversee separate markets , their jurisdiction has overlapped in several areas . these areas have included: futures on single stocks and the shad - johnson accord ; innovative products that have features of both futures and securities ; and dually registered broker - dealers and futures commission merchants . in its june 2009 white paper on financial regulatory reform , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) noted that the broad public policy objectives of futures and securities regulation are the same , and that many differences in regulation exist between the markets that are no longer justified .