do you know any more ? here are some letters of the alphabet . gesture with a circular motion at letters and say: point to all the letters that you know and tell me the name of each one . the nrs builds on this work . the nrs was developed in response to president bush's april 2002 announcement of the “good start , grow smart” early childhood initiative that directed hhs to develop a national accountability system to ensure that every head start grantee will assess the progress made by children in early literacy , language , and numeracy skills . head start teachers , or others trained as nrs assessors , administer the nrs to children individually in the fall and spring of the head start year . the nrs begins with a game of “simon says,” lasts about 15 minutes , and includes four sub - tests designed to screen for understanding of spoken english and to assess skills in recognizing letters , vocabulary , and early math . during the test , an assessor sits across from a child at a table and asks scripted questions of the child , and the child responds by verbally identifying or pointing to pictures , numbers , or letters that are contained in a 3-ring binder . the assessor marks the child's responses on a computer - readable scoring sheet . while all of the children are given at least the portion of the english - language assessment that screens for understanding of spoken english , children whose primary language is spanish are also assessed using a spanish version of the nrs . children who speak both english and spanish are given both versions of the nrs and scores from both tests are reported separately . although other evaluations of children's skills and head start performance exist , the nrs differs from them in its scale , type , and purpose . each grantee or delegate agency may have one or more centers , each containing one or more classrooms . in this report , the term “grantee” is used to refer to both grantees and delegate agencies . figure 1 provides information on the numbers of head start grantees , delegate agencies , centers and classrooms . since the inception of head start , questions have been raised about the effectiveness of the program . in 1998 , we reported that head start lacked objective information on performance of individual grantees and congress enacted legislation requiring hsb to establish specific educational standards applicable to all head start programs and allowed development of local assessments to measure whether the standards are met . hsb implemented this legislation by developing the child outcomes framework to guide head start grantees in their ongoing assessment of the progress of children . the framework covers a broad range of child skill and development areas and incorporates each of the legislatively mandated goals , such as that children “use and understand an increasingly complex and varied vocabulary” and “identify at least 10 letters of the alphabet.” since 2000 , hsb has required every head start grantee to include each of the areas in the framework in the child assessments that each grantee adopts and implements .