we agree that if implemented , these actions would satisfy our recommendation . dod noted that this process will be incorporated in the pending update of jcaamp . in commenting on our recommendation for jieddo to develop a comprehensive plan to guide the transition of each jieddo - funded initiative , including expected costs , identified funding sources , and a timeline including milestones for inclusion into the dod base budget cycle , dod concurred and noted that the navy and marine corps are working on efforts to improve the transition of jieddo - funded initiatives . dod also stated that it has developed recommended changes for dod directive 2000.19e that will address coordinating the transition of counter - ied solutions . dod noted that these changes will be staffed to dod and the services during the periodic update of dod directive 2000.19e . we agree that if implemented , these actions would satisfy our recommendation . in commenting on our recommendation for jieddo to coordinate with the services prior to funding an initiative to ensure that service requirements are fully taken into account when making counter - ied investment decisions , dod partially concurred . appendix i provides additional details on our scope and methodology . although the ied was not a new threat when first encountered during operations in iraq and afghanistan , according to dod officials , u.s. forces were not initially concerned with the ied as a “weapon of choice” until ied attacks began to increase in iraq at the end of major combat operations . terrorist and insurgent groups facing overwhelming conventional forces had previously used ieds in a variety of scenarios , including the 1983 marine barracks bombing in beirut , the ship - borne attack against the uss cole in 1999 , and the airborne attacks of september 11th , 2001 . in a 2006 report examining the requirements for truck armor , we stated that the army had previously identified the ied as a threat to u.s. forces prior to the beginning of operations in iraq . following the end of major combat in 2003 in iraq , insurgents began to rapidly adjust their tactics due to the overwhelming firepower and accuracy of u.s. and coalition military forces in conventional warfare . as u.s. forces began to respond to this asymmetric threat , a new tactic emerged as the preferred enemy form of fire , the ied . beginning in june 2003 , ied incidents targeting coalition forces began to escalate from 22 per month to over 600 per month in june 2004 . in june 2006 , these incidents reached more than 2,000 per month . at one point in 2006 , coalition forces in iraq were experiencing almost 100 ieds per day . the initial ied attacks in iraq used nonconventional tactics , techniques , and procedures with a magnitude u.s. forces had not seen before . this threat involved an enemy that takes advantage of and adapts to the environment and is not restricted by conventional rules of engagement . for example , insurgents began using tactics such as buried or camouflaged roadside bombs , vehicle - borne ieds ( car bombs ) , and suicide bombers to attack coalition forces .