hud also has two other types of contract administrators . “traditional” contract administrators ( typically local public housing authorities ) were responsible for administering approximately 5,000 contracts until they expired ; at which time , these contracts would be assigned to the pbcas . finally , hud itself also administered a small number of contracts under specific types of project - based programs . to receive their monthly housing assistance payments , owners must submit monthly vouchers to account for changes in occupancy and tenants' incomes that affect the actual amount of subsidy due . however , the manner in which the owners submit these vouchers and the process by which they get paid varies depending on which of the three types of contract administrators handles their contract . for hud - administered contracts , the owner submits a monthly voucher to hud for verification , and hud in turn pays the owner based on the amount in the voucher . for pbca - administered contracts , the owner submits a monthly voucher to the pbca , which verifies the voucher and forwards it to hud for payment . hud then transfers the amount verified on the voucher to the pbca , which in turn pays the owner . in contrast , for traditionally administered contracts , hud and the contract administrator develop a yearly budget , and hud pays the contract administrator set monthly payments . the owner submits monthly vouchers to the contract administrator for verification , and the contract administrator pays the amount approved on the voucher . at the end of the year , hud and the contract administrator reconcile the payments hud made to the contract administrator with the amounts the contract administrator paid to the owner , exchanging payment as necessary to settle any difference . overall , from fiscal years 1995 through 2004 , hud disbursed by the due date 75 percent of the 3.2 million monthly housing assistance payments on all types of contracts ( see fig . however , 8 percent of payments , averaging 25,000 per year , were significantly late — that is , they were delayed by 2 weeks or more and therefore could have had negative effects on owners who relied on hud's subsidy to pay their mortgages . mahra required an assessment of each project when it neared the end of its original contract term to determine whether the contract rents were comparable to current market rents and whether the project had sufficient cash flow to meet its debt as well as daily and long - term operating expenses . if the expiring contract rents were below market rates , hud could increase the contract rents to market rates upon renewal ( i.e. however , hud contractually requires the pbcas ( which administer the majority of contracts ) to pay owners no later than the first business day of the month . hud officials said that they also used this standard informally to determine the timeliness of payments on hud - administered and traditionally administered contracts . , “mark up to market” ) . conversely , hud could decrease the contract rents upon renewal if they were higher than market rents ( i.e. , “mark down to market” ) .