organized primarily for profit . industry includes some organizations that were founded as non - profit corporations but call themselves “companies” and / or describe “serving clients.” other: any entity not associated with a university or industry . other includes groups such as other federal government agencies , as well as non - profit corporations and other entities which we could not identify conclusively as either industry or universities . we used these three categories , and their definitions , to guide us in the coding process . after developing these definitions , three analysts independently coded each recipient as a university , industry , or other . our method was to examine the identifying information on each recipient's website and decide which category best described the entity . we also had an independent analyst check the coding category that we had assigned to each recipient and verify that we had made a reasonable coding decision . to describe the status of doe's advanced fossil energy loan guarantees , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and guidance , as well as past gao reports describing doe's administration of the loan program . we also reviewed summary information that doe provided on applications for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects . we analyzed information that doe provided on applications for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects under the loan guarantee program ( lgp ) and other related information for fiscal year 2006 through august 2018 . we used fiscal year 2006 as the start date because it was the first year that doe issued an advanced fossil energy project solicitation — an announcement of opportunities for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects — and we used august 2018 as the end date in order to provide the most up - to - date information as possible . we also reviewed the advanced fossil energy project solicitations doe issued during this timeframe . to assess the reliability of the summary information , we interviewed lgp staff who maintain the information for the advanced fossil energy applications , and reviewed doe documentation . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in addition , we interviewed officials from the loan programs office who work on the lgp . we conducted this performance audit from march 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , karla springer ( assistant director ) , rebecca makar ( analyst - in - charge ) , tc corless , cindy gilbert , carol henn , kirk menard , patricia moye , sheryl stein , and sara sullivan made key contributions to this report . doe's advanced fossil energy r&d projects typically lasted for multiple years . doe sets milestones for technical progress for each year of a project to ensure that funding recipients accomplish a specific r&d objective or set of objectives , according to doe officials .