ins is not effectively overseeing its it projects . while ins has documented policies and procedures for project management in its system development life cycle ( sdlc ) manual , it is not following its own procedures . for example , ins has not developed and maintained project management plans that include cost and schedule controls for each of its it projects , an sdlc requirement . in fact , only two of the four projects that we reviewed had current project management plans . furthermore , ins does not have written polices and procedures for oversight of its it projects . without written polices and procedures , ins increases the risk that project oversight activities will not be performed effectively . for example , the irb does not ( 1 ) receive up - to - date cost and schedule data for each project , ( 2 ) oversee each project's performance regularly by comparing actual cost and schedule data to expectations , and ( 3 ) ensure that corrective actions are implemented and tracked for underperforming projects . in the absence of effective oversight , ins executives do not have adequate assurance that it projects are being developed on schedule and within budget . table 3 summarizes the ratings for each key practice and the specific findings supporting the ratings . the purpose of the asset tracking critical process is to create and maintain an it asset inventory to assist in managerial decision - making . to make good investment decisions , an organization must know where its it assets ( i.e. , personnel , systems , applications , hardware , software licenses , etc. ) are located and how funds are being expended toward acquiring , maintaining , and deploying them . this critical process identifies it assets within the organization and creates a comprehensive inventory of them . this inventory can take many forms , but regardless of form , the inventory should identify each asset and its associated components . beyond identifying it assets , this process is used to support other itim critical processes by serving as an investment information and data repository that contains such items as the list of systems and projects and data on each project's progress toward achieving its plans . to support investment decision - making , this inventory should also be accessible where it is of the most value to decisionmakers . according to itim , effectively tracking it assets requires , among other things , ( 1 ) making investment information available on demand to decisionmakers , ( 2 ) developing and maintaining an it asset inventory according to written procedures , ( 3 ) overseeing the development and maintenance of the asset tracking process , and ( 4 ) assigning responsibility for managing this tracking process . ins has not implemented an effective it asset tracking process for investment management . while investment information from various sources has been available to the irb on an ad hoc basis , it is not available on demand and ins has not developed and maintained an inventory for investment management purposes according to written policies and procedures .