gao - 07-819t . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2007 . climate change: financial risks to federal and private insurers in coming decades are potentially significant . gao - 07-820t . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2007 . rma has taken steps on some of the recommendations we made . for example , rma amended its crop insurance policy manual to provide information more frequently to fsa on suspect claims so that fsa is able to conduct timelier field inspections to detect potential abuse . in another case , we recommended that rma promulgate regulations needed to fully utilize its expanded sanction authority provided under arpa . in response , rma developed draft regulations that , when final , will allow the agency to fully use this authority to sanction program violators . we also found that the program's design , as laid out in rma's regulations or as required by statute , can impede the efforts of rma officials to prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse in a number of ways . in terms of rma's regulations , farmers can insure their fields individually instead of insuring all fields combined , which makes it easier for them to switch production among fields , either to make false insurance claims or to build up a higher yield history on a particular field in order to increase its eligibility for higher future insurance guarantees . rma disagreed with our recommendation to reduce the insurance guarantee or eliminate optional unit coverage for producers who consistently have claims that are irregular in comparison with other producers growing the same crop in the same location . rma stated that our recommendation represents a disproportionate response , considering the small number of producers who switch the yield on a field each year . nevertheless , we continue to believe that rma could tailor an underwriting rule to target those relatively few farmers who file anomalous claims related to yield switching . in terms of statutory requirements , rma is obligated by law to offer farmers “prevented planting” coverage — coverage that allows for insurance claims if an insured crop is prevented from being planted because of weather conditions , but it is often difficult to determine whether farmers had the opportunity to plant a crop . in our 2006 testimony , we stated that congress may wish to consider allowing rma to reduce premium subsidies — and hence raise the insurance premiums — for farmers who consistently have claims , such as prevented planting claims , that are irregular in comparison with other farmers growing the same crop in the same location . to date , congress has not granted rma the authority to make such reductions . finally , usda paid the insurance companies underwriting gains of $2.8 billion , in total , from 2002 through 2006 . the underwriting gains represent an average annual rate of return of 17.8 percent over this 5-year period . this rate of return is considerably higher than the insurance industry average . according to insurance industry statistics , the benchmark rate of return for u.s. insurance companies selling private property and casualty insurance was 6.4 percent during this period .