another component , u.s . improving fevs scores on employee engagement . since our last high - risk report in march 2019 , dhs has demonstrated additional progress in its employee engagement scores , as measured by the fevs employee engagement index ( eei ) . the eei is one of three indices opm calculates to synthesize fevs data . the eei measures conditions that lead to engaged employees and is comprised of three sub - indices related to employees' views on leadership , supervisors , and intrinsic work experience . as a result of continued improvement on dhs's eei score , we have moved this outcome rating from partially addressed to mostly addressed based on dhs's 2019 score . as shown in figure 1 , dhs increased its eei score across 4 consecutive years , from a low of 53 percent in 2015 to 62 percent in 2019 . in particular , dhs improved its score by two points between 2018 and 2019 while the government average remained constant over the same period . with its 2019 score , dhs also regained the ground that it lost during an 8-point drop between 2010 and 2015 . while dhs has made progress in improving its scores including moving toward the government average , it remains below the government average on the eei and on other measures of employee morale . basing hiring decisions and promotions on competencies and performance . ochco has conducted audits to better ensure components are basing hiring decisions and promotions on human capital competencies and individual performance and we have considered this outcome fully addressed since 2017 . our past work has highlighted the importance of selecting candidates based on qualifications , as doing otherwise can negatively affect morale . working to ensure that components' human capital decisions are based on performance and established competencies helps create a connection between individual performance and the agency's success . enhancing information technology security through improved workforce planning for cybersecurity positions . in february 2018 , we made six recommendations to dhs to take steps to identify its position and critical skill requirements among its cybersecurity workforce . since then , dhs has implemented all six recommendations . for example , in fiscal year 2019 , regarding its cybersecurity position identification and coding efforts , we verified that dhs had identified individuals in each component who are responsible for leading those efforts , developed procedures , established a process to review each component's procedures , and developed plans for reporting critical needs . however , dhs has not yet implemented a recommendation we made in march 2019 to review and correct its coding of cybersecurity positions and assess the accuracy of position descriptions . specifically , we stated that dhs had not correctly categorized its information technology / cybersecurity / cyber - related positions . we noted that having inaccurate information about the type of work performed by 28 percent of the department's information technology / cybersecurity / cyber - related positions is a significant impediment to effectively examining the department's cybersecurity workforce , identifying work roles of critical need , and improving workforce planning . dhs employee concerns about senior leadership , among other things , is one area that negatively affects dhs's overall employee morale scores .