markets . for example , ftc staff told us that they generally consider crude producers to compete globally , refiners to compete regionally , and wholesale gasoline suppliers to compete at a more local level . ftc and doj merger guidelines define three broad categories of market concentration as measured by hhi: an unconcentrated market has an hhi of less than 1,000 ; a moderately concentrated market has an hhi between 1,000 and 1,800 ; and a highly concentrated market has an hhi over 1,800 . more than 1,000 u.s. mergers occurred in the petroleum industry between 2000 and 2007 . for the remaining data , we conducted a variety of analyses to better understand merger activity . these analyses included , but were not limited to , evaluating the number , type , and transaction value of mergers over time as well as evaluating the distribution of mergers across industry segments and subsegments . to better understand and contextualize the results of our analysis of the j.s . herold data , we also reviewed industry journal articles and conducted interviews with industry officials and experts to better interpret merger activity over time . to examine the rationale for petroleum industry mergers since 2000 , we conducted interviews with various representatives from all three segments of the petroleum industry . for information on the upstream segment , we interviewed representatives from large , vertically integrated oil companies as well as a smaller , independent exploration and production company . for information on the midstream segment , we primarily relied on industry publications because midstream operators — including pipeline and tanker operators — were less available for interviews or comment . for information on the downstream segment , we interviewed representatives from vertically integrated companies . in addition , we interviewed a number of other firms operating in the downstream segment , including refiners , marketers , and retailers of petroleum . to better contextualize the information provided in these interviews , we also conducted a literature search of articles that addressed rationales for petroleum industry mergers from 2000 through 2007 . lastly , we interviewed a number of experts — including academics specializing in the petroleum industry or antitrust matters as well as industry representatives — for additional context and information on recent merger activity . to calculate market concentrations ( hhi ) at the upstream level , we purchased data from the oil and gas journal containing crude oil production information for the 100 largest international companies between 2000 and 2006 . these data included state - owned oil companies , such as those in iran and saudi arabia . after conducting data reliability assessments , such as looking for out - of - range and missing values , we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for our use in calculating upstream hhi . we used a single global market to calculate hhi in this segment because , according to experts with whom we spoke , crude oil prices are set on world markets . because of the lack of readily accessible data on the midstream petroleum industry , which simultaneously includes the pipeline , barge , and trucking industries , we were not able to calculate hhi in this segment .