overall , . specifically , usda's animal and plant health inspection service's veterinary services and wildlife services supported our recommendation to leverage support , consider challenges , and develop a framework to understand the current capacity and conduct a needs assessment for nonfederal identities to conduct biosurveillance activities . usda stated that it will continue to work with the national security staff in development of the national biosurveillance strategy . usda noted that its animal and plant health inspection service has an established national program — the national wildlife disease program — that is currently available to provide the infrastructure and leadership necessary to implement these recommendations , and should be incorporated into an integrated system . tribal jurisdictions . how does the federal government support tribal and insular participation in a national biosurveillance capability and what challenges does it face ? to what extent has the federal government assessed nonfederal jurisdictions' capacity to contribute to a national biosurveillance capability ? to address our objectives , we reviewed key legislation and presidential directives related to biosurveillance , including the homeland security act of 2002 , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act of 2006 , and homeland security presidential directives ( hspd ) 9 , 10 , and 21 . at the federal level , we consulted officials at the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and the interior ( doi ) , which have key missions , statutory responsibilities , directives , or programmatic objectives for biosurveillance activities within the scope of this report , including protecting human and animal health and national security . we also discussed biosurveillance at the state and city level with officials from the department of justice's federal bureau of investigation . to provide perspectives on the federal efforts that support state biosurveillance capabilities and the challenges officials face building and maintaining those capabilities , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of seven states based on a variety of factors that might affect biosurveillance efforts — including the structure of a state's public health system , its geography , and its amount and type of agriculture . the states selected were utah , colorado , new jersey , california , delaware , north carolina , and mississippi . in each of these states , we interviewed three groups of officials: ( 1 ) officials in public - health departments , ( 2 ) officials in state agriculture departments , and ( 3 ) officials in various departments that included wildlife infectious - disease control and monitoring in their missions . we also interviewed public - health officials with responsibility for human infectious - disease control and monitoring in two cities with an increased risk of bioterrorism — new york city and washington , d.c. — that received direct funding from federal agencies to support preparedness capabilities . among other things , we discussed the federal efforts that support their biosurveillance capabilities and the challenges they face in building and maintaining biosurveillance capabilities .