contract option years . job corps center contracts may be awarded for an initial term of no more than 2 years , with three 1-year options . for each option year , eta has an opportunity to assess the contractor's performance to determine whether to continue with the contract . eta and regional officials said that they have typically exercised option years for job corps center contracts . however , in recent years , officials in one region said they have declined to exercise option years when questions are raised about a contractor's performance . officials said they are implementing provisions under wioa that prohibit eta from exercising an option year in a job corps center contract under certain circumstances . wioa generally prohibits eta from exercising an option year if , in the prior 2 program years , the center: ( 1 ) has been ranked in the lowest 10 percent of all job corps centers ; and ( 2 ) did not achieve at least an average of 50 percent of its expected level of performance with respect to each primary performance indicator . eta officials said that to date , every contractor has exceeded these minimum performance standards and , therefore , they have not had to decline an option year on these grounds . formal notices to contractors . when eta finds performance challenges , it may issue formal notices to contractors starting with a letter of concern to notify contractors of the deficiencies . if deficiencies are not addressed , a formal letter referred to as a cure notice may be sent to notify contractors that their failure to perform specific contract specifications may endanger the contract . if the contractor does not correct the condition , eta may issue a notice ( referred to as a “show cause” ) informing the contractor that it intends to terminate the contract for default . dol has indicated that it will terminate a contract for default if the contractor fails to satisfactorily address any serious performance challenges identified . none of the center contractors included in our in - depth review received a cure notice or a show cause notice from eta during program year 2016 . however , we found that eta issued letters of concern to two center contractors in our in - depth review after it identified issues related to safety and student conduct . the letters of concern required the contractor to submit a corrective action plan and explain how it would address the areas of non - compliance identified by eta , such as the presence of controlled substances at one of the centers . regional office center assessments . eta officials said they generally conduct unannounced visits to examine all aspects of center operations to ensure contractors comply with program requirements . for centers that operate for the full 5-year period of performance through a competitively awarded contract , these assessments are typically conducted twice over that time period . according to one regional director , these unannounced visits provide the opportunity to hear directly from job corps students and observe the conditions at the facilities . program officials said that these visits are critical because some issues are not always apparent based on the data and reports they receive .