( see fig . although consumers who were eligible for premium tax credits were somewhat insulated from large differences in premiums , if they were automatically re - enrolled in a plan with a premium that was higher than their benchmark plan premium , no matter how great the difference , they would have been be required to pay a larger share of their incomes on those premiums . and , as already noted , the premium differences for consumers who were not eligible for premium tax credits , or for those who were eligible but who chose plans that had higher premiums than their benchmark plan , could have had a more substantial financial impact because premium tax credits would not have offset , or fully offset , the higher premiums . among consumers who were enrolled in plans through the federal platform in both 2015 and 2016 , 30 percent ( about 1.7 million consumers ) were automatically re - enrolled . of those consumers who were automatically re - enrolled , 71 percent were re - enrolled in their same plan and 29 percent were re - enrolled in a similar crosswalked plan , because their 2015 plan had been discontinued or was no longer offered in the consumer's local area . these data do not indicate whether these consumers explored their options for switching plans and made an active decision not to change plans . the remaining 70 percent of consumers who enrolled in exchange plans through the federal platform in both 2015 and 2016 ( more than 3.9 million consumers ) actively re - enrolled in 2016 . of these consumers , 39 percent chose the same plan in which they had been enrolled in 2015 or the similar crosswalked plan to which they would have been automatically re - enrolled . the majority of consumers who re - enrolled actively , 61 percent , switched to a plan that was neither their 2015 plan nor the similar crosswalked plan . ( see fig . of those consumers who actively switched plans , more than half ( 54 percent ) would have been automatically re - enrolled in their same plan if they had not actively switched plans , indicating that plan discontinuation was not the only factor involved in consumers' decisions to change plans . consumers' median net monthly premiums ( after premium tax credits ) generally increased less from 2015 to 2016 for those who actively re - enrolled ( $5 ) than for those who were automatically re - enrolled ( $22 ) . as shown in table 4 , consumers who actively re - enrolled had a lower median increase in their net monthly premiums than consumers who were automatically re - enrolled for both the same and similar crosswalked plans . moreover , table 4 also shows that consumers who re - enrolled actively , and who switched plans from 2015 to 2016 , enrolled in plans with median monthly net premiums that increased the least overall — a median net increase of $1 compared to $13 per month for those who enrolled in the same plan .