chairwoman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact cathleen berrick at ( 202 ) 512- 3404 or at berrickc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . these changes will go into effect in early 2009 . however , according to agency officials , tsa made these determinations based on a limited number of vulnerability assessments , as well as professional judgment . in february 2008 , tsa issued a report assessing existing screening exemptions for certain kinds of cargo transported on passenger aircraft and evaluated the risk of maintaining those exemptions . as part of its assessment , tsa officials stated that they considered and determined the threat to and vulnerability of the exempted cargo types . tsa officials also stated they based their determinations on which screening exemptions to revise , maintain or eliminate in part on results from air cargo vulnerability assessments at category x airports they completed in accordance with law . tsa has completed assessments at 6 of the 27 category x airports . absent the completed assessments , which could help to identify potential security vulnerabilities associated with the exemptions , tsa does not have complete information with which to make risk - based decisions regarding the security of air cargo . tsa officials have acknowledged the importance of completing air cargo vulnerability assessments and stated that they will complete them by the end of 2009 . officials further stated that as the agency conducts additional air cargo vulnerability assessments , they will assess the results to determine whether existing screening exemptions should be revised , maintained or eliminated . to ensure that existing air cargo security requirements are being implemented as required , tsa inspects air carriers and freight forwarders that transport cargo . under the ccsp , tsa will also have to inspect other entities , such as shippers , who volunteer to participate in the program . these compliance inspections range from an annual comprehensive review of the implementation of all air cargo security requirements to a more frequent review of at least one security requirement by an air carrier or freight forwarder . in october 2005 , we reported that tsa had conducted compliance inspections on less than half ( 49 percent ) of the estimated 10,000 freight forwarder facilities nationwide , and of those freight forwarders they had inspected , the agency found violations in over 40 percent of them . we also reported that tsa had not determined what constitutes an acceptable level of performance related to compliance inspections , or compared air carriers' and freight forwarders' performance against this standard ; analyzed the results of inspections to systematically target future inspections on those entities that pose a higher security risk to the domestic air cargo system ; or assessed the effectiveness of its enforcement actions taken against air carriers and freight forwarders to ensure that they are complying with air cargo security requirements .