ii. ) the licensee may choose the alternative licensing process , if it can demonstrate that all the participants agree on its use , subject to final approval by ferc . the alternative licensing process shortens the process by combining many of the earlier consultations and studies with the later analyses in the pre - application phase . ( see app . for example , ferc requires at least 30 days to review a licensee's initial consultation package , and a meeting between the licensee and federal and state agencies typically takes place between 30 and 60 days after the initial consultation package is prepared . during the pre - application consultation phase , the licensee must consult with officials at federal and state land and resource agencies , as well as those representing affected indian tribes , who identify studies the licensee should undertake to determine the project's impacts on fish and wildlife , recreation , water , and other resources . if the licensee disagrees with the need for a study , ferc may be asked to resolve the dispute . after completing the agreed - upon studies , the licensee prepares a draft application and obtains comments from , and attempts to resolve any disagreements on needed actions with , the relevant federal and state agencies . the post - application analysis phase begins when the licensee files a formal application to obtain a new license . this filing must occur at least 2 years before the license expires . the application is a comprehensive , detailed document specifying the project's proposed operations , its anticipated impact on resources and other land uses , and proposed actions to mitigate adverse effects . ferc reviews the application to ensure that it meets all requirements and then asks relevant federal and state land and resource agencies to formally comment on it . depending on the comments and its own independent analysis of the application , ferc may ask the licensee to provide additional data and studies . when ferc is satisfied that these are sufficient , it conducts an environmental analysis under the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) and an economic analysis of the project's benefits and costs . in addition to using ferc's nepa analysis , affected federal land and resource agencies frequently conduct separate environmental analyses under nepa , or assessments under other laws , to determine the license terms and conditions to be prescribed or recommended to protect or enhance fish , wildlife , and other resources . ferc reviews these terms and conditions and , if necessary , negotiates with the relevant federal and state land and resource agencies or affected indian tribes on the license's terms and conditions . in october 1997 , ferc issued an order codifying an alternative licensing process . similar to the traditional licensing process , the alternative licensing process is divided into pre - application and post - application phases . ( see app . for example , the licensee begins a preliminary nepa analysis during the pre - application phase rather than having ferc begin the nepa analysis during the post - application phase .