details of the five projects are described below . the lake pontchartrain and vicinity hurricane protection project is located in st. bernard , orleans , jefferson , and st. charles parishes in southeastern louisiana , in the vicinity of the city of new orleans and between the mississippi river and lake pontchartrain . the project includes a series of control structures , concrete flood walls , and about 125 miles of earthen levees designed to protect residents living between lake pontchartrain and the mississippi river levees from storm surges in the lake ( see fig . this project was designed to provide protection from a standard project hurricane ( equivalent to a fast - moving category 3 hurricane ) . the flood control act of 1965 authorized the project that , at the time of hurricane katrina , was 90 percent complete in st. bernard and orleans parishes , 70 percent complete in jefferson parish , and 60 percent complete in st. charles parish . the pre - katrina scheduled completion date for this project was 2015 , at an estimated cost of $738 million , where the estimated federal share was $528 million and the estimated local sponsor share was $210 million . at the time of the storm , estimated costs to complete the remainder of the project were $121 million . this estimate is expected to increase due to higher construction costs following hurricane katrina . the west bank and vicinity hurricane protection project is located on the west bank of the mississippi river in the vicinity of the city of new orleans and in jefferson , orleans , and plaquemines parishes . the project is designed to provide hurricane protection to residents from storm surges from lakes cataouatche and salvador , and waterways leading to the gulf of mexico . the project encompasses 66 miles of earthen levees and floodwalls ( see fig . this project was designed to provide category 3 level of hurricane protection . the water resources development act of 1986 authorized this project . at the time of hurricane katrina , the project was 38 percent complete . the pre - katrina completion date for this project was 2016 , at an estimated cost of $331 million , where the federal estimated share was $215 million and the estimated local sponsor share was $116 million . ten contracts were awarded to repair this damage . plaquemines parish includes long , narrow strips of land on both sides of the mississippi river between new orleans and the gulf of mexico . the mississippi river levees protect the parish from floods coming down the river , and the new orleans to venice hurricane protection project ( portions of which are not yet completed ) protects against hurricane - induced tidal surges . the distance between these gulf - side levees , called back levees , and the mississippi river levees is less than 1 mile , in most places . plaquemines parish has a total of 169 miles of levees and floodwalls and 18 pump stations ( see fig . between stages the levees are allowed to settle for up to 5 years .