we have no say . we have no governance . and yet , we all — every one of us around here earned the same degree , worked the same amount . so there is huge inequality between choosing to focus on research primarily , and therefore , getting this basic job guarantee until die and choosing to focus on teaching , not having that , even though in many other ways we are equivalent.” contingent faculty in some discussion groups also told us they are reluctant to voice their views because they do not have job protections . for example , a full - time contingent faculty member in one discussion group told us she would feel more comfortable speaking up if she had a continuing contract rather than her current annual contract . an official from the national center for the study of collective bargaining in higher education and the professions said that an issue for contingent faculty broadly is whether they are protected by due process . he said it can be unclear for contingent faculty whether they can be terminated without due process consideration when , for example , a student complains about the content of a faculty member's lecture . using these variables , we classified as instructional faculty any respondents who said that their “primary or secondary work activity is teaching,” and whose institution type was a 2-year college ; 4-year college or university ; medical school ; or university - affiliated research institute . this resulted in an analysis population of 7,232 instructional faculty respondents ; however , our analyses are weighted analyses that generalize to the population . within our analysis population , we identified faculty types based on tenure status ( i.e. , tenured / on the tenure track or not on the tenure track ) and whether respondents said they worked 36 hours or more per week or less than that ( i.e. , full - time versus part - time ) . we categorized graduate assistants separately , though we chose not to present estimated percentages for graduate assistants . given that sdr is a survey of doctorate holders , it may be that graduate assistants in the sdr data are — for example — working toward another doctoral degree or have remained at their degree - granting institution in a postdoctoral position . in either case , we believe the working arrangements and economic circumstances of these individuals may be unique from those of most other graduate assistants . without more detailed information , the data do not allow us to determine the exact nature of graduate assistant positions in the sdr data or explain how they compare to other types of positions . we also chose not to present estimated percentages for part - time tenure - track faculty given that they represented a small proportion of our analysis population . to analyze the economic circumstances of contingent faculty , we used sdr data to calculate median annual earnings by faculty type , as well as data on the availability of work - provided benefits . we calculated median earnings using data on basic annual salary from the respondent's principal job .