iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . second attempt to create an oil for food program . iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . what precluded the sanctions committee from taking action ? while sanctions committee procedures stated that the secretariat was to examine each contract for price and value , oip officials stated that no u.n. resolution tasked them with assessing the price reasonableness of the contracts . although the sanctions committee was responsible for approving commodity contracts , it primarily screened contracts to prevent the purchases of items with potential military uses . in december 1999 , u.n. security council resolution 1284 directed the sanctions committee to accelerate approval procedures for goods no longer subject to sanctions committee review , including food and equipment and supplies to support the health , agricultural , water treatment and sanitation , housing , and electricity sectors . who assessed the reasonableness of prices for commodity contracts negotiated between the iraqi government and suppliers and what actions were taken ? how were prices for commodities assessed for reasonableness under fast - track procedures ? much of the information on surcharges on oil sales and illicit commissions on commodity contracts is with the ministries in baghdad and national purchasers and suppliers . we did not have access to this data to verify the various allegations of corruption associated with these transactions . subsequent investigations of the oil for food program should include a statistical sampling of these transactions to more accurately document the extent of corruption and the identities of companies and countries that engaged in illicit transactions . this information would provide a basis for restoring those assets to the iraqi government . subsequent evaluations and audits should also consider an analysis of the lessons learned from the oil for food program and how future humanitarian programs of this nature should be structured to ensure that funds are spent on intended beneficiaries and projects . for example , analysts may wish to review the codes of conduct developed for the cpa's oil for food coordination center and suppliers . in addition , u.n. specialized agencies implemented the program in the northern governates while the program in central and southern iraq was run by the central government in baghdad . a comparison of these two approaches could provide insight on the extent to which the operations were transparent and the program delivered goods and services to the iraqi people . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call joseph christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 . other key contributors to this statement were pamela briggs , mark connelly , lynn cothern , philip farah , zina merritt , tetsuo miyabara , stephanie robinson , jonathan rose , richard seldin , audrey solis , roger stoltz , and phillip thomas . lyric clark , jeanette espinola , josé m. peña , iii , and eve weisberg also provided technical support . iraqi forces invaded kuwait . resolution 660 condemned the invasion and demands immediate withdrawal from kuwait . imposed economic sanctions against the republic of iraq .