department of the treasury . federal communications commission . united states agency for international development . united states trade representative . to determine challenges to effective u.s involvement , we gathered and analyzed relevant documents , such as our past reports and studies by various cybersecurity - related entities . we also solicited input regarding the challenges from private and public sector officials , including from the center for strategic and international studies , george mason university , georgia institute of technology , defense group inc. , google , microsoft , symantec , and techamerica . on the basis of the information received and our knowledge of the issues , we determined the major challenges impeding u.s. ability to formulate and implement foreign policy related to cyberspace governance and security . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 to july 2010 , in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the person named above , michael w. gilmore , assistant director ; rebecca eyler ; richard j. hagerman ; kenneth a. johnson ; kush malhotra ; lee mccracken ; and justin m. palk made key contributions to this report . first's steering committee is responsible for its general operating policy , procedures , and other matters affecting the organization . the steering committee also selects the secretariat , the coordinator of meetings and workshops , and the administrator for data and communications . according to first , it has also worked with multiple international standards organizations to develop standards for cybersecurity and incident management and response . in addition , first uses the common vulnerability scoring system as a standard method for rating information technology vulnerabilities , which helps when communicating vulnerabilities and their properties to others . the group of eight ( g8 ) is an international forum that includes the governments of canada , france , germany , italy , japan , russia , the united kingdom , and the united states . the g8's cybersecurity efforts are directed by the g8 subgroup on high - tech crime , which seeks to prevent , investigate , and prosecute crimes involving computers , networked communications , and other new technologies . in 1997 , the subgroup created the 24-7 high - tech crime point - of - contact network , which allows law enforcement officials from countries — including those from outside the g8 — to quickly contact their counterparts in other participating nations for assistance with cybercrime investigations . the network is to supplement traditional methods of obtaining law enforcement assistance . in 2004 , the subgroup on high - tech crime also developed a best practices guide for network security to assist network operators and system administrators when responding to computer incidents . based on an 8-month investigation in 2009 , university researchers reported that computer systems in india were attacked .