they said this does not always occur . further , they told us that contracting officers have large workloads that sometimes take precedence over maintaining contract files . according to indian affairs officials , the agency has begun to maintain electronic files for contracts awarded after 2012 , which could make it easier to locate certain files . however , it is unclear whether contract administration files will be included as part of this system . further , agency officials told us the new system will not include grant files and self - determination contract files for tribally managed construction projects . turnover among senior indian affairs' managers responsible for overseeing school construction and a resulting loss of institutional knowledge makes a set of complete contract files important in order to better manage current and future projects . without a complete set of construction contract or grant files for recently built bie schools , it is also difficult to use contract provisions to hold contractors accountable for problems resulting from construction . further , without a complete set of contract files for all projects , indian affairs will be less likely to learn from past experience to ensure future school and dormitory construction projects are better managed . this is particularly important now as indian affairs is in the process of building three bie schools from its 2004 replacement list and will soon begin replacing 10 additional schools selected for replacement in april 2016 . managing bie school facilities is a complex task . the cost of repairing , renovating , and replacing bie's school and dormitory facilities represents a substantial liability , particularly in a resource - constrained environment . unless indian affairs actively monitors its school facilities portfolio and develops a comprehensive long - term capital asset plan , it may not be able to effectively evaluate the full range of its funding priorities and identify which school construction projects should take precedence . moreover , by including more detailed information on proposed capital expenditures for future projects and updates on ongoing and recent construction in its annual congressional budget justifications , indian affairs could provide congress with more complete information on the costs of its programs . such information could help inform decision - making about the agency's annual budget for school construction and , more generally , provide greater transparency of federal resource allocation and facilitate oversight . it is critical that indian affairs develop and implement clear , specific guidance for project managers and contracting officers on the effective use of accountability measures to ensure that federally managed projects are on time , within budget , and meet schools' needs . without such guidance , indian affairs may be unable to ensure that new construction meets the needs of students and staff in terms of its size , quality , or sustainability over time . in addition , unclear guidance in indian affairs' design handbook makes it difficult to ensure that design requirements — such as for heating and cooling systems — are cost effective and practical .