bus passengers . the cost of bus passenger inspections totaled about $23 million , or about $4 per passenger , in fiscal year 2011 . cbp officials told us that it would be difficult to collect the fee from individual passengers . in june 2012 , our limited observations of the inspection process for bus passengers at san ysidro , california , revealed logistical challenges consistent with these concerns . in this port , bus passengers get off the bus and are processed along with pedestrians crossing the border , which would make it difficult to properly separate out and charge a fee only to bus passengers . to avoid these kinds of logistical challenges , bus passenger fees could be collected using the air passenger fee model in which the fee is collected by the airline and then remitted to aphis periodically . however , aphis's fee review noted that barriers to entry for the bus passenger industry are lower than air and cruise vessel industries — which could mean a large and changing list of bus companies from which aphis would need to collect fees . because of this , an aphis official stated , this type of remittance model could be burdensome to maintain and audit . the official also told us that aphis has discussed both a possible transponder approach to collect fees for buses , and an approach in which buses with over 15 seats and buses with fewer than 15 seats pay different fee rates . in commenting on a draft of this report , aphis officials said that due to logistical challenges , they would have to seek new legislative authority to allow for the collection of fees for the bus rather than charging a fee for the individual passenger . private aircraft and private sea vessels . the total cost of inspecting private aircraft passengers in fiscal year 2011 was about $11 million , which equates to approximately $34 per passenger or $93 per aircraft for each arrival . the cost of inspecting private vessel sea passengers for fiscal year 2011 was about $4.9 million , which equates to approximately $20 per passenger or $61 per vessel for each arrival . as stated above , aqi's statute authorizes it to charge passengers , but not the private aircraft or vessels in which those passengers arrive . however , cbp charges a customs fee of $27.50 per year for each private plane and vessel at least 30 feet long . absent a change in aphis's statutory authority allowing it to charge private aircraft and vessels for aqi services , aphis and cbp cannot leverage the cbp infrastructure already used to collect customs inspections fees for private aircraft and vessels . aphis considered the effect of charging new fees for private aircraft and vessels , but as of february 2013 , the fees aphis is considering might not recover the costs of aqi services for these users . aphis's fee review noted that it would be relatively easy to administer an annual fee on private aircraft or vessels using cbp's current process , but concluded that the potential revenue would be very small . however , the potential revenue from such a fee would be greater than the aqi fees currently assessed on freight rail .