isolation . an isolated location may be desirable for building or maintaining nuclear weapons , but it may not appeal to some desirable candidates with advanced degrees in science , technology , and engineering . for example , los alamos national laboratory officials told us that the laboratory's relative isolation – – nearly 100 miles from albuquerque , new mexico – – may make it less appealing to some candidates . in addition , the relative lack of other types of employment opportunities nearby may pose challenges for candidates with spouses in careers outside of science , technology and engineering . officials at two of the three weapons laboratories told us they focus on recruiting top candidates nationwide to gain a wide breadth of thought and opinion among their staff . the laboratories track the proportion of job offers accepted but cannot always ascertain or be sure of the reason a candidate rejects an offer because , according to officials at lawrence livermore , candidates may simply state they declined an offer for “personal reasons.” in addition , some of the production plants and the test site are also in isolated locations and face some of the same challenges as the laboratories . however , these sites require fewer candidates with advanced degrees and can generally rely on the local workforce to fill other types of critical skills positions . for example , savannah river site and pantex are also both located far from other large cities . however , because of their relative isolation , they are among the biggest employers in these areas , and many local candidates are qualified and eager to accept positions in weapons manufacturing and maintenance . pantex officials reported that they do not have difficulty finding most workers to perform weapons maintenance , which requires a shorter amount of on - the - job training than weapons design but nonetheless requires a set of critical skills . however , site staff have had to develop strategies to attract candidates to fill those positions that require advanced degrees . unlike the laboratories , officials at all of the production plants told us that they focus their recruiting efforts for these positions at local and regional colleges and universities . officials at y - 12 , for example , have identified competitive science and engineering programs at universities within 300 miles of their plant in oak ridge , tennessee . y - 12 officials reported that they have better results in both recruiting and retaining critically skilled workers when those workers have personal ties to the area . in contrast , m&o contractor officials from the laboratories told us that they needed to recruit from the top academic programs across the country . high cost and competition . two enterprise sites are located in areas with high costs of living , which can deter qualified candidates — los alamos and lawrence livermore . nnsa and its m&o contractors have flexibility to offer higher compensation for some critical skills , but some candidates are unwilling to live in high cost areas . for example , housing in los alamos is expensive and scarce .