but achieving this has been difficult . our work continues to show that some of the government's largest procurement operations are not always run efficiently , either because requirements are not clearly defined , because prices and alternatives are not fully considered , or because contracts are not adequately overseen . at the same time , the ongoing technological revolution requires a workforce with new knowledge , skills , and abilities . moreover , the nature of acquisition is changing from routine simple buys toward more complex acquisitions , such as information technology services , and toward new business practices , such as performance - based contracting and the use of purchase cards . to ensure an adequate professional acquisition workforce , the congress enacted a series of reforms in the 1990s , which required agencies to establish policies and procedures for effective management and training of their acquisition workforce , to include certain positions in the definition of the acquisition workforce , and to establish qualification , educational , and training requirements for positions identified as part of the acquisition workforce . you asked us to assess agency progress in this regard . particularly , you asked us to determine whether agencies have ( 1 ) definitions of their acquisition workforces that include all significant acquisition - related functions as required by the congress , ( 2 ) established training requirements for these workforces , ( 3 ) a means for ensuring that those requirements are met , and ( 4 ) allocated sufficient funding to provide required training . our review focused on the department of defense ( dod ) ; the departments of the army , navy , and air force ; the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , energy ( doe ) , health and human services ( hhs ) ; the general services administration ( gsa ) ; and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . these agencies represented 87 percent of total contract dollars obligated in fiscal year 2000 and employed 82 percent of the government's contract specialists and purchasing agents , which are the primary career fields in the acquisition workforce . the congress and others have been addressing the question of how to strengthen the acquisition workforce since 1974 when the ofpp was created to establish governmentwide procurement policies for executive agencies . one of the primary responsibilities of this office and its federal acquisition institute ( fai ) is to strengthen acquisition workforce training . the concern about the quality of the acquisition workforce deepened in the 1990s , as it became clear that the government was experiencing significant contracting failures partly because it lacked skilled personnel to manage and oversee contracts . there was also concern that program managers and other personnel integral to the success of the acquisition process were only marginally involved with the contracts . two of the most significant steps taken in this regard were the passage of the defense acquisition workforce improvement act in 1990 and the clinger - cohen act in 1996 . the defense acquisition workforce improvement act , among other things , provided specific guidance on dod's acquisition workforce definition . the clinger - cohen act required civilian agencies to establish acquisition workforce definitions .