contract management . dod has relied extensively on contractors to undertake major reconstruction and logistical support to its troops in iraq . service contracts have grown by nearly 80 percent in a decade , both at home and abroad . in some cases , contractors have begun work without the key terms and conditions of contracts , including projected costs , being defined within required time frames . problems with poor planning , insufficient leadership and guidance , inadequate numbers of trained contracting personnel , and limited oversight contribute to ineffective contract management controls . for example , a program official for the logistics civil augmentation program ( logcap ) — dod's largest support contract — noted that if adequate staffing had been in place , the army could have realized substantial savings through more effective reviews of new requirements . furthermore , we recently found that sole - source contracts for security contractors on installations were found to be 25 percent higher than past contracts awarded competitively . in addition , dod does not have a sufficient number of oversight personnel , in deployed locations and elsewhere , which precludes its ability to obtain reasonable assurance that contractors are meeting contract requirements efficiently and effectively at each location where work is being performed . for example , officials responsible for contracting with the multi - national force — iraq ( mnf - i ) stated that they did not have enough contract oversight personnel and quality assurance representatives to allow mnf - i to reduce the army's use of the logcap contract by awarding more sustainment contracts for base operations support in iraq . further , a lack of training for military commanders hinders their ability to adequately plan for the use of contractor support and inhibits the ability of contract oversight personnel to manage and oversee contracts and contractors who support deployed forces . as these examples point out , weaknesses in dod's business operations span most of the department's major business areas and negatively impact the department's efficiency and effectiveness and affect its ability to support the warfighter . overall , these long - standing weaknesses in dod's business areas have ( 1 ) resulted in a lack of reliable information needed to make sound decisions and report accurately on its operations ; ( 2 ) hindered its operational efficiency ; ( 3 ) adversely affected mission performance ; and ( 4 ) left the department vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . due to the impact of the department's business weaknesses on both the department and the warfighter , dod's leaders have demonstrated a commitment to making the department's business transformation a priority and have made progress in establishing a management framework for these efforts . for example , the deputy secretary of defense has overseen the establishment of various management entities and the creation of plans and tools to help guide business transformation at dod . supply chain management . systemic deficiencies in dod's supply support for u.s. ground forces have led to critical supply shortages during war operations .