vehicle . fmcsa has reported that the most commonly cited driver - related factor in a fatal truck crash in 2012 was speeding . that same year , driver impairment , including by fatigue , was the fourth most commonly cited factor . research indicates fatigue can lead to a state of diminished capacity , which can have ramifications for humans such as having more difficulty maintaining attention , becoming less communicative , and having reduced situational awareness . people are then at greater risk of committing errors in their work , which can ultimately lead to more crashes . managing fatigue is particularly critical for tasks that require constant attention , such as driving a commercial vehicle . fmcsa is responsible for overseeing the large and diverse commercial motor - vehicle industry . to do so , fmcsa establishes safety standards for interstate motor carriers as well as intrastate hazardous - material carriers operating in the united states . to enforce compliance with these standards , fmcsa partners with state agencies to perform roadside inspections of vehicles and investigations of carriers . in fiscal year 2014 , fmcsa had a budget of approximately $572 million and almost 1,100 fmcsa staff members located at headquarters , four regional service centers , and 52 division offices . drivers of commercial motor vehicles in the united states have been subject to driving and working hour restrictions for almost 80 years . in 1937 , the entity that previously carried out certain of fmcsa's current functions — the interstate commerce commission — adopted the first hos rule . while the specific requirements in several of the provisions of that rule have changed over time , there are three general requirements that are still in place today: daily off - duty period: drivers must be off - duty — not working or driving — a minimum number of hours per day . daily driving limit: drivers can only drive a maximum number of hours per day . 60 / 70 hour on - duty limit: drivers are restricted from driving when they reach a total of 60 or 70 hours of on - duty time over a rolling 7- or 8-day period , respectively . because the 60 / 70 hour on - duty limit is a rolling period , drivers must calculate these hours by looking back over the prior 7- or 8-day period . for example , according to the schedule below , the driver has accumulated 68 hours in the 8-day rolling period from thursday to thursday , and 72 hours of on - duty time from friday to friday ( see fig . in this example , the driver worked under 70 hours ( 68 hours total ) and is in compliance with the 60 / 70 hour on - duty limit from thursday to thursday , but not from friday to friday when he worked more than 70 hours ( 72 hours total ) over an 8 day period . in 2003 , fmcsa altered the hos rule for drivers transporting freight in several significant ways: created a 14-hour “driving window” that restricts driving beyond the 14th consecutive hour after a driver comes on - duty . increased the daily driving limit ( from 10 to 11 hours ) .