generate the same message digest . alice ( or anyone wishing to verify the document ) can compute the message digest of the document and decrypt the signature using bob's public key , as shown in figure 7 . assuming that the message digests matc alice then has three kinds of security assurance . first , that bob actu ally h , signed the document ( authentication ) . second , the digital signature ensures that bob in fact sent the message ( nonrepudiation ) . ( 2 ) what risk could malicious code on the u.s. e - passport computer chip pose to national security ? to determine whether e - passport chips can be altered or forged so that a traveler could fraudulently enter the united states , we interviewed officials from state's bureau of consular affairs and reviewed state department policies , procedures , and guidance documents regarding the public key infrastructure ( pki ) used to protect the data on the e - passport computer chip and assessed them against relevant international civil aviation organization ( icao ) and national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) standards and guidelines . we interviewed officials at one passport agency and reviewed systems documentation to understand how u.s. e - passports are personalized . we determined the extent to which information stored on u.s. e - passport computer chips is inspected at u.s. ports of entry by interviewing dhs and cbp officials and reviewing documentation regarding the systems and procedures used to inspect e - passports at the ports of entry . to determine whether malicious code on the e - passport chips poses a risk to national security , we determined how u.s. e - passport computer chips are manufactured and incorporated into the production of blank u.s. e - passport booklets based on interviews with gpo and manufacturer officials and reviews of gpo documentation . we met with officials from nist and the national counterterrorism center to determine the level of threat that exists to u.s. e - passports . we interviewed gpo and state officials and reviewed documentation that describes the u.s. e - passport computer chip architecture and operations . we reviewed documents governing the manufacturing of the blank e - passport covers . we identified protections that have been designed into the e - passport computer chip as well as controls that are in place to reduce the possibility of malicious code on the e - passport computer chip . additional details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2008 to january 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . u.s. passports are official documents that are used to demonstrate the bearer's identity and citizenship for international travel and reentry into the united states .