however , va policy does not allow revenues to be waived . we also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed va officials . in addition , we visited the three selected medical centers to review the monitoring of land - use agreements and the collection and billing of the associated revenues . we selected medical centers with the largest number of agreements or those with high amounts of estimated revenue . the site - visit results cannot be generalized to all va facilities . further details on our scope and methodology are included in the august 2014 report . our work for that report was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we found that va did not maintain reliable data on the total number of land - use agreements and the revenue they generate . further , our work found weaknesses in the billing and collection processes for land - use agreements at three selected va medical centers due primarily to ineffective monitoring . finally , we found that va did not effectively monitor many of its land - use agreements at its medical centers in west los angeles and new york . these problems included unenforced agreement terms , expired agreements , and instances where land - use agreements did not exist where they should . at these sites , va did not perform systematic reviews and has not established mechanisms to do so , thus hindering its ability to effectively monitor its agreements and use of its properties . our review of va's policy on sharing agreements showed that va did not have any specific guidance on how to manage agreements before they expired , including the renewal process . in new york , we observed more antennas on the roof of a va facility than the new york medical center had recorded in cai . after we brought this observation to their attention , new york va officials researched the owners of these antennas and could not find written agreements or records of payments received for seven antennas . according to new york va officials , now that they are aware of the antennas , they will either establish agreements with the tenants or disconnect the antennas . the city of los angeles has used 12 acres of va land for recreational use since the 1980s without a signed agreement or payments to va. an official said that va cannot negotiate agreements in this case due to an ongoing lawsuit brought on behalf of homeless veterans about its land - use agreement authority . we found that va had not established mechanisms to monitor the various agreements at the west los angeles and new york medical centers . va officials stated that they had not performed systematic reviews of these agreements and had not established mechanisms to enable them to do so . without a mechanism for accessing land - use agreements to perform needed monitoring activities , va lacks reasonable assurance that the partners are meeting the agreed - upon terms , agreements are renewed as appropriate , and agreements are documented in writing , as required .