contents . as of june 2006 , the nfip had a little over 5.1 million policies in force . as of june 2006 , the nfip had a little over 5.1 million policies in force . about 3 million of the policies , about 62 percent , were for properties in the about 3 million of the policies , about 62 percent , were for properties in the five states affected by hurricanes katrina and rita , and florida had the five states affected by hurricanes katrina and rita , and florida had the largest number of policies of any state in the nation , with almost largest number of policies of any state in the nation , with almost 2.1 million . homeowners are required to purchase flood insurance at least 2.1 million . alabama , florida , louisiana , mississippi , and texas are the five states in which major disaster declarations were made for hurricane katrina or rita . the nfip is intended to pay operating expenses and insurance claims with flood insurance policy premiums rather than tax dollars , but it has statutory authority to borrow funds from the u. s. treasury to keep solvent in heavy loss years . historically , the nfip has been able to repay funds borrowed from the treasury to meet its claims obligations . however , the magnitude and severity of losses from hurricane katrina and other 2005 hurricanes required the nfip to obtain borrowing authority of $20.8 billion from the treasury , an amount the program is unlikely to be able to repay while paying future claims with its current premium income of about $2 billion annually . as a result of the catastrophic losses , we designated the program as a high - risk area in march 2006 , and congress is considering a number of legislative changes to improve the nfip's financial solvency . the federal emergency management agency , within the department of homeland security , administers the nfip . fema pays 88 private insurance companies to perform the administrative functions of selling and servicing flood insurance policies and settling claims , although the companies do not assume risk for losses . to settle claims , including those from hurricanes katrina and rita , insurance companies work with certified flood adjusters who assess damages and estimate losses . the nfip pays for adjuster services according to a standard fee schedule . for example , for the average claims settlement amount for hurricane katrina , $94,803 , the nfip fee schedule authorizes payment of 3 percent of the claim amount , or $2,844 , for adjusting services . fema is responsible for the management and oversight of the nfip and is assisted in performing these functions by a program contractor . the nfip also provides incentives for communities to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood damage . after nfip policyholders cited concerns regarding the processing and payments of claims after hurricane isabel in 2003 , congress passed the flood insurance reform act .