data on other outcomes . seven studies examined outcomes other than mortality , but according to some of the studies we reviewed and stakeholders we interviewed , more information is needed on outcomes other than mortality for children treated at pediatric trauma centers . further , as some studies note , mortality can be a limited measure for determining quality of care or a trauma center's contribution to survival , because overall mortality is low among severely injured children . one 2015 study found that adding a pediatric trauma center in delaware decreased the frequency of pediatric splenectomies — a procedure that removes a child's spleen . another study found that pediatric trauma centers performed less imaging than adult trauma centers when treating severely injured adolescents . information on other outcomes was limited . one study from 2016 that we reviewed noted that in the pediatric trauma literature there are no longitudinal studies on the long - term effects — both physical and psychological — of trauma on children . in addition , another study we reviewed indicated that the selection of outcome measures for analysis was constrained by what was available in the dataset used for the study . one stakeholder we interviewed told us that mortality is one of the few outcomes related to pediatric trauma that is captured in databases , because most trauma registries and other databases were initially developed to capture data for adult patients . moreover , a few stakeholders told us that the pediatric trauma system is not as well developed as the adult trauma system and that both pediatric trauma care and research have tended to occur in isolation . one of these stakeholders said that because of this fragmentation , it has been difficult for researchers to use or build on the outcome measures that other researchers have developed in their work . hospital - based pediatric trauma care activities are supported primarily through grants from two agencies within hhs — hrsa and the national institutes of health ( nih ) . officials from these agencies reported that activities related to pediatric trauma care are coordinated through an interagency group focused broadly on emergency care , as well as through arrangements between individual agencies . two agencies within hhs — hrsa and nih — have grant programs and other activities that support hospital - based pediatric trauma care ( see table 2 ) . within hrsa , the emergency medical services for children ( emsc ) program , established in 1984 , provides funding to states and academic medical institutions . it does so primarily through six grant programs and cooperative agreements that aim to enhance the capacity of emergency care — including hospital - based trauma care — to address the needs of children . the program's annual appropriation is authorized at $20.2 million per fiscal year from fiscal years 2015 through 2019 . according to hrsa officials , emsc is the only federal program that focuses specifically on improving emergency care for children . within nih , the pediatric trauma and critical illness branch supports research and training focused on preventing , treating , and reducing all forms of childhood trauma , injury , and critical illnesses .