however , our recommendation has not been implemented . in the air force's march 2001 quarterly review to the under secretary , the information reported included only summary information on the total estimated cost reductions . information was not reported as we recommended regarding the total number of cost reduction plans identified , the number implemented , the cost reductions realized to date , and any additions or deletions from the plans included in the prior report . to identify the amount of potential offsets attributable to production cost reduction plans by f - 22 contractors we reviewed contractor cost reduction plans to determine the basis for the reductions expected to be achieved and whether the reduction was implemented or not yet implemented . we reviewed the documentation from the contractors and discussed the plans and the air force procedures for reporting on such plans with contractor and air force officials . to compare the latest f - 22 production cost estimates of the air force and the office of the secretary with the congressional production cost limitation and to determine the extent to which cost reductions plans were considered in establishing these estimates , we reviewed the joint estimating team's report and various air force briefings . we discussed the estimates with officials in the office of the secretary and the air force's f - 22 program office to determine why they differed . we compared the two estimates , including the baseline estimate , the estimated reductions from cost reduction plans , and the net estimates . we obtained a description of the reasons for the variances between the two estimates . we also discussed the estimates and production cost limitation with air force and office of the secretary officials . the office of the secretary cost estimate shown in this report is recorded in briefing documents we obtained during the course of our review . the office of the secretary provided us neither its cost estimate nor documentation related to its cost estimate . officials from the office of the secretary cited their policy of not allowing access to that information because they considered it predecisional . however , we corroborated the information contained in the briefing documents we analyzed . an office of the secretary official reviewed and agreed with the estimated and projected costs included in this report that are attributed to the office of the secretary . to calculate the number of f - 22s that could not be procured within the cost limitation we allocated the dollars in the office of the secretary estimate to production lots 1 through 11 in the previous air force estimate . f - 22 aircraft: progress of the engineering and manufacturing development program ( gao / t - nsiad - 98-137 , mar . f - 22 aircraft: progress in achieving engineering and manufacturing development goals ( gao / nsiad - 98-67 , mar . tactical aircraft: restructuring of the air force f - 22 fighter program ( gao / nsiad - 97-156 , june 4 , 1997 ) . defense aircraft investments: major program commitments based on optimistic budget projections ( gao / t - nsiad - 97-103 , mar . f - 22 restructuring ( gao / nsiad - 97-100r , feb. 28 , 1997 ) .