other reviews . the selected vamcs were also unable to provide documentation of some retrospective reviews . specifically , of the 27 providers for whom the selected vamcs conducted a retrospective review , 8 were missing documentation . while vha guidance recommends that vamcs document these reviews , vha policy does not require that vamcs document retrospective or comprehensive reviews . vha officials told us that they expected vamcs to document these types of reviews so that the information could be used to support adverse privileging actions , if necessary . without clearly stated documentation requirements in vha policy , vamc officials inconsistently document their results , preventing vamc directors and visns from properly evaluating the effectiveness of its retrospective and comprehensive reviews , which are used to , among other things , ensure patient safety . additionally , we found that key officials from two vamcs were not aware of the vha guidance and that 5 of the 8 missing retrospective reviews were from these two vamcs . we also found that one vamc was missing documentation of clinical care reviews for 12 providers who met the vamc's peer review trigger . in the absence of this documentation , we were unable to identify the type of reviews that were missing for these 12 providers . the selected vamcs' failure to document reviews of providers' clinical care after concerns were raised is inconsistent with federal internal control standards for monitoring and documentation , which state that management should conduct and document separate evaluations , when necessary . in the absence of vamc documentation of such separate evaluations of providers , vamc leadership officials lack key information needed to make decisions about whether providers' privileges are appropriate , and they also lack reasonable assurance that appropriate reviews are conducted . reviews not always timely . we found that the five selected vamcs' reviews of providers' clinical care were not always conducted in a timely manner after concerns were raised . slbs . vha policy requires vamc directors to report providers — both current and former employees — when there are serious concerns about the providers' clinical care to any slb where the providers hold an active medical license . specifically , vha policy requires vamcs to report providers who so substantially failed to meet generally accepted standards of clinical practice as to raise reasonable concern for the safety of patients . according to vha policy and guidance , the slb reporting process should be initiated as soon as it appears that a provider's behavior or clinical practice fails to meet accepted standards . specifically , of the 148 providers , the vamcs' initiation of reviews of 16 providers' clinical care was delayed by more than 3 months , and in some cases for multiple years , after the concern was raised . at one vamc , service chiefs were not instructed to conduct reviews of 14 providers until 4 to 13 months after these providers met the vamc's peer review trigger . before the service chiefs were notified of the concerns , 3 of these providers had at least one additional concerning episode of care — that peer reviewers judged would have been handled differently by most experienced providers — identified through the peer review process .