washington , dc . gao - 19-229 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2018 . air force readiness: actions needed to rebuild readiness and prepare for the future . gao - 19-120t . maintenance personnel inexperience and retention . the navy has had difficulty attracting and retaining skilled maintainers , such as sheet metal workers and machinists at its aviation depots ( i.e. , fleet readiness centers ) , which directly affects its ability to complete planned maintenance . some of the depots experienced challenges attracting and retaining skilled personnel due to competition with nearby contractors that are able to offer higher pay , according to navy depot officials . similar to the shipyards , the aviation depots also lack experienced personnel , affecting the efficiency and quality of maintenance . for example , 41 percent of the skilled workers at fleet readiness center southwest have 2 years or fewer of experience . workforce inexperience and attrition of skilled personnel were some of the reasons cited for machining defects detected in the landing gear for f / a - 18 , e - 2 , and c - 2a aircraft by a recent navy report . all of the depots have undertaken retention efforts such as incentives , bonuses , and awards to address these issues . until the navy and marine corps address maintenance and supply challenges it will be difficult to meet secretary of defense - established mission capability goals . specifically , in september 2018 , the secretary of defense issued a memorandum emphasizing that a key component of implementing the 2018 national defense strategy is ensuring critical aviation platforms meet their mission capability targets by the end of fiscal year 2019 . the memorandum established a goal of achieving a minimum of 80-percent mission capable rates for various aircraft , including for the navy's and marine corps' f / a - 18 inventories , by the end of fiscal year 2019 while also reducing operating and maintenance costs . to accomplish this , the navy and the marine corps developed the return to readiness strategy in november 2018 that includes a broad array of actions to improve the availability of spare parts and evaluate the application of best commercial practices to naval aviation sustainment , among other actions . office of the secretary of defense and navy program officials told us , and based on our prior work we agree , that this goal will be challenging to achieve by the end of fiscal year 2019 . we reported in april 2018 that fighter pilot shortages in the navy and the marine corps have been worsening in recent years and shortfalls are projected to remain through at least fiscal year 2023 . our analysis of navy and marine corps data showed that the navy's shortage of first operational tour fighter pilots more than doubled from 12 percent in fiscal year 2013 to 26 percent in fiscal year 2017 . similarly , the marine corps' overall shortage of fighter pilots quadrupled from 6 percent in fiscal year 2006 to 24 percent in fiscal year 2017 . also , as we reported in april 2018 , service officials attributed the pilot shortages to reduced training opportunities and increased attrition due to career dissatisfaction , among other factors .