ii for further details. ) we have previously testified before this subcommittee regarding the decrease in the total improper payment estimate from $45 billion in fiscal year 2004 to $38 billion in fiscal year 2005 . specifically , we reported that the $7 billion decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in the medicare estimate that resulted from increased efforts to educate health care providers on the importance of responding to requests for medical records to perform detailed statistical reviews . generally , improper payments result from a lack of or an inadequate system of internal control , but some result from program design issues . internal control is a major part of managing an organization . it comprises the plans , methods , and procedures used to meet missions , goals , and objectives and supports performance - based management . internal control also serves as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and preventing and detecting errors and fraud . our standards for internal control in the federal government provide a road map for entities to establish control for all aspects of their operations and a basis against which entities' control structures can be evaluated . also , our executive guide on strategies to manage improper payments focuses on internal control standards as they relate to reducing improper payments . we found that over half of the programs reporting improper payment estimates also had reported management challenges that could increase the risk of improper payments , including challenges related to internal controls . for example , in the department of education's ( education ) fiscal year 2006 par , the education oig reported that recent audits , inspections , and investigations continue to uncover problems with program control and oversight of program participants , placing billions of taxpayer dollars at risk of waste , fraud , abuse , and noncompliance . the oig concluded that only by improving effective oversight of its operations and demanding accountability by its managers , staff , contractors , and grantees can the agency be an effective steward of the billions of taxpayer dollars supporting its programs and operations . education's oig also reported that identifying and correcting improper payments remains a challenge for the agency due to ineffective oversight and monitoring of its policies , programs , and participants . another example involved an agency's systems used to detect fraudulent activity . specifically , treasury's oig reported that some tax credits , such as the earned income tax credit , provide opportunities for abuse in income tax claims . in past years , the internal revenue service ( irs ) used its web - based electronic fraud detection system ( efds ) to search for signs of fraud at the time that tax returns are filed to help eliminate the issuing of questionable refunds . for its 2005 processing year , irs stopped over $412 million in improper payments . however , irs was unable to utilize efds for the 2006 processing year because the contractor it had hired to update the fraud detection program could not produce a working program within the established timeframe .