retirements . it is not certain what portion of the 2 to 12 percent of coal - fueled generating units expected to retire could cause reliability challenges that would need to be addressed . several stakeholders said it could be difficult to resolve all potential reliability challenges that may arise because of retirements before the 3-year mats compliance deadline established by statute . there have been examples in the past of efforts to resolve reliability issues as a result of retirements that have taken multiple years to resolve , and two of the rtos we spoke with have identified similar challenges going forward . for example , pjm interconnection ( pjm ) , an rto system planner in the mid - atlantic and midwest , received 116 requests from power companies to retire units , as of may 30 , 2012 — representing 16,184 mw of capacity and almost 9 percent of capacity under pjm's authority . pjm has identified reliability concerns with 101 of these retirement requests because they may cause violations of reliability standards . pjm has identified solutions to these potential violations , including transmission upgrades and operational changes , and stated that it expects the resolution of its reliability concerns with 16 of these retirements to take past april 2016 — the mats compliance deadline for units with a 1-year extension . similarly , as of may 3 , 2012 , miso has identified reliability challenges with 8 of the 62 unit retirement notifications it has received and completed evaluations on . miso expects 5 of these to take until 2018 to resolve . increasing reliance on natural gas . several stakeholders said that increasing dependence on natural gas to produce electricity could pose potential reliability challenges because there could be interruptions in the delivery of natural gas to generating units . in particular , one stakeholder said that there can be other natural gas users on pipelines , such as homeowners in regions of the country where natural gas is used as a home heating fuel , who may also consume natural gas during periods of peak demand . in these areas , constructing pipelines to improve the supply of natural gas to existing or new natural gas - fueled generating units could take time because of a range of financial and regulatory steps that must be taken . without such upgrades , there may be inadequate natural gas supply in certain locations where it is needed for electricity generation . while pipeline capacity is being expanded in some regions of the country to accommodate rising demand , several stakeholders raised concerns about gas - electric coordination in the industry . to better understand and prepare for these challenges , miso recently completed a study on the availability of natural gas pipeline infrastructure to support increased use of natural gas - fueled capacity . the study found that some of the region's pipelines that deliver natural gas to power plants may be close to capacity and that further investments in pipeline capacity and additional natural gas storage may be needed to ensure the delivery of reliable natural gas supplies .