capabilities . gao - 17-440t . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2017 . data analytics and innovation: emerging opportunities and challenges . gao - 16-659sp . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2016 . intelligent transportation systems: urban and rural transit providers reported benefits but face deployment challenges . gao - 16-638 . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2016 . critical infrastructure protection: measures needed to assess agencies' promotion of the cybersecurity framework . gao - 16-152 . washington , d.c.: december 17 , 2015 . intelligent transportation systems: vehicle - to - infrastructure technologies expected to offer benefits , but deployment challenges exist . gao - 15-775 . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2015 . critical infrastructure protection: cybersecurity of the nation's electricity grid requires continued attention . gao - 16-174t . washington , d.c.: october 21 , 2015 . spectrum management: fcc's use and enforcement of buildout requirements . gao - 14-236 . washington , d.c.: february 26 , 2014 . intelligent transportation systems: vehicle - to - vehicle technologies expected to offer safety benefits , but deployment challenges exist . gao - 14-13 . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2013 . these projects can be targeted to specific community goals . for example , “smart” traffic lights may collect and evaluate real - time traffic information to update traffic signals' timing to reflect current traffic conditions , with the goal of improving traffic flow by easing congestion and reducing vehicles' emissions . iot - enabled garbage cans can signal waste removal teams when cans are full , streamlining the routes that garbage trucks take and reducing wear and tear on roads due to unnecessary trips by these heavy trucks . researchers and industry stakeholders have noted that integrating technologies and projects so that they work in concert with one another is key to realizing the full potential of iot applications . the goals of different sectors of the community — such as energy efficiency , mobility for underserved populations , or improved public health — are often interconnected in such a way that integrating iot projects and systems may save resources and enable solutions that address multiple goals at once . in the example above , the smart traffic lights that are deployed by communities to improve traffic flow may also lead to reduced vehicle emissions , targeting a secondary goal of improving air quality and public health . the u.s. government has shown increased interest in supporting iot in communities , in part to harness the economic potential ; help address anticipated challenges , such as risks to privacy or security ; and promote replicability — that is , make it easier for projects in one community to be deployed in other communities . over the past 22 months , the white house announced more than $240 million in federal investments for research and technology to support making communities “smarter.” and on january 12 , 2017 , the former administration issued for public comment a draft federal strategic plan for smart cities and communities that provides a high - level framework to guide and coordinate federal efforts supporting iot in communities . the european union ( eu ) and some foreign governments also have made investments in supporting iot projects in communities .