resources . collaborating agencies should identify the human , financial , and technological resources they need to initiate or sustain their efforts . oec and fema staff their collaborative effort with employees from their grants offices to address their human resource needs . these employees perform work related to emergency communications grants as outlined in their performance plans or as a collateral duty . please specify the other area in the box below . ( written responses not included ) 13 . please provide any additional comments you have on the usefulness of oec's efforts to incorporate emerging technologies into interoperable emergency communications . ( written responses not included ) 14 . what , if anything , could oec do to further incorporate emerging technologies into its interoperable emergency communications efforts ? ( written responses not included ) . the following questions are about oec's communication efforts with swics and the public safety community . in your opinion , how well does oec communicate to swics training opportunities in the following areas ? emerging technologies ( i.e. , wi - fi , nextgen 911 , etc. ) if you responded to other , please specify in the box below . ( written responses not included ) 16 . how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the communication efforts from the following oec organizational levels ? if you responded to other , please specify in the box below . ( written responses not included ) 17 . in your opinion , are there additional tools or approaches that oec could use to improve communication with swics and the public - safety stakeholder community ? please identify and describe additional tools and approaches in the box below . ( written responses not included ) 18 . in your opinion , does oec face any challenges that affect its ability to meet the needs of the public safety community ? please explain in the box below . ( written responses not included ) . the following questions ask your opinion about safecom grant guidance for interoperable emergency communications equipment . oec develops annual safecom guidance in an effort to provide current information on emergency communications policies , eligible costs , best practices , and technical standards for state , local , tribal , and territorial grantees investing federal funds in emergency communications projects . in your opinion , how clear are the following aspects of the safecom grant guidance for interoperable emergency communications equipment ? if you responded to other , please specify in the box below . ( written responses not included ) 20 . in the past 2 years , has your state developed supplemental statewide guidance to clarify the safecom grant guidance for interoperable emergency communications equipment ? please explain in the box below , why your state developed supplemental statewide guidance . ( written responses not included ) 21 . in your opinion , is there a need to improve the safecom grant guidance for interoperable emergency communications equipment ? if yes , please explain in the box below . ( written responses not included ) . please provide any additional comments you have on oec's efforts to address firstnet's nationwide public safety broadband network as part of interoperable emergency communications . ( written responses not included ) 7 .