pub . 91-190 , 83 stat . 852 ( 1970 ) ( codified as amended at 42 u.s.c . ch . in 1998 to 2,960 in february 2012 . recognizing its changing roles , responsibilities , and decline in staff levels , fhwa continued to adapt its oversight approach . in 2006 , it began adopting a risk management approach to its oversight , recognizing in part that , while its role had expanded , its resources had not . fhwa has adapted to changes in demands for its oversight , but its role and responsibilities are complicated by the fact that the current federal approach to surface transportation in general — and to highways in particular — is not working well . the expansion of the program did not result from a specific rationale or plan , but rather an agglomeration of policies and programs since the 1950s without a well - defined overall vision of the national interest and federal role in our surface transportation system . federal goals and programs are now numerous and sometimes conflicting , and federal roles are unclear . furthermore , although dot and fhwa establish national goals and priorities , federal highway funding is apportioned to states without regard to the accomplishment of specific outcomes or the performance of grantees . this makes it difficult to assess the extent to which funding is achieving transportation goals . for these and other reasons , funding surface transportation remains on gao's high - risk list . in the face of its evolving roles and responsibilities , fhwa has relied on its historical partnership with the states in which fhwa and the states work collaboratively to construct highway infrastructure . fhwa uses partnering activities and practices with the states that are , based on our review and synthesis of partnering literature , recognized as best practices . these activities and practices enable parties to achieve individual and mutually beneficial goals and results , such as expedited project time frames and cost savings . we observed the following examples of successful partnerships: open and regular communication includes clear and candid discussions among partners as well as an understanding of the inner workings and decision - making processes of participating organizations . fhwa division and state dot officials reported having regular formal and informal meetings ( at leadership and working levels ) as well as frequent contact by e - mail and telephone . clear delineation of roles and responsibilities involves understanding individual partner roles as well as articulating responsibilities for joint actions and tasks . fhwa stewardship agreements describe the roles of fhwa divisions and state dots . some stewardship agreements that we examined include detailed matrices addressing factors such as work activities and their frequency , legal authority , and specific division office and state dot responsibilities . proactive issue identification and resolution , in a mutually agreeable way , is closely linked to open and regular communication between partnering members . fhwa officials in several division offices told us that they work closely with their state dot counterparts to identify problems early and develop solutions .