kans . ky. md . mich. minn. mo . mont . n.c. n.j. n.m. n.y. okla. ore. penn . tenn. tx . va. wash. wis. w.va. wyo . ntsb's february 2010 update on the status of its most wanted recommendations related to icing characterized faa's related rulemaking efforts as “unacceptably slow.” in december 2009 , at faa's international runway safety summit , ntsb's chairman commented , “how do safety improvements end up taking 10 years to deliver ? they get delayed one day at a time . and every one of those days may be the day when a preventable accident occurs as the result of something we were ‘just about ready to fix. '” in particular , ntsb has expressed concern about the pace of faa's rulemaking project to amend its standards for transport category airplanes to address supercooled large droplets , which is outside the range of icing conditions covered by the current standards . faa began this rulemaking effort in 1997 in response to a recommendation made by ntsb the prior year , and the agency currently expects to issue its proposed rule in july 2010 and the final rule by january 2012 . however , until the notice of proposed rulemaking is published and the close of the comment period is known , it will be unclear as to when the final rule will be issued . the department of transportation , in its monthly report on the department's significant rulemakings , has classified this rulemaking effort as “behind schedule” since march 2010 . much of the time on this rulemaking effort has been devoted to research and analysis aimed at quantifying the atmospheric conditions that lead to supercooled large droplet icing , as well as developing tools that would allow industry to comply with the forthcoming rule . in 2009 , faa completed an internal review of its rulemaking process and concluded that several of the concerns from 1998 that led to the agency's major reform effort remain , including: inadequate early involvement of key stakeholders ; inadequate early resolution of issues ; inadequate selection and training of personnel involved in rulemaking ; and inefficient quality guidance . according to faa's manager for aircraft and airport rules , the agency is taking steps to implement recommendations made by the internal review , such as revising the rulemaking project record form and enhancing training for staff involved in rulemaking . in addition , in october 2009 , faa tasked arac with reviewing its processes and making recommendations for improvement within a year . according to an faa rulemaking manager , arac is finalizing its recommendations and writing its report , which faa expects to receive in december 2010 . we believe these efforts have the potential to improve the efficiency of faa's rulemaking process . ensuring the availability of adequate resources for icing - related r&d . nasa is a key source of r&d related to icing . the agency performs fundamental research related to icing in - house and sponsors such research at universities and other organizations .