( see fig . cbp credits its uas operations as helping its agents make over 4,000 arrests and seize nearly 20,000 pounds of illegal drugs between september 2005 and march 2008 . in the aftermath of hurricane katrina , uass searched for survivors in an otherwise inaccessible area of mississippi . we identified the information to collect in our surveys based on our congressional request , internet and literature searches , professional conferences we attended , background interviews , and through discussions with external expert advisors . a social science survey specialist collaborated with staff with subject matter expertise on the development of the surveys . ( 3 ) what is the federal government's response to these challenges ? and ( 4 ) assuming that uass have routine access to the national airspace system , how might they impact the system and the environment ? to address these questions , we reviewed the literature , faa and department of defense ( dod ) documents , and aviation trade association reports . we also interviewed officials from dod , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) about their operations and plans to operate uass in the national airspace system . we interviewed officials in associations that represent uas manufacturers and users of the national airspace system . to determine the expected growth of uass , we obtained industry forecasts . additionally , we administered a web - based survey to 23 uas experts , selected with the assistance of the national academies , to obtain their opinions of the steps that faa could take to accelerate uas integration in the national airspace system and the impact that uass might have on the system and the environment after integration occurs . we conducted this performance audit from october 2006 to may 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( see app . i for additional information on our scope and methods. ) faa defines an unmanned aircraft as one that is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft . in the past , these aircraft were sometimes called “unmanned aerial vehicles,” “remotely piloted vehicles,” or “unmanned aircraft.” faa and the international community have adopted the term “unmanned aircraft system” to designate them as aircraft and to recognize that a uas includes not only the airframe , but also the associated elements — the control station and communications links — as shown in figure 1 . the capabilities of uass differ from manned aircraft in several ways . a uas can operate for far longer periods than an onboard pilot could safely operate an aircraft . ( 2 ) what challenges exist in operating uass safely and routinely in the national airspace system ? future scenarios envision uass remaining aloft for weeks or even months using fuel cell technology or airborne refueling operations .