gao - 13-525 . washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2013 . ( see fig . to fully implement the imaging auc program , cms must complete several components over the next 5 years , as outlined in pama: specify applicable auc by november 15 , 2015 . through rulemaking , and in consultation with stakeholders , cms must specify one or more auc . the auc may only be developed or endorsed by national professional medical specialty societies or other provider - led entities , not by cms . the agency must take into account whether the auc have stakeholder consensus , are scientifically valid and evidence - based , and are derived from studies that are published and reviewable by stakeholders . cms must annually review auc to determine the need for any updates or revisions . publish a list of qualified cdsms by april 1 , 2016 . with stakeholder input , cms must specify one or more qualified cdsms that may be used by ordering providers for auc consultation . mechanisms may include modules in certified electronic health record technology , other private sector cdsms , or mechanisms established by cms . the cdsms must be able to execute certain functions , such as generating and providing a certification or documentation that the cdsm was used by the ordering provider . the list must be updated periodically and include one or more cdsms per imaging service that are available free of charge . roll out imaging auc program by january 1 , 2017 . ordering providers generally must provide to the furnishing provider certification that they have consulted with specified auc using a qualified cdsm . furnishing providers generally will only be paid if their medicare claims for imaging services indicate which cdsm was used , whether the order would or would not adhere to any applicable auc , and the ordering provider identification number . begin the process for identifying outlier ordering providers on january 1 , 2017 . for services furnished beginning in 2017 , cms must annually determine up to 5 percent of all ordering providers who are outliers based on their low adherence to appropriate ordering . in making these determinations , cms must use 2 years of data starting from january 1 , 2017 and consult with stakeholders in order to develop methods to identify outlier ordering providers . cms must also establish a process for determining when a provider's outlier designation should be removed . implement prior authorization beginning january , 1 , 2020 . imaging services ordered by an outlier provider will be subject to prior authorization from cms . in applying prior authorization , the agency may only use specified auc . in its july 2015 notice of proposed rulemaking , cms outlined its initial plan and timeframes for implementing the imaging auc program . while cms's initial plan touches on each implementation component of the program , it focused largely on the process for specifying applicable auc and establishing priority clinical areas for future prior authorization policy . given the need to consider stakeholder comments and that progress on early components affects the timing of subsequent components , cms's initial plans to implement certain components of the program extend beyond the dates outlined in pama .