this is incorrect . the paper bopcom - 05 / 9 states that the tsg agreed to define “personal transfers” as consisting of all current transfers in cash or in kind . bea disagreed with our statement that remittance data cannot be reconciled and stated that , because reconciliation projects are resource intensive and difficult , bea must choose the statistical items it reconciles with which trading partners . we concur that reconciliation cannot be done easily . however , our observations were on reconciliation of remittance data on a global level , not between individual countries , as shown in figure 4 . the global discrepancy has grown in recent years . in addition to the contact named above , barbara i. keller , assistant director ; gezu bekele ; tania calhoun ; lynn cothern ; william r. chatlos ; bruce l. kutnick ; james m. mcdermott ; marc m. molino ; josé r. peña ; and rachel seid made key contributions to this report . the remitter was assumed to be the household head . bea extrapolated the foreign - born population derived from the 1990 decennial census using indicators , including the census bureau's annual current population survey ( cps ) . to estimate the proportion of income immigrants were likely to remit , bea relied on the 1989 legalized population survey ( lps1 ) and the 1992 legalized population follow - up survey ( lps2 ) , which were conducted as a result of the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) . bea then combined the information obtained from lps1 and lps2 with demographic and income information obtained from the cps to arrive at the total amount of remittances sent from the united states . for a more detailed description of bea's methodology for estimating remittances , see appendix ii . in 2005 , bea made several revisions to its methodology to include more recent census data , and recent studies on the foreign born and their remitting behaviors . first , bea incorporated data on the foreign - born population and their income from the 2000 census and the american community survey ( acs ) , which is available annually , unlike decennial census data , and thus requires less extrapolation of population and income trends . according to bea , these data will enable a better breakdown of the foreign - born population by all relevant characteristics on an annual basis . the acs data on the number and income of the adult foreign - born population are arrayed by their gender , duration of stay , presence or absence of children , and per capita income of recipient countries and proximity to the united states . bea then used its own judgment to determine the percentage of the adult foreign - born population that remits and the probability of remitting from information gathered from various academic studies published between 1995 and 2004 , as well as lps1 and lps2 , which bea used in its earlier model . bea revised its estimates back to 1991 using this new approach , which resulted in an increase in estimated remittances for all years . figure 3 shows the data that are included in bea's model and how the remittance estimate is calculated .