washington . d.c.: march 17 , 2004 . signals intelligence: dod should consider joint replacement of aging aircraft . gao - 02-401 . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2002 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . this can be attributed to a variety of causes . many programs began development without a solid business case or a realistic acquisition strategy . as a result of the schedule delays in some programs , the services will have to make investments in legacy systems to keep them in the inventory longer than planned . these investments represent opportunity costs that could have been used for other needs within dod . programs must build a business case that provides demonstrated evidence that ( 1 ) the warfighter need exists and that it can best be met with the chosen concept , and ( 2 ) the concept can be developed and produced within existing resources — technologies , design , funding , and time . establishing a business case calls for a realistic assessment of risks and costs ; doing otherwise undermines the intent of the business case and invites failure . once the business case is done , programs must develop a realistic acquisition strategy , which requires having critical program knowledge at key points in the acquisition . this includes knowledge about technology maturity , system design , and manufacturing and production processes . dod's acquisition policy endorses this knowledge - based approach to acquisition . this policy includes strategies to reduce technology , integration , design , manufacturing , and production risks . table 1 summarizes isr programs that have encountered problems either in development or as they prepared to begin the system development and demonstration phase of an acquisition program . results of these problems included cost and schedule growth , program restructuring , cancellation , and unplanned investments in the legacy systems that were being replaced . following are detailed examples of programs that failed to either develop a good business case or an executable acquisition strategy and that had problems . the outcome was that the services either had to or may have to make additional investments in the legacy systems to keep them relevant and in the operational inventory until the new system has completed development and is fielded . aerial common sensor ( acs ) the army's termination of the acs system development and demonstration contract could have significant schedule , cost , and performance impacts on three legacy systems in the isr portfolio — the army's guardrail common sensor ( grcs ) and airborne reconnaissance low ( arl ) , and the navy's ep - 3 . the army and the navy had planned a phased approach to field the acs and retire the legacy systems from the inventory with a minimal investment in maintaining legacy systems .