identifying allegations not adjudicated by tsa . our review indicates that ooi has not established procedures to reconcile completed misconduct investigations against oso or opr adjudication decisions to identify cases not resolved by oso or opr . specifically , ooi is not matching its completed investigations against oso and opr adjudication decisions to identify any gaps , following up with oso and opr to help resolve these outstanding cases , and updating the status of the cases in the integrated database . previously , ooi matched its completed records of investigation against oso or opr adjudication decisions to ensure that oso or opr had received the record and made an adjudication decision . according to an ooi senior official , the previous assistant administrator for ooi determined that this type of reconciliation process was too resource intensive and discontinued the process because ooi had to manually sort through open investigations listed as “pending an adjudication decision” and then contact oso or opr to determine the status of each case . however , the ooi senior official stated that although the process was manual in nature , it was beneficial in identifying allegations that had not been adjudicated by tsa . recording case information on all adjudication decisions . tsa does not record the results of all misconduct cases that have been adjudicated by tsa airport staff in its integrated database , which could help the agency oversee efforts at the airport level to address employee misconduct . specifically , the agency does not record all employee misconduct case outcomes in the database , including cases that resulted in a corrective action , which are actions that are administrative or nondisciplinary in nature , such as a letter of counseling . as discussed earlier , the integrated database is tsa's centralized case management system used by staff to track and manage employee misconduct cases . tsa strives to follow a progressive discipline approach in adjudicating employee misconduct cases , which means that managers must have access to information on an employee's disciplinary track record in a centralized location . however , we found that five out of the seven airports included in our sample do not consistently track corrective actions in the integrated database . a senior er official stated that er was unaware that tsa staff at airports are not consistently recording corrective actions in the integrated database , and there is a strong need for tsa to clarify that tsa staff at airports should record corrective actions in the database . the official stated that while tsa has communicated through training that staff at airports should record corrective actions in the integrated database , there is not a written policy or procedure requiring such tracking . a demotion is a voluntary or involuntary change to a lower pay band or rate of pay . a removal is involuntary separation from tsa employment in order to promote the efficiency of the federal service . tsa may use an expedited process , known as one - step , for certain allegations of tso misconduct , such as allegations that may result in indefinite suspensions or removals involving theft and intentional serious security breaches , among other things .