gao - 19-72 . washington , d.c.: december 13 , 2018 . omb and treasury did not comment on our recommendation . we plan to conduct work intended to help inform omb's and treasury's efforts . this work may include the development of a maturity model that could provide a framework for assessing data governance activities related to federal spending data . this work may also have broader government - wide implications as agencies begin implementing the requirements of the foundations for evidence - based policymaking act enacted on january 14 , 2019 , including designating chief data officers with data governance and implementation responsibilities . in december 2018 , omb staff told us that they are transitioning from the governance structure used for initial data act implementation to a new structure for managing data standards within the broader context of efforts to establish a federal data strategy . according to omb staff , the initial data governance structure reflected omb's and treasury's focus on creating the design and build functions required to meet the statutory requirements of the data act . the president's management agenda ( pma ) , released in march 2018 , outlines a long - term vision for modernizing federal operations . to address the issues outlined in the pma , the administration established a number of cross - agency priority ( cap ) goals . these goals , required by the gpra modernization act of 2010 , are to address issues in a limited number of policy areas requiring action across multiple agencies , or management improvements that are needed across the government . according to omb staff , several of the 2018 goals relate to data standardization , and a new governance structure is needed to achieve those goals . omb staff informed us in july 2018 that the governance structure used for initial implementation efforts , which included the data act interagency advisory committee and data standards committee , had been disbanded , and that the advisory roles of these groups were assumed by the chief financial officers council's data act working group ( cfoc working group ) . according to omb staff , the working group includes four subgroups , which focus on policy , internal controls and data quality , audit coordination , and the data act information model schema ( daims ) , respectively . omb staff also told us that by december 2018 an interagency board and council , both led by the general services administration ( gsa ) , had begun to advise omb on policy matters . according to an action plan that omb and gsa released along with the march 2018 pma , the new interagency shared solutions governance board ( ssgb ) and business standards council ( bsc ) are responsible for setting goals and providing advice to promote a government - wide marketplace for shared services . specifically , they cover mission - support services such as human resources and financial management that a small number of providers offer to many agencies . according to omb staff , this oversight function involves creating and administering government - wide data standards , including data standards established to support the data act .