( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . dhs provided written comments , which are summarized below and reproduced in full in appendix i. dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dhs concurred with our recommendation and described actions planned to address it . specifically , dhs stated that border patrol will revise its training presentation concerning asset assists to include additional information on how sectors should conduct asset assist data integrity checks , why the data are collected , how the data can be used , and why border patrol needs to ensure asset assist data are accurately recorded . cbp has an office of acquisitions that performs oversight . as noted above , the 2014 southwest border technology plan incorporated the 2011 arizona technology plan and included plans to extend land - based surveillance technology deployments beyond arizona to the remainder of the southwest border , beginning with selected areas in texas and california . for example , potential solutions could include adjusting the technologies or personnel deployed in a specific area or improving maintenance and repair of access roads . the solutions are documented in sector - specific initial requirements documents . the fourth step — execution — involves border patrol leadership executing courses of action . border patrol officials stated that courses of action are options for border patrol commanders and executives to select and implement . certain courses of action , including acquiring and deploying land - based surveillance technology , may need to proceed through the dhs acquisition life cycle as appropriate . once implemented , these options are expected to resolve identified capability gaps in operations , according to border patrol officials . the fifth and sixth steps of the process — assessment and life - cycle management — involve implementing and monitoring solutions to determine their ability to resolve capability gaps , and gathering sector feedback on how the solutions affect border security operations . as of october 2017 , border patrol had initiated or completed the planned deployment of select technologies to sectors across areas in arizona , texas , california , and new mexico . in 2014 , we reported that border patrol had made progress deploying technologies and had completed deployments for two technology programs in arizona — the agent portable surveillance system ( apss ) and the thermal imaging device ( tid ) technologies . since our 2014 report , border patrol has completed deployments of several additional technology programs . specifically , according to border patrol officials , it has completed deployments of all planned rvss , msc , and unattended ground sensors ( ugs ) , as well as 15 of 53 ift systems to arizona . border patrol has also completed deployments of select technologies to texas and california , including deploying 32 msc systems to texas and california . border patrol also has efforts underway for completing deployments of other technology programs , but some of those programs have not yet begun deployment or are not yet under contract .