she agreed with the findings in our report . she also added that resident abuse may be underestimated , as studies suggest a significant number of abuse cases are never reported . she said that , in order to respond appropriately to victims of abuse , local law enforcement and other “first responders” such as firefighters and paramedics , would benefit from special training . in her view , this training should include guidance regarding how to distinguish signs of physical abuse from other types of injuries , advice on interviewing elderly and confused residents , and investigative techniques and evidence preservation strategies unique to the nursing home setting . our work did not include an evaluation of the training programs offered to law enforcement officials or “first responders.” in addition , she pointed out that doj could become actively involved in investigating abuse allegations in certain situations , such as those involving facilities where a pattern of abuse has been detected and instances where nursing home managers or employees have made false statements to state surveyors regarding resident care . in addition to these comments , we received technical comments from the fbi , which we incorporated as appropriate . we received comments from all three of the state survey agencies we visited as well as the illinois mfcu . these agencies described initiatives they have undertaken to increase awareness of resident abuse and improve reporting and offered technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . although we provided our draft to the georgia mfcu , it did not offer any comments . finally , we received comments from representatives of ahca and aahsa . both organizations generally agreed with our recommendations . ahca representatives told us that they suspect that abuse of nursing home residents is underreported . they said that they support providing more training to both caregivers and law enforcement officials . they noted that such training could discourage abusive behavior by nursing home staff and improve law enforcement's responsiveness to instances of resident abuse . our work did not include an evaluation of such training programs . representatives of both ahca and aahsa indicated that they strongly support the establishment of a national nurse aide registry and a national criminal background check for nursing home employees . in addition , the aahsa representatives said that they strongly agreed with our recommendation to clarify the definition of abuse . they noted that the definition of abuse has long been the subject of debate and its clarification by cms is in the interest of residents , as well as nursing home management and staff . in addition to these comments , both ahca and aahsa offered technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies to the cms administrator , interested congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will then make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 .