pub . 112 – 55 , 125 stat . the funds provided were from funds for nhtsa's safety belt performance grants program , which was created to encourage states to enact and enforce seat belt laws . the senate report accompanying the transportation and housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriations bill , 2014 , mandated gao to review nhtsa's progress in redesigning nass - cds . this report assesses ( 1 ) the process nhtsa has used to redesign nass - cds and ( 2 ) the potential for this redesign to improve the nass - cds sample . to assess the process nhtsa used to redesign nass - cds , we reviewed pertinent documents related to the nass redesign . we also interviewed nhtsa officials from the national center for statistics and analysis — a component within nhtsa that oversees the agency's data collection efforts , including nass — and representatives of westat , the contractor selected to assist nhtsa in redesigning the nass - cds sample . based on comments the public submitted to nhtsa in response to a notice in the federal register , we also interviewed 21 nass users — including 4 auto manufacturers , 3 automotive suppliers , 4 safety advocates , 2 members of the medical community , 1 federal agency , and representatives from 7 research organizations — to understand how they use nass - cds and the improvements they would like to see nhtsa make to nass - cds as part of the redesign . we selected these 21 nass users by first contacting all those who submitted comments to nhtsa on the redesign and then asking these initial contacts what other nass users we should interview . the results of our discussions with nass users are not generalizable to all nass users but provide insights into aspects of nass - cds that some users indicated they would like to see improved . in addition , we visited two of the geographic locations , called primary sampling units ( psu ) , where nhtsa collects nass - cds data , to observe nhtsa's crash technicians conduct their work , and spoke with nhtsa crash technicians at two others . the psus we visited were seattle , washington , and king county , washington ; the psus we contacted were allegheny county , pennsylvania , and muskegon county , michigan . we selected these locations to ensure we included each type of psu ( i.e. , urban , county , or group of counties ) and to ensure that we included at least one psu from each of the two contractors that nhtsa currently uses to implement the program . the results of our discussions with psus are not generalizable to all psus but provide insights into aspects of the work crash technicians do . we assessed nhtsa's efforts to redesign nass based on government - wide standards and guidelines issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) that apply to the development and implementation of statistical surveys such as nass .