w80-4 lep . officials from nnsa's office of cost policy and analysis told us that this program may be underfunded by at least $1 billion to meet the program's existing schedule . w88 alteration 370 . according to officials from nnsa's office of cost policy and analysis , this program's expanded scope of work may result in about $1 billion in additional costs . to help nnsa put forth more credible modernization plans , we recommended in our april 2017 report that the nnsa administrator include an assessment of the affordability of nnsa's portfolio of modernization programs in future versions of the stockpile stewardship and management plan , such as by presenting options ( eg , potentially deferring the start of or canceling specific modernization programs ) that nnsa could consider taking to bring its estimates of modernization funding needs into alignment with potential future budgets . in commenting on our report , nnsa neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation . doe also faces challenges with addressing its environmental liabilities and its cleanup mission . in february 2017 , we added the federal government's environmental liabilities to our high - risk list . specifically , we found that the federal government's environmental liability has been growing for the past 20 years — and is likely to continue to increase — and that doe is responsible for over 80 percent ( $372 billion ) of the nearly $450 billion reported environmental liability . notably , this estimate does not reflect all of the future cleanup responsibilities that doe may face . in addition , doe has not consistently taken a risk - informed approach to decision - making for environmental cleanup , and doe may therefore be missing opportunities to reduce costs while also reducing environmental risks more quickly . our recent work in this area has also identified opportunities where doe may be able to save tens of billions of dollars . as we have previously reported , doe's total reported environmental liability has generally increased over time . since 1989 , em has spent over $164 billion to retrieve , treat , and dispose of nuclear and hazardous waste and , as of 2017 , it had completed cleanup at 91 of 107 sites across the country ( the 91 sites were generally viewed by doe as the smallest and least contaminated sites to address ) . despite billions spent on environmental cleanup , doe's environmental liability has roughly doubled from $176 billion in fiscal year 1997 to the fiscal year 2016 estimate of $372 billion . between 2011 and 2016 , em spent $35 billion , primarily to treat and dispose of nuclear and hazardous waste and construct capital asset projects to treat the waste ( see fig . 3 for em's annual spending and growing environmental liability ) . according to documents related to doe's fiscal year 2016 financial statements , half of doe's environmental liability resides at two cleanup sites: the hanford site in washington state and the savannah river site in south carolina .