we are continuing to conduct this work . officials at two of the five vamcs we visited stated that vamc committees reviewed and approved all of the expendable medical supplies the vamcs purchased for the first time . however , at the remaining three vamcs , officials told us that vamc committees did not conduct these reviews in all cases . officials from these three vamcs told us that certain expendable medical supplies — for example , new specialty supplies — were purchased without vamc committee review and approval . specialty supplies , such as those used in conjunction with dialysis machines , are expendable medical supplies that are only used in a limited number of clinical departments . without obtaining that review and approval , however , the vamcs purchased these supplies without evaluating their cost effectiveness or likely impact on veterans' care . at one vamc we visited , officials told us that clinical department staff were permitted to purchase certain rme — surgical and dental instruments — using purchase cards and that these purchases were not reviewed and approved by a committee . since our visit , one of the four vamcs has reported that it has begun to enter all expendable medical supplies that are ordered on a recurring basis , including specialty supplies , into gip . by not following va's policy governing gip , vamcs have an incomplete record of the expendable medical supplies in use at their facilities . this lack of information can pose a potential risk to veterans' safety . for example , vamcs may have difficulty ensuring that expired supplies are removed from patient care areas . therefore , the vamc had no assurance that rme purchased by clinical department staff using purchase cards had been reviewed and approved by a committee before it was purchased for the first time . as a result , these purchases may have been made without assurance that they were cost effective and safe for use on veterans and that the vamc had the capability and trained staff to reprocess these items correctly . signatures of purchasing and approving officials . at one of the five vamcs we visited , vamc officials discovered that one staff member working in a dialysis department purchased specialty supplies without obtaining the required signature of an appropriate approving official . that staff member was responsible for ordering an item for use in 17 dialysis machines that was impermeable to blood and would thus prevent blood from entering the dialysis machine . however , the staff member ordered an incorrect item , which was permeable to blood , allowing blood to pass into the machine . after the item was purchased , the incorrect item was used for 83 veterans , resulting in potential cross - contamination of these veterans' blood , which may have exposed them to infectious diseases , such as hiv , hepatitis b , and hepatitis c. entry of information about items into va's inventory management systems . at the time of our site visits , officials from one of the five vamcs we visited told us that information about expendable medical supplies that were ordered on a recurring basis was entered into gip , as required .