federal information systems and networks are inherently at risk . they are highly complex and dynamic , technologically diverse , and often geographically dispersed . this complexity increases the difficulty in identifying , managing , and protecting the myriad of operating systems , applications , and devices comprising the systems and networks . compounding the risk , systems used by federal agencies are often riddled with security vulnerabilities — both known and unknown . for example , the national vulnerability database maintained by the mitre corporation has identified 78,907 publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities and exposures as of september 15 , 2016 , with more being added each day . federal systems and networks are also often interconnected with other internal and external systems and networks , including the internet , thereby increasing the number of avenues of attack and expanding their attack surface . in addition , cyber threats and incidents to systems supporting the federal government are increasing . these threats come from a variety of sources and vary in terms of the types and capabilities of the actors , their willingness to act , and their motives . accordingly , agencies need to have effective mechanisms for detecting , responding to , and recovering from such incidents . the following actions will assist the federal government in building its capabilities for detecting , responding to , and recovering from security incidents . dhs needs to expand capabilities , improve planning , and support wider adoption of its government - wide intrusion detection and prevention system . in january 2016 , we reported that dhs's national cybersecurity protection system ( ncps ) had limited capabilities for detecting and preventing intrusions , conducting analytics , and sharing information . in addition , adoption of these capabilities at federal agencies was limited . expanding ncps's capabilities for detecting and preventing malicious traffic , defining requirements for future capabilities , and developing network routing guidance would increase assurance of the system's effectiveness in detecting and preventing computer intrusions and support wider adoption by agencies . improve cyber incident response practices at federal agencies . in april 2014 we reported that 24 major federal agencies did not consistently demonstrate that they had effectively responded to cyber incidents . for example , agencies did not determine the impact of incidents or take actions to prevent their recurrence . by developing complete policies , plans , and procedures for responding to incidents and effectively overseeing response activities , agencies will have increased assurance that they will effectively respond to cyber incidents . update federal guidance on reporting data breaches and develop consistent responses to breaches of personally identifiable information ( pii ) . as we reported in december 2013 , eight selected agencies did not consistently implement policies and procedures for responding to breaches of pii . for example , none of the agencies documented the evaluation of incidents and lessons learned . in addition , omb's guidance to agencies to report each pii - related incident — even those with inherently low risk to the individuals affected — within 1 hour of discovery may cause agencies to expend resources to meet reporting requirements that provide little value and divert time and attention from responding to breaches .