gao - 04-635t . the estimates assume peacetime operations . vehicle operating costs include the cost for maintenance , repair , and the cost of consumable and repairable parts . the army calculates vehicle cost per mile by tracking vehicle mileage and the actual costs of consumable or replaceable parts used . however , the short time frame from fielding the first stryker brigade's production vehicles — may 2002 through january 2003 — and the brigades' deployment to iraq in october 2003 , limited the amount of time and miles the vehicles were in peacetime service . similarly , fielding of stryker vehicles for the second brigade was completed in january 2004 . while the army collected operational cost and mileage data for both brigades , there were insufficient actual operating costs and miles on the vehicles to make reliable estimates . consequently , until the army can collect more actual peacetime operating cost data for the production vehicles , it will not be able to determine actual vehicle operating costs and make reliable operating cost estimates for these vehicles . similarly , reliable operating cost estimates for the mobile gun system and nbc reconnaissance vehicle will not be available until after 2006 when they are scheduled to begin full production and fielding . according to army and osd test reports , the tested stryker production vehicles met operational requirements with certain limitations and , overall , support the key operational capabilities and force effectiveness of the stryker brigade combat team . the separate developmental testing schedules of the mobile gun system and nbc reconnaissance vehicles have been delayed , resulting in delays in meeting planned production milestone dates . delay in the mobile gun system's development was due in part to shortfalls in meeting performance requirements of the vehicle's ammunition autoloader system . the nbc reconnaissance vehicle's development schedule was delayed pending osd approval of an updated technology readiness assessment for the vehicle and its nuclear , biological , and chemical sensor systems . following the army's completion of live - fire tests and evaluation for seven production vehicles in february 2004 and its ongoing test evaluation of the eighth , the army stated that the stryker production vehicles met operational requirements , with limitations ; and osd approved full production . the army's system evaluation report for the stryker production decision concluded that overall , the stryker family of vehicles is effective , suitable , and survivable , and supports the key operational capabilities and force effectiveness of the stryker brigade combat team . the report concluded that the stryker production vehicle configurations met operational requirements with limitations . for example , in the area of lethality , the report noted that four stryker vehicle configurations have a remote weapons station that provides effective protective and supporting fires for dismounted maneuver . however , limitations of the remote weapons station's capability to provide accurate and continuous fires at night and while moving reduce its effectiveness and lethality . similarly , while the stryker vehicles contribute to force protection and meet survivability requirements , there are inherent and expected survivability limitations as in any armored vehicle system .