discuss . please discuss how well u.s . in conducting these structured interviews , we used a standardized interview guide ( see appendix ii ) to obtain consistent answers . during these interviews we asked , among other things , for each expert's views on a number of already defined potential challenges facing the deployment of v2v technologies . the ratings provided by the experts for each of the potential challenges discussed are shown in table 2 below . to inform our discussion of the challenges facing the deployment of v2v technologies , we considered these ratings as well as experts' responses to open - ended questions . in addition to the individual above , judy guilliams - tapia , assistant director ; melissa bodeau ; leia dickerson ; david hooper ; terence lam ; maren mcavoy ; josh ormond ; madhav panwar ; matthew rosenberg ; chad williams ; and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report . dot should take ? as part of our review , we conducted 21 structured interviews with individuals identified by the national academies of sciences to be experts on vehicle - to - vehicle ( v2v ) technologies ( see table 1 in appendix i for list of experts interviewed ) . considering the potential costs of deploying cvts involving v2v communications c. supporting the development of v2v safety applications . d. conducting development and testing of v2v devices and promoting the development of technical standards . e. communicating and collaborating with key stakeholders , including automobile manufacturers and suppliers f. and other interested parties . identifying policies to help lead to deployment of cvts involving v2v communications . which potential v2v applications are likely to offer the greatest benefits and why ? 3 ) what work , in your opinion , needs to be completed before such technologies are commercially feasible and available in the u.s. ? in your opinion , what is a realistic timeframe in which automobile manufacturers might begin to install these technologies in new vehicles being manufactured for the u.s. vehicle fleet ? 4 ) according to a 2007 report by the u.s . dot , cvts involving v2v communications have the potential to address up to 76 percent of unimpaired roadway crashes , which could have the potential to greatly reduce the number of roadway fatalities that occur each year . what views , if any , do you have on dot's projection of these technologies' potential benefits ? costs of vehicle - to - vehicle connected vehicle technologies 5 ) to your knowledge , are there any studies that estimate the potential future costs associated with the deployment of cvts involving v2v communications ? specifically , are you aware of any work that has been done to estimate the costs associated with the deployment of ( 1 ) fully - integrated devices , ( 2 ) aftermarket safety devices , and ( 3 ) vehicle awareness devices ? b . other than this study and dot's safety pilot driver clinics and model deployment , are you aware of any other studies that estimate the potential benefits of v2v technologies ?