citizenship and immigration services . the official must also undergo a face - to - face personnel security interview . though guidance to fbi field offices requires that these tasks be performed and the application forwarded to headquarters within 10 days of receipt of the security clearance application , the fbi was not able to estimate the actual processing time for these preliminary tasks . according to the fbi , the time required to perform the initial steps of the process varies by field office and is dependent on the unique circumstance of each candidate . for example , state and local officials who are located in a law enforcement agency that is distant from the fbi field office may require additional time to schedule tasks that take place at the field office . according to fbi officials , the time frames for completion of these preliminary tasks may also depend on the laws , regulations , policies , and union agreements that may affect the local police agency . the fbi has undertaken various steps to enhance its process for granting security clearances to state and local officials and to facilitate information sharing with state and local law enforcement agencies . since september 11 , the fbi has consulted with state and local officials to collect their views and recommendations regarding information sharing and improving the security clearance process . the fbi identified state and local officials' unfamiliarity with the requirements for processing security clearance applications as one of the main impediments to timely processing of applications . to improve understanding of its policies for granting security clearances , the fbi published an informational brochure for state and local officials and continued to meet with state and local law enforcement organizations . the fbi also developed policy guidance and a checklist of procedures for fbi field office officials , added staff to the headquarters unit responsible for processing state and local security clearance applications , and developed database resources at headquarters to track applications . to promote information sharing between the fbi and state and local law enforcement agencies , in 2002 and 2003 , the fbi increased the number of jttfs and encouraged state and local officials to participate in this and other information - sharing initiatives . in addition , the fbi distributed terrorism - related bulletins to state and local agencies and has made terrorist threat - related information available via various fbi electronic networks . in response to an increased interest in information sharing between the fbi and state and local law enforcement agencies following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , high - level fbi officials met with state and local law enforcement leaders to discuss ways to prevent or respond to terrorist attacks . these discussions included ways to improve information sharing between the fbi and state and local law enforcement agencies , as well as the fbi's requirements and process for granting security clearances . according to fbi officials , representatives of major state and local law enforcement groups continue to meet periodically with the fbi director and other fbi officials .