s corporations . an eligible domestic corporation can avoid double taxation ( once to the shareholders and again to the corporation ) by electing to be treated as an s corporation . annually . return due by the 15th day of the third month following end of corporation's tax year . for example , if tax year is equivalent to calendar year , filing would be due march 15. business can file irs form 7004 to be granted a 6-month extension . partnerships . a partnership is the relationship existing between two or more persons who join to carry on a trade or business . a partnership must file an annual information return to report the income , deductions , gains , losses , etc. , from its operations , but it does not pay income tax . instead , it generally “passes through” any profits or losses to its partners . annually . return and schedule k - 1 information returns ( which report income shares to partners ) due on the 15th day of the 4th month following the close of its tax year . business can file irs form 7004 to be granted a 5-month extension . when a business changes its structure or hires employees , the business is required to notify irs and in some cases may need a new ein . a business is required to notify irs if its structure changes , for example if it restructures as an s corporation , a partnership , or a subsidiary of another company . a subsidiary that elects to have its income , losses , and deductions included in the parent business's consolidated income tax return is not required to file an annual return . a business that ceases to operate is expected to inform irs including by sending a letter and checking a “final return” box on its income tax return . a business is also required to notify irs if it stops paying wages or is a seasonal employer . a business that fails to notify irs of a change affecting its filing requirement risks being identified as a potential nonfiler by irs when it matches its records against returns filed . irs identifies potential business nonfilers primarily using its return delinquency check process . under its new business master file case creation nonfiler identification process ( bmf ccnip ) , irs prioritizes which of these potential business nonfilers will be pursued using information return and historical account data in irs's records on the business entity . once a case has been selected for pursuit , irs mails the taxpayer a notice of delinquency . if irs is not successful in resolving a case through this taxpayer correspondence , the case may proceed to one of irs's collections functions . figure 1 shows irs's process for business nonfiler cases through the notice stage . irs's return delinquency program checks the filing requirement of each business against the returns filed by that business for a given tax period . this process is completed every week for all return types .