we did not test ice controls in place as part of our review . we also interviewed headquarters officials responsible for overseeing ice's enforcement operations to examine controls in place to monitor enforcement activities . when and how do ice officers and attorneys exercise discretion during the alien apprehension and removal process ? what internal controls has ice designed to guide officer decision making to enhance its assurance that the exercise of discretion supports its operational objectives ? what internal controls has ice designed to oversee and monitor officer decision making during the alien apprehension and removal process to enhance ice's assurance that the exercise of discretion supports its operational objectives ? to address these questions , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations as well as applicable policies , memorandums , field operational manuals , and training materials developed by oi , dro , and opla headquarters offices . we also examined available data on alien apprehensions for worksite enforcement and fugitive operations to understand decision outcomes resulting from alien apprehension enforcement operations . what internal controls has ice designed to guide officer decision making to enhance its assurance that the exercise of discretion supports its operational objectives ? what internal controls has ice designed to oversee and monitor officer decision making during the alien apprehension and removal process to enhance ice's assurance that the exercise of discretion supports its operational objectives ? to address these objectives , we obtained and analyzed information at ice's office of investigations ( oi ) , office of detention and removal operations ( dro ) , and the office of the principal legal advisor ( opla ) within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in washington , d.c. we also carried out work at 14 ice field offices — seven oi and seven dro field offices — located in seven cities throughout the united states: chicago , detroit , los angeles , new york , philadelphia , phoenix , and san diego and seven ice chief counsel offices ( which serve as opla's field offices ) at these same locations . we performed procedures to test the data's reliability and we concluded that the data were reliable for the purpose of our review . we also met with officials at oi , dro , and opla in washington , d.c. ; and interviewed ice officers , supervisors , and managers in 14 ice field offices — seven oi and seven dro field offices — located in seven cities throughout the united states: chicago , detroit , los angeles , new york , philadelphia , phoenix , and san diego . in addition , we interviewed ice attorneys , supervisors , and managers in seven chief counsel offices ( which serve as opla's field offices ) at these same locations . we asked both officers and attorneys about when and how they have exercised and are expected to exercise discretion in the course of their duties related to alien removal . we selected these locations considering field office size , ice data on alien apprehensions , and geographic dispersion .