other process improvement initiatives included the following . the oklahoma city air logistics center's initiative for the kc - 135 aircraft cut in half the number of aircraft awaiting scheduled depot maintenance according to center documentation and officials . further , the center reported that this effort reduced the number of flow days from 421 days in fiscal year 2000 to 221 days in fiscal year 2003 with a goal to have it down to 178 days by fiscal year 2005 . this initiative ( 1 ) included the renovation of nine depot maintenance docks and the associated support areas and ( 2 ) implemented the “continuous flow” concept that consists of having as many aspects of the job in one area as possible and arranged so that the work flows from one step to the next without unnecessary movement to create more effective cells of productivity . project officials noted that these changes have enabled the center to become much more efficient and put the needed aircraft back into the warfighter's hands more quickly . in some cases the prices increased by more than 50 percent . the $20 per hour average sales price increase for fiscal year 2003 was intended to make the activity group break even at the end of fiscal year 2003 based on projected losses at the time the decision was made to increase prices . even though sales prices were increased — significantly in some cases as shown in table 4 — the activity group still reported a financial loss at the end of the fiscal year . according to an air force materiel command official , when the estimated price increase was developed they did not consider that some of the revenue from the fiscal year 2003 price increase would be realized in fiscal year 2004 because of work started and / or accepted in fiscal year 2003 that had to be carried over and completed in fiscal year 2004 . further , we found that the amount of the reported loss at the end of fiscal year 2003 was questionable . based on our analysis of the financial data and discussions with activity group officials , the air force's implementation of the new accounting system , difms , resulted in wide swings in the group's reported net operating results during fiscal year 2003 . for example , one air logistics center's net operating results went from a $1 million loss to a $94 million loss over a period of 1 month due to the implementation of difms . another center reported a profit throughout most of fiscal year 2003 , including a reported profit of $137 million at the end of august 2003 . however , the center ended the fiscal year with a reported loss of $17 million — a $154 million shift in 1 month — due to the implementation of the new accounting system . air force officials told us that implementing difms was a major effort and were aware of system implementation problems and were working to resolve them . the air force lacks systematic and effective processes for controlling costs .