iii. ) in addition , both va and dod provided technical comments which we have incorporated as appropriate . the agencies' specific responses to each of our recommendations are as follows: to determine the costs associated with the workarounds required because of delayed it capabilities at the fhcc , dod indicated that it will collaborate with va to determine these costs . va stated the fhcc will convene a workgroup to review these costs and to identify any additional needs associated with it development delays . va suggested changing “workaround” to “impacts and changes to business practices.” we maintain that “workaround” is used appropriately in the context of this report because we use it to describe processes that are temporarily in place for the purpose of mitigating it delays rather than permanent changes to business practices . to what extent have va and dod continued to implement the executive agreement to establish and operate the fhcc ? what plan , if any , do va and dod have to assess the provision of care and operations of the fhcc ? to determine the extent to which va and dod have continued to make progress in establishing and operating the fhcc , we examined the 12 integration areas ( and the provisions within each area ) outlined in the executive agreement and assessed the fhcc's progress in meeting them . specifically , we reviewed va and dod policies pertaining to fhcc operations ; meeting minutes documenting discussions of fhcc , va , and dod officials about patient care and operations ; and financial planning documents , such as the operating plan and budget . for the areas we noted in our prior report as having been implemented , we reexamined these for any changes that might affect their current status . we also reviewed our earlier work , including our first report on implementation progress , and a separate 2011 report specifically examining it capabilities and planning for the fhcc integration.interviewed officials at va , dod , and the fhcc about continued progress in establishing and operating the fhcc . in addition , we to determine what plan , if any , va and dod have to assess the provision of care and operations of the fhcc , we interviewed officials at the fhcc , va , and dod regarding the provision of care and operations , standards used to measure and assess performance , and plans to evaluate and report results . we also reviewed relevant documents that describe the plans for measuring the fhcc's performance in delivering care to patients and for assessing the operations in support of care delivery . in addition , we examined best practices for program evaluation , mainly within federal agencies , including some specific to demonstrations . we conducted this performance audit from november 2011 to june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .