we then aggregated the key challenges . to determine the extent to which fema had adequate controls in place to address these challenges , we compared the agency's efforts to best practices we have identified in the areas of it investment management , human capital management , and strategic planning . for the second objective , we selected three fema it programs to determine the extent to which fema has implemented key management controls . the three programs we reviewed were the disaster assistance improvement program ( daip ) , emergency management mission integrated environment ( emmie ) , and the integrated public alert and warning system ( ipaws ) . in selecting these programs , we relied on the office of management and budget's exhibit 53 and applied selection criteria , including whether the program was associated with objectives of the systems identified in the post - katrina act or had spending in fiscal year 2015 . we then identified key practices in the areas of risk management , requirements management , project planning , and systems integration and testing from the software engineering institute's capability maturity model® integration for acquisition ( cmmi - acq ) and the project management institute's guide to the project management body of knowledge ( pmbok® guide ) . to determine the extent to which each of the three programs had implemented key practices in these areas , we assessed each of the three program's relevant documentation against these criteria . we conducted this performance audit from january 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional details of our scope and methodology are contained in appendix i . our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify challenges associated with ensuring the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) information technology ( it ) systems adequately support the agency's ability to respond to major disasters and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which fema has implemented key it management controls for selected emergency management systems . to address our first objective , we obtained and analyzed fema documentation ( eg , fema's hurricane sandy after - action report ) , prior gao reports , and department of homeland security ( dhs ) inspector general ( ig ) reports . in addition , we interviewed officials from the national advisory council ; the disaster emergency communications division ; regions 2 , 4 , and 6 ; the mobile emergency response center ( thomasville , georgia ) ; and the national processing center ( maryland ) . we selected regions 2 , 4 , and 6 because , according to fema officials , these three regions contained the states that had the 10 most costly natural disasters since 2005 . we also interviewed agency officials from fema's office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) , its office of policy & program analysis , and dhs's ig office to determine challenges associated with its it systems .