gao - 07-406sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . most of the programs had problems in more than one of these categories . these summaries do not address all quality problems experienced on the programs ; rather they emphasize major problems we discussed with officials from the military services , prime contractors , and the defense contract management agency . when possible , we include the direct impact the quality problems had on the program , the corrective actions the prime contractor or dod took to address the problems , and the change in cost estimates and quantities from the start of program development to the present . the cost estimates were taken from dod selected acquisition reports or were program office estimates and include dod's research , development , test and evaluation ( rdt&e ) and procurement expenditures on a particular program . we did not break out the portion of these funds that were paid to prime contractors versus the amount paid to suppliers . in addition , the change in cost estimates can be the result of a number of factors , including the amount paid to fix quality problems , a decision to procure more weapons , and increased labor rates or material prices . michael sullivan ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . the department stated that the recommendation was vague . dod noted that it conducts systems engineering planning prior to entering into a development contract and that prime contractors conduct more detailed systems engineering analysis afterwards . moreover , dod noted that systems engineering is a continuous government - performed activity at the heart of any structured development process that proceeds from concept to production . the concept decision review initiative , in particular , considers fundamental systems engineering issues such as technology and integration and manufacturing risk before the concept decision review . to address dod's concern that our recommendation was too vague , we modified it to add more detail . specifically , as part of the concept decision review initiative , we recommend that contractors that are competing for the systems development contract provide dod more detailed systems engineering requirements analysis to be completed before a systems development contract is awarded . this would help ensure that requirements are clear and reasonable before dod enters into a development contract . we understand that currently dod conducts systems engineering planning prior to entering a development contract with prime contractors and that prime contractors conduct a more thorough systems engineering analysis afterwards . however , because our work has found that many dod systems development efforts have been hampered by poorly defined or poorly understood requirements , we believe that dod should test , through the concept decision initiative , paying contractors to complete a more thorough systems engineering analysis prior to entering into a development contract . this would give the department the benefit of more knowledge when finalizing requirements and provide an opportunity for dod to set requirements that can be met in a well - defined time frame , which could reduce the department's risk exposure in cost reimbursement contracts used for development .