gao - 04-721r . this provision was not approved by dod . since 1994 , three modifications to the eligibility criteria have also been proposed . in 1994 , a proposal was made to allow payment of the family separation allowance for members embarked on board a ship or on temporary duty for 30 consecutive days , whose family members were authorized to accompany the member but voluntarily chose not to do so . the proposal was endorsed by dod and accepted by congress . in 2001 , dod considered but ultimately rejected a similar proposal that would have applied to all members who elect to serve an unaccompanied tour of duty . the third proposal sought to modify the use of family separation allowance for joint military couples ( i.e . one military member married to another military member ) . according to a dod official , while this proposal was not endorsed by dod , congress ultimately passed legislation that clarified the use of family separation allowance for joint military couples . the family separation allowance is now payable to joint military couples , provided the members were residing together immediately before being separated by reason of their military orders . although both may qualify for the allowance , only one monthly allowance may be paid to a joint military couple during a given month . if both members were to receive orders requiring departure on the same day , then payment would be made to the senior member . overall , c - 5 aircrew members and aircrew leadership with whom we met noted that the unpredictability of missions was having more of an adverse impact on crewmembers' quality of life than the compensation they receive as a result of their deployments . for example , several aircrew members at travis air force base indicated that over the past two years , they have been called up on very short advance notice , as little as 12 hours , and sent on missions lasting several weeks , making it difficult to conduct personal business or make plans with their families . according to the aircrew members and both officer and enlisted leadership with whom we met , the unpredictability of their missions is expected to continue for the foreseeable future due to the global war on terrorism . officials informed us that the average number of days by month that aircrew members have been deployed has increased since september 11 , 2001 , with periods of higher activity , or surges . for example , as shown in figure 1 , the average number of days in september 2001 that amc c - 5 co - pilots were deployed was 9 . since then , the average number of days by month that c - 5 co - pilots were deployed has fluctuated between 12 and 19 . prior to september 2001 , available data shows a low monthly average of 5 days in january 2001 . while the average number of days deployed has fluctuated , aircrew members expressed concern about the intermittent suspension of pre - and post - mission crew rest periods that have coincided with increased operations .