the agency did not provide any comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to opm and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in table 4 , we present information about a selection of counties that reflect a range of fehbp attributes , but which are not intended to be a representative sample of all counties . we chose counties with a range of total enrollments , market shares held by different plan offerings ( with different enrollee premiums ) , and number of health maintenance organization ( hmo ) plan offerings . some of the stakeholders we interviewed suggested that any positive effects of expanding the office of personnel management's ( opm ) contracting authority and adding additional plan types to the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) could be limited because of other aspects of the program that affect competition and discourage carrier participation . in particular , stakeholders cited concerns related to: medicare - eligible enrollees , the government contribution formula for fehbp premiums , and fehbp's plan performance assessment system . medicare - eligible enrollees . six of the 11 stakeholders we interviewed suggested that problems associated with medicare - eligible enrollees negatively affect fehbp premiums , and 5 of the 6 noted these problems create an unfair competitive advantage for the nationwide fehbp plans . these stakeholders suggested that because certain older , medicare - eligible fehbp enrollees tend to incur higher health care costs , they drive up premiums . some stakeholders noted that plans — in particular , health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) that offer service in areas with higher concentrations of older enrollees — experience challenges keeping premium rates competitive with the nationwide plans like those offered by the blue cross blue shield association ( bcbsa ) . additionally , 3 stakeholders we interviewed that offer hmo plans pointed specifically to costly retirees who opt not to enroll in in medicare coverage of outpatient services , known as part b , making it difficult for them to compete . fehbp retirees eligible to enroll in medicare are not required to do so , and some maintain only their fehbp coverage instead . while there is no penalty for choosing not to enroll in medicare , retirees who later decide to enroll in part b must pay a penalty . for retirees in fehbp who choose not to enroll in medicare , their fehbp plan remains the primary payer and they continue to receive the same level of coverage through that plan as they did prior to becoming eligible for medicare .