we found that it was unclear why some incidents were referred and enforced and not others . according to an interagency memorandum of understanding regarding the select agent program , cdc and aphis should maintain consistency in the application and enforcement of the select agent and toxin regulations . we found , however , that cdc and aphis did not use the same set of criteria for referring violations for investigation by the hhs office of inspector general or aphis's investigative and enforcement services . moreover , they did not clearly document the bases for referring or not referring violations . in addition , it was unclear why the select agent program took certain administrative actions , such as revoking or suspending an entity's registration to possess select agents or requiring a corrective action plan , in response to some violations and not others . the select agent program recently took some steps to increase consistency in the application and enforcement of the select agent regulations . however , the extent to which these steps will improve the understanding and transparency of the program's enforcement is not yet clear . without consistent criteria and documentation of decisions for referring violations and enforcing regulations related to incidents involving incomplete inactivation , the select agent program will not have reasonable assurance that its regulatory approach to overseeing high - containment laboratories is applied consistently . in our report , we recommended that cdc and aphis develop and implement consistent criteria and documentation requirements for referring violations to investigative entities and enforcing regulations related to incidents involving incomplete inactivation . hhs and usda agreed with this recommendation and described steps they recently took , or are planning to take , to increase consistency in the application and enforcement of the select agent regulations . for example , they said that for the select agent program they have developed a draft document that provides guidance on when to refer violations and options for enforcement actions but they did not provide a time frame for finalizing and implementing the draft document . in conclusion , these inconsistencies , in conjunction with our past work , also raise larger questions about the potential limitations of the select agent program as a whole to effectively and independently oversee high - containment laboratories , both within hhs and across other federal agencies . select agent program officials and an expert from our group noted that the select agent program is independent in its oversight of hhs labs since it organizationally exists in a separate part of the department from the hhs agencies that have high - containment laboratories . however , as we have noted in our prior work , existing federal oversight of high - containment laboratories is fragmented and largely self - policing , raising questions about whether the government framework and oversight are adequate . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in our report . the work upon which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .