blm . according to blm headquarters officials , blm began drafting regulations in 2010 to implement the 1997 act , but did not complete that effort because of insufficient resources and competing priorities . because blm did not issue new regulations , blm is required by law to rely on its regulations issued prior to september 8 , 1995 . blm regulations reflect timber export and substitution laws from the 1970s because blm did not issue regulations implementing the 1990 act because of competing priorities at that time , according to officials . consequently , blm regulations currently in use do not reflect the changes made by the 1997 act . forest service officials said their agency did not seek legislative relief from the requirement to issue new regulations , and blm officials said they have no record that their agency sought legislative relief but could not be certain that the agency had not done so . without issuing new coordinated and consistent regulations as required by the 1997 act , or obtaining legislative relief , the agencies will continue to be out of compliance with this provision of the act . however , the pacific northwest region's procedures call for quarterly surveillance rather than monthly surveillance . the northern region delegates responsibility for surveillance to a national forest in the pacific northwest region . we reviewed surveillance inspection reports from calendar year 2017 and found that , during that year , the pacific southwest region conducted from one to nine inspections of each of the six facilities regional officials identified as exporting logs — less than the monthly surveillance called for by regional and national policy . officials from the pacific northwest region provided us calendar year 2017 surveillance information for one of the region's six facilities that exported logs that year . for that facility , forest service officials conducted surveillance seven times in 2017 , including at least one inspection per quarter , which is in accordance with regional policy but not national policy . officials from both regions said they view the frequency with which they conduct surveillance to be appropriate . for example , officials from the pacific southwest region said that when a port is actively exporting timber , they conduct surveillance at least once per month , as required by policy . officials from the pacific northwest region said they view their frequency of surveillance to be appropriate , since they view the likelihood of export violations to be low and they have competing agency priorities . blm policy does not call for surveillance of log export facilities . however , officials from blm's coos bay district , which has two log export facilities , have conducted surveillance since the 1970s as a way to help detect illegal timber export , according to blm documents and officials . based on our review of 2017 surveillance inspection reports , blm officials inspected one export facility twice and the other facility seven times during that year . figure 3 shows an example of unprocessed logs at one of the export facilities in coos bay , oregon . some officials from both agencies said they may in some cases be unable to conduct surveillance within export facilities because they do not have clear authority to enter these facilities .