pt . also , serious injuries are defined as life - threatening events , events that result in permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure , and events that require medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment or damage . malfunctions are defined as the failure of a device to meet its performance specifications or otherwise not perform as intended . device - related means that the event was or may have been attributable to a medical device , or that a device was , or may have been , a factor in an event including those occurring as a result of device failure , malfunction , improper or inadequate design , poor manufacture , inadequate labeling , or use - related error . a user facility is a hospital , ambulatory surgical facility , nursing home , outpatient diagnostic facility , or outpatient treatment facility that is not a physician's office . serious injuries are defined as life - threatening events , events that result in permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure , and events that require medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment or damage . malfunctions are defined as the failure of a device to meet its performance specifications or otherwise not perform as intended . user facilities are required to file annual reports that summarize their adverse event reports . pt . 803 , subpart c. in addition to maude , fda has other adverse event reporting systems in place to capture adverse events associated with medical devices . one of these is the medical product safety network ( medsun ) system . medsun collects voluntary report information from a limited number of hospitals and user facilities . all reports received through medsun are entered into the maude system . launched in 2002 , the primary goal of medsun is to enable fda to work collaboratively with specific device - user facilities in the clinical community to identify , understand , and solve problems with the use of devices . medsun user facilities are required to report device problems that result in serious illness , injury , or death . medsun user facilities are also encouraged to voluntarily report other types of problems with devices , such as “close - calls,” potential for harm , and other safety concerns . once a problem has been identified , fda works with the medsun user facilities' representatives to clarify and understand the problem . subsequent reports and lessons learned from these collaborations are then shared with the greater clinical community so that all clinicians may take necessary preventative actions to address device problems . currently , 350 user facilities participate in the medsun network . participants are recruited from all regions of the country using the american hospital association membership listing . fda's voluntary adverse event reporting system , medwatch , was created in 1993 to encourage voluntary reporting by interested parties , such as consumers of medical devices , and health care professionals , such as physicians .