reform . renew . : a new transportation approach for america ( proposed ) to better streamline federal requirements , in 2008 , u.s . dot has proposed to ( 1 ) allow state requirements to satisfy “substantially similar” federal requirements , ( 2 ) exempt projects with less than 10 percent federal funding from federal requirements , and ( 3 ) pilot a project for some states to opt out of federal requirements under titles 23 and 49 ( except the davis - bacon prevailing wage requirement ) in exchange for a reduction in the percentage of federal funding they would otherwise receive . the proposal also includes several specific reforms to the nepa process: clarifying what constitutes a reasonable alternative , reducing fhwa documentation requirements by allowing the final environmental impact statements to be combined with the record of decision into one document to simplify the process , and broadening categorical exclusion assignment authority to states . this proposal has not been finalized . this database contains information on streamlining and stewardship practices used by states as ways to efficiently and effectively fulfill their nepa obligations . fhwa officials said that they regularly update the database with state - nominated practices and all are available to the public on the internet . for example , for maryland , fhwa has 30 practices listed , including a workshop to address working relationships between participating agencies in environmental reviews , various copies of programmatic agreements ( described later in this appendix ) , and templates for evaluating categorical exclusions . fhwa officials said that this database provides states with examples and enables states to share practices for streamlining the environmental review process . maryland dot officials said that this database is helpful in that it helps them acquire information more efficiently and that it expands their thinking in the development of their environmental streamlining agreements — which can ultimately reduce project costs and delays . officials at california dot said , however , that it is difficult for them to implement solutions from another state that does not have to comply with as many state environmental laws and regulations as california . other states say that the database has not helped them decrease projects costs or delays . to reduce paperwork burdens described earlier in this report , in 2003 , the department of labor ( dol ) created and fhwa is facilitating this pilot program for selected state dots to submit davis - bacon prevailing wage weekly payroll statements and contractor certifications on the internet . software automatically downloads information from payroll processors and performs diagnostics ( including issuing an alert if an employee rate is incorrect ) . officials from the two participating state dots that we contacted — arizona dot and wisconsin dot — told us that the new process provided automatic electronic approval of payrolls and eliminated the need for staff to manually review payrolls . an arizona dot official told us that it reduced the amount of paperwork and repetitive steps and created consistency for payroll submission across contractors . both state dot officials told us that they have received positive feedback from some contractors .