further information is classified . influential sectarian leaders linked to the security ministries . these actions have reportedly led to the arrest and detention of several military officials . according to u.s. officials , this tactic is primarily used against sunni ministry of defense officials and does not occur at the predominantly shi'a ministry of interior . the u.s. government also reported that some sunni politicians have made unsubstantiated claims against isf officials . moreover , iraqi government support for the isf has been uneven . some members of the council of ministers and council of representatives have publicly supported isf leaders while behind the scenes they continue to ignore sectarian activities , according to the u.s. government . ppendix xix: origin of iraqi benchmarks appendix xix: origin of iraqi benchmarks iraq's policy committee on national security agreed upon a set of political , security , and economic benchmarks and an associated timeline in september 2006 . these were reaffirmed by the presidency council on october 16 , 2006 . in december 2006 , mnf - i and the government of iraq agreed to establish joint security stations . forming contittionl review committee nd then completing the contittionl review . encting nd implementing legition on de - ba'athifiction . encting nd implementing legition to ensure the equitable ditribution of hydrocon rerce of the people of iraq withot regrd to the ect or ethnicity of recipient , nd encting nd implementing legition to ensure tht the energy rerce of iraq enefit sunni arabs , shi arabs , krd , nd other iraqi citizen in n equitable mnner . encting nd implementing legition on procedre to form emi - autonomous region . encting nd implementing legition eablihing n independent high electorl commission , provincil electionw , provincil concil authoritie , nd te for provincil election . encting nd implementing legition ddressing mnety . encting nd implementing legition eablihing trong militi disarmment progrm to ensure thsuch ecrity force re ccontable only to the centrl government nd loyl to the contittion of iraq . eablihing supporting politicl , medi , economic , nd ervice committee in support of the bghdecrity pln . providing three trined nd redy iraqrigde to support bghdd opertion . providing iraqi commnder with ll authoritie to execte thi plnd to mke tcticnd opertionl deciion , in consulttion with u.s. commnder , withot politicl intervention , to inclde the authority to psull extremi , inclding sunni insurgent nd shiite militias . ensuring tht the iraqsecrity force re providing even - hnded enforcement of the lw . ensuring tht , ccording to preident bush , prime miniter mliki said ‘‘the bghdecrity pln will not provide safe hven for ny otl , regrdless of ectrin or politicffilition.'' redcing the level of ectrin violence in iraq nd eliminting militi control of locecrity . eablihing ll of the plnned joint ecrity tion in neighorhood cross bghdd . increasing the ner of iraqecrity forces' nitable of operting independently . power of the presidency . the deputy chairman of the crc , a member of the sunni bloc , believes that the presidency should have greater power . the constitution gives the presidency such powers as accrediting ambassadors . it also gives the presidency council the power to approve or disapprove legislation in the current electoral term .