( see fig . on average , for plans that provided detailed cost estimates , the projected dollar amounts of the common additional benefits ranged from a low of $0.11 pmpm for international outpatient emergency services to $4 pmpm for dental services . additional benefits commonly offered included dental services , health education services , and hearing services . about 41 percent of beneficiaries , or 2.3 million people , were enrolled in an ma plan that also charged additional premiums to pay for additional benefits , reduced cost sharing , or a combination of the two . the average additional premium charged was $58 pmpm . based on plans' projections , we estimated that about 77 percent of the additional benefits and reduction in beneficiary cost sharing was funded by rebates , with the remainder being funded by additional beneficiary premiums . for 2007 , ma plans projected that ma beneficiary cost sharing , funded by both rebates and additional premiums , would be 42 percent of estimated cost sharing in medicare ffs . plans projected that their beneficiaries , on average , would pay $49 pmpm in cost sharing , and they estimated that the medicare ffs equivalent cost sharing for their beneficiaries was $116 pmpm . although plans projected that beneficiaries' overall cost sharing was lower , on average , than medicare ffs cost - sharing estimates , some ma plans projected that cost sharing for certain categories of services was higher than medicare ffs cost - sharing estimates . this is because overall cost sharing in ma plans is required to be actuarially equivalent or lower compared to overall cost sharing in medicare ffs , but may be higher or lower for specific categories of services . for example , 19 percent of ma beneficiaries were enrolled in plans that projected higher cost sharing for home health services , on average , than in medicare ffs , which does not require any cost sharing for home health services . similarly , 16 percent of ma beneficiaries were in plans with higher projected cost sharing for inpatient services relative to medicare ffs . ( see table 1. ) some ma beneficiaries who frequently used these services with higher cost sharing than medicare ffs could have had overall cost sharing that was higher than what they would pay under medicare ffs . cost sharing for particular categories of services varied substantially among ma plans . for example , with regards to inpatient cost sharing , more than half a million beneficiaries were in ma plans that had no cost sharing at all . in contrast , a similar number of beneficiaries were in ma plans that required cost sharing that could result in $2,000 or more for a 10-day hospital stay and $3,000 or more for three average - length hospital stays . in medicare ffs in 2007 , beneficiaries paid a $992 deductible for the first hospital stay in a benefit period , no deductible for subsequent hospital stays in the same benefit period , and a 20 percent coinsurance for physician services that averaged $73 per day for the first 4 days of a hospital stay and $58 per day for subsequent days in the stay .