gao - 17-331 . washington , d.c.: february 16 , 2017 . border security: additional actions needed to strengthen collection of unmanned aerial systems and aerostats data . gao - 17-152 . washington , d.c.: february 16 , 2017 . these actions met the intent of our recommendation . dhs also concurred with our second recommendation , and as of september 2016 has taken some action to assess its technology assist data and other measures to determine contributions of surveillance technologies to its mission . however , until border patrol completes its efforts to fully develop and apply key attributes for performance metrics for all technologies to be deployed under the arizona border surveillance technology plan , it will not be well positioned to fully assess its progress in determining when mission benefits have been fully realized . chairwoman mcsally , ranking member vela , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact rebecca gambler at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement included kirk kiester ( assistant director ) , as well as stephanie heiken , david lutter , sasan “jon” najmi , and carl potenzieri . southwest border security: additional actions needed to better assess fencing's contributions to operations and provide guidance for identifying capability gaps . border patrol: actions needed to improve oversight of post - apprehension consequences . gao - 17-66 . washington , d.c.: january 12 , 2017 . border security: dhs surveillance technology unmanned aerial systems and other assets . gao - 16-671t . washington , d.c.: may 24 , 2016 . southwest border security: additional actions needed to assess resource deployment and progress . gao - 16-465t . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2016 . more detailed information about our scope and methodology can be found in our reports and testimonies . we conducted all of this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dhs and its components have used various mechanisms over time to coordinate border security operations . in september 2013 , we reported that the overlap in geographic and operational boundaries among dhs components underscored the importance of collaboration and coordination among these components . to help address this issue and mitigate operational inflexibility , dhs components , including those with border security - related missions such as cbp , coast guard , and ice , employed a variety of collaborative mechanisms to coordinate their missions and share information . these mechanisms had both similarities and differences in how they were structured and on which missions or threats they focused , among other things , but they all had the overarching goal of increasing mission effectiveness and efficiencies .