states . in 2007 , becc began efforts to identify the water and wastewater infrastructure needs within the 62-mile region north of the u.s. - me xico border . the study is expected to compare the number of existing water and wastewater connections with the total number of homes and is expected to identify gaps in access to centralized services . according becc officials , data collection and analysis were completed for new mexico in the first quarter of 2009 and are currently being conducted f texas , california , and arizona . instead , hud officials told us that it is up to the states to determine the needs - based gran t priorities and the agency does not believe it has the authority to direct states on how to distribute the funds as long as it is in accordance with a distribution plan . we believe that without direction and oversight from that gives priority to colonias hud , states may not be meeting the statutory requirements . for example , one state does not distinguish between colonia set - aside funds and cdbg funds and does not actually “set aside” the colonias funds to distribute based on priority of needs . instead , the state splits the available funds among the regional councils of governments , which then determine how to distribute the funds to local projects . the distribution proces vary by region — eg , one region rotates eligibility among the eligible entities in the county , providing each eligible entity an equal distribution of the funds . the state later adds up the total of the projects that it considers qualifying as colonias to justify the set - aside amount . while hud officials may believe states are identifying the colonias with the greatest needs , w do not agree that this complies with the act , which requires the agency to take the necessary steps to ensure that the states are doing so . submission of application . after the pre - application discussion , the entity seeking assistance prepares an application that can include information such as financial , engineering , and environmental studies that describe the project plan and its costs . some agencies require additional documentation , such as evidence of public support for the project and documentation that the entity cannot obtain commercial credit at a reasonable rate . review and evaluation of application . once an agency receives an application , officials review it for eligibility . after the agency determines that an application meets program eligibility requirements , it may be further evaluated , depending on whether the assistance being requested is from a competitive or a noncompetitive program . for competitive programs , agencies generally score each application according to established criteria and then rank the applications so that the projects with the highest scores will receive priority for available funds . for noncompetitive programs , agencies will generally obligate funding as applications are deemed eligible until all available funds are depleted . we found that seven federal agencies obligated at least $1.4 billion for drinking water and wastewater projects in the u.s. - mexico border region from fiscal years 2000 through 2008 .