pub . 108-458 , § 1016 ( b ) ( 2 ) , 118 stat . 3638 , 3664-70 ( 2004 ) ( codified as amended at 6 u.s.c . regarding contributions to homeland security , we analyzed fusion center performance measures and assessed them against criteria that gao developed in connection with work related to the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) . we also interviewed slpo officials regarding the development and definitions of these measures . further , we interviewed other federal stakeholders — including headquarters program officials and field personnel from i&a , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) — to determine the extent to which these agencies have developed expectations for fusion centers and assessed how centers help support the agencies' homeland security missions . we selected these agencies because they had the most personnel deployed to fusion centers during fiscal year 2013 . the fusion center federal cost inventory provides the office of management and budget and the program manager of the ise with an inventory of all federal funding that agencies report was expended and the personnel deployed that are dedicated to support the national network of fusion centers . ice , and the fbi , as well as federal personnel deployed to the 10 fusion centers we visited to ( 1 ) identify the range of activities personnel performed ; ( 2 ) assess the extent to which agencies defined personnel's roles , responsibilities , and expectations ; and ( 3 ) determine what , if any , performance criteria existed to hold deployed personnel accountable for expected results . we also interviewed directors and other fusion center officials at the 10 locations to obtain their views on federal support to the centers . to address the fourth objective , we analyzed federal emergency management administration ( fema ) guidance related to the homeland security grant program ( hsgp ) to identify reforms that are intended to improve accountability for federal funds that support fusion centers . we also reviewed grant requests for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 from the 10 centers we visited , and data provided by fema on the amount of dhs grant funding provided to support fusion centers in fiscal years 2011 and 2012 . we determined that fema data on the amount of federal funding provided to fusion centers was unreliable , a conclusion we discuss later in this report . we interviewed fusion center directors and fema grant management officials to discuss the hsgp and related processes — including fema's recent changes to grant requirements — and determine how fusion centers utilized annual center assessments to identify and prioritize grant projects . we also interviewed fema officials to determine the steps they take to monitor the reliability of data reported by grantees and compared these steps with related controls outlined in standards for internal control in the federal government . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 through october 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .