the database server is the same as that for enforce . ident uses ins's wan as its primary telecommunications network . in addition , similar to enforce , the ident application workstations on each ins lan connect to eid over the ins wan through routers . in addition , each lan has a server for connectivity between workstations and peripherals . information is passed around the lan by ethernet switches ( at new sites ) and hubs ( at old sites ) . all external connections ( including to other government agencies , private contractors , and local law enforcement offices ) are controlled through firewalls that prevent unauthorized access to or from the network . the integrated card production system ( icps ) consists of two main components: icps print services and the national production server ( nps ) . this system produces and prints three types of benefit cards: the optical permanent resident card , the employment authorization document , and the optical laser visa / border crossing card . depending on the card type , icps card production requests originate either at one of the five ins service centers in the united states or at the department of state's consular affairs office . the requests are first processed through either of two card production request systems: the ins's computer - linked application information management system 3 ( claims 3 ) system , which processes permanent resident cards and employment authorization documents , or the department of state's consular affairs system ( dosbcc ) ,which processes laser visas / border crossing cards . nps then routes card production requests to any of six printer devices at three ins sites . ( nps also tracks card orders between the card production request systems and the printer devices. ) the gateway databases are connected to each other in a star configuration via database links across the ins wan , allowing every database to communicate with every other database . this provides a path for card transfer in the event of a failure of the central nps system . the icps results processor extracts card production information from its local gateway database and updates the claims 3 biographic server . similarly , the bcc utilities program does the same for the dosbcc database . when the results come back into the database , the nps sends the card production results to the appropriate gateway database ( service center or dosbcc ) . below is a brief description of each system . appendix ii describes the technical architectures for the enforcement case tracking system , the automated biometric identification system , and the integrated card production system ( we do not include the architecture for the automated i - 94 system because it has recently been retired ) . the i - 94 is the paper form that ins uses to capture nonimmigrant data at air , land , or sea ports of entry . to this end , it has initiatives planned that , if properly implemented , will go a long way to strengthen its oversight practices . a key to success in doing so will be for justice leadership to treat it investment oversight as a management priority and allocate sufficient resources to its performance .