to date , epa has not approved this proposal . diversifying environmental tools and approaches . fostering a more innovative culture and organizational system at epa and states . among other things , the strategy emphasizes fostering an organizational culture at epa that is more friendly to innovative approaches . following up on epa reinvention activities of the last 10 years , it states that epa should integrate support for innovation into its planning , budgeting , and organizational systems . it also notes that a more innovative culture will require epa staff to view their jobs more broadly ; that is , not just as overseers of ongoing operations , but as problem solvers , partners , and facilitators . it also proposes to hold senior managers accountable for supporting innovative approaches and increasing their responsibilities for scaling up successful innovations . according to epa officials , the process of diffusion and broader application of successful innovations may lead to gradual revision of existing regulations that may be inhibiting better ways of achieving environmental goals . the details of both epa initiatives still need to be fleshed out and a number of issues resolved . for example , some state officials have questioned the focus of the draft strategy on innovating for environmental results on four priority issues ( greenhouse gases , smog , water quality , and water infrastructure ) , fearing that this focus downplays other issues of greater importance to individual states or localities . according to epa , states will play a role in refining the draft strategy as it undergoes further development . how these and other issues are resolved will determine the ultimate impact these efforts have on epa's reinvention efforts in general and on its efforts to collaborate with states on innovative environmental proposals in particular . while states face a variety of obstacles when seeking to promote innovative approaches to environmental protection , we found their most significant obstacles to be at the federal level . of these federal obstacles , the detailed requirements of prescriptive federal environmental regulations were cited as among the most significant , along with a cultural resistance among many epa staff toward alternative approaches . in some cases , however , the underlying cause of this cultural resistance was traced back to the regulations . specifically , many epa staff believe that strict interpretations must be applied to detailed regulations if they are to be legally defensible . the identification by state officials of prescriptive federal regulations as a key obstacle to innovation is consistent with the findings of numerous research organizations that have cited the need for environmental regulations to focus more on the desired environmental results and , where possible , to be less prescriptive concerning the specific means of achieving these results . it is also consistent with epa's recent adoption of the recommendations of its own task force on improving epa regulations which advocates , among other things , that innovative alternatives should be considered as new regulations are developed . it remains to be seen if implementation of the epa recommendations will have the desired effect in reforming the regulations development process to better accommodate innovative proposals .