categorical exclusion determination . under a categorical exclusion , an undertaking may be excluded from a detailed environmental review if it meets certain criteria and a federal agency has previously determined that the undertaking will have no significant environmental impact . environmental assessment / finding of no significant impact ( ea / fonsi ) . a federal agency prepares a written environmental assessment ( ea ) to determine whether or not a federal undertaking would significantly affect the environment . if the answer is no , the agency issues a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) . environmental impact statement ( eis ) . if the agency determines while preparing the ea that the environmental consequences of a proposed federal undertaking may be significant , an eis is prepared . an eis is a more detailed evaluation of the proposed action and alternatives . the more extensive the analysis required , the longer the process can take . a full eis can take several years to complete . eas and categorical exclusions , by contrast , take less time and resources to complete . because nepa does not allow consideration of the net impact of an action such as the introduction of new procedures or broader airspace redesign — which may increase noise in some areas but increase capacity at an airport and reduce noise and emissions overall — these actions can often result in extensive and time - consuming reviews . faa is exploring situations in which it might be more appropriate to use a categorical exclusion or an ea instead of an eis . the 2009 faa reauthorization legislation includes language that may expedite the environmental review process . for example , the legislative proposal would allow airport operators to use grant funds for environmental reviews of proposals to implement flight procedures . the proposal would also allow project sponsors to provide faa with funds to hire additional staff as necessary to expedite completion of the environmental review necessary to implement flight procedures . according to stakeholders and task force members , and as we have previously reported , faa faces organizational and cultural challenges in implementing nextgen operational capabilities . faa has traditionally developed and acquired new systems through its acquisition process . however , most nextgen technologies and capabilities , such as automatic dependent surveillance broadcast ( ads - b ) , rely on components in the aircraft , on the ground , and in space for their use . they also require controllers and pilots to be trained and flight procedures to be developed in order to maximize their benefits . different offices within faa — including its aircraft certification service , flight standards service , and air traffic organization ( ato ) , among others — are responsible for ensuring the completion of all the activities required to maximize the use of a technology or capability . while faa has recently made organizational changes to address integration issues , several stakeholders told us , and our previous and ongoing work suggests , that faa's structure and culture continues to hamper its ability to ensure that all the actions necessary to maximize use of a technology or capability in the national airspace system are completed efficiently .