assistance . although some districts were first required to offer ses in 2002-2003 , although some districts were first required to offer ses in 2002-2003 , others did not have to offer ses until 2003-2004 or the year after , and others did not have to offer ses until 2003-2004 or the year after , and therefore , states and districts are at different stages of implementing the therefore , states and districts are at different stages of implementing the ses provisions . further , research suggests that many face challenges to increasing student participation , working with providers to ensure students receive quality services , and monitoring and evaluating these services . in response to congressional interest in these and other issues related to early implementation of ses , and in anticipation of reauthorization of the esea , we agreed to answer the following questions: ( 1 ) how has ses participation changed between school years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 , and what actions have been taken to increase participation ? ( 2 ) how are providers working with districts and schools to provide services that increase student achievement ? to ensure that we obtained information from the largest districts with schools required to offer ses , we included all 21 districts with 100,000 or more enrolled students in our sample . in designing our surveys , we reviewed survey questions used by education . the district and state surveys were both administered between january and march 2006 . seventy - seven percent of district ses coordinators , including all coordinators from districts with 100,000 or more enrolled students , and all state ses coordinators responded to the surveys . all percentage estimates presented from the district survey have margins of error of plus or minus 8 percentage points , unless otherwise noted . while we did not validate specific information that states and districts reported through our surveys , we reviewed the information to determine that their responses were complete and reasonable and found the information to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to gather federal - level information on ses implementation , we interviewed education officials and analyzed education's data on ses available from state reports and ongoing studies . to collect additional information from states and districts , as well as information from schools and providers , we conducted site visits to four school districts that had experience with ses implementation ( woodburn , ore. ; newark , n.j. ; chicago , ill. ; and hamilton county , tenn. ) . during the visits , we spoke with state and district officials , as well as officials from a total of 12 schools and 15 providers . when viewed as a group , the site visit districts provided variation across characteristics such as geographic location , district size , student ethnicity , and the percentage of students with limited english proficiency or disabilities . in addition to the 15 providers we spoke with during the site visits , we also interviewed 7 for - profit ses providers operating in multiple states , for a total of 22 providers .