naval reserve . u.s. marine corps reserve , quantico , virginia . we reviewed relevant reports from the dod office of the inspector general and the u.s. army audit agency and our prior gao reports and testimony . we discussed with an official from the congressional budget office the estimated cost of a pay differential for federal employees who are called to active duty . we did not verify the methodology used to calculate this estimate . we analyzed current compensation and benefits policies for activated federal employees from the office of personnel management . further , we surveyed officials from 22 states between may and july 2003 and obtained their compensation and benefits policies to gain the perspective of state governments' financial assistance and benefits for state employee reservists called to federal active duty . to determine the 22 states , we chose the 11 states with the highest total population of reservists in the state , the 5 states with the smallest total reservist population , and 6 states in the middle . we obtained a standard set of information regarding each state's policy . we also updated information on employer compensation policies from our june 2002 report on employer support of the national guard and the reserve . we had surveyed 359 employers of reservists in high tempo units between november 2001 and march 2002 . due to concerns about mail contaminated with anthrax , not all completed surveys were obtained before issuance of the employer support report . we updated the data with an additional 72 surveys for a total of 183 completed surveys . employers were not randomly selected ; therefore , the results are not projectable to all employers . we also reviewed data from the defense manpower data center regarding army reserve medical corps authorized and actual fill rates for critical medical specialties and gains and losses from the army selected reserve and the army individual ready reserve from 1991 to 2002 to review an army proposal for special deployment pay . we reviewed dod surveys on army reserve physicians' experiences during mobilizations , on a rotation program to address earlier concerns about the length of deployments , and on associated catastrophic income loss . we also contacted military aid associations , including the army emergency relief , the navy - marine corps relief society , and the air force aid society , to obtain and review information on emergency loans and financial assistance provided to activated reservists on active duty . to evaluate reserve families' readiness and awareness and use of family support programs , we reviewed dod family policy regulations . we also reviewed dod web sites and other materials designed to inform servicemembers and their families about benefits . to obtain further insight into reservists' awareness and access to family support programs , we reviewed service personal financial management regulations and policies to determine the extent to which these programs are extended to reservists and their family members . to evaluate the financial well - being of reservists , we reviewed rand and other dod studies . we also compared the results of the 2000 dod survey with the 1999 dod survey of active duty personnel .