transfer rate . transfers from one csr to another occurred for no more than 20 percent of calls in each of the 13 months of data we analyzed , meeting the contractually required performance standard . while cms officials said that they expect some transfers to occur normally , they also said a monthly transfer rate that exceeds 20 percent may imply that csrs are inappropriately transferring callers . csrs transferred nearly 13 percent of calls in july 2007 , but the transfer rate increased to just under 20 percent by october 2007 . since october 2007 , the transfer rate has generally decreased , with the lowest percentage of transferred calls of the 10 months we studied occurring in june 2008 . ( see fig . csrs can transfer calls to other csrs for various reasons , including transferring a call from a tier 1 csr to a tier 2 csr if the complexity of a caller's inquiry requires a greater degree of training . according to cms officials , most transfers occur between tier 1 and tier 2 csrs , although transfers can also occur between two tier 1 csrs . for example , a caller may have a general medicare inquiry answered initially by a tier 1 csr , but then raise a claims - related inquiry that may be better answered by another tier 1 csr with additional training . in addition to the three required performance metrics , cms also established several performance indicators and associated targets for the 1-800-medicare contractor to meet in order to receive a portion of its award fee . three of the indicators are particularly related to callers' telephone access: ( 1 ) the average amount of time csrs spend assisting callers , referred to as average handle time ; ( 2 ) agent occupancy — the percentage of csrs answering calls ; and ( 3 ) forecasting of call volume going to csrs . ( see table 3 for more information on these selected performance indicators. ) the 1-800-medicare contractor met its performance target in each of the 13 months between july 2007 through july 2008 for one performance indicator — agent occupancy — but had varying experience in meeting its targets for the average handle time and csr call volume forecasting . for agent occupancy , the 1-800-medicare contractor met its performance target — to have 80 percent or more of its csrs answering calls — in each of the 13 months of data we analyzed . during these 13 months , the 1-800-medicare contractor's agent occupancy ranged from 83 percent to 89 percent . for average handle time , the 1-800-medicare contractor did not meet its performance target — most recently set at 8 minutes — in any of the 13 months analyzed . average handle time peaked in december 2007 at 11 minutes , 18 seconds and then decreased each month , reaching an average handle time of 8 minutes , 59 seconds in july 2008 . cms officials said that , because there are many factors that could affect call length , they consider average handle time in conjunction with other metrics and indicators to determine if the contractor is managing csrs' time effectively .