gao - 08-774 . washington d.c.: july 16 , 2008 . private pensions: gao survey of 401 ( k ) plan sponsor practices ( gao - 08-870sp , july 2008 ) , an e - supplement to gao - 08-774 . gao - 08-870sp . washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2008 . private pensions: low defined contribution plan savings may pose challenges to retirement security , especially for many low - income workers . gao - 08-8 . washington , d.c.: november 29 , 2007 . some small employers are hesitant to sponsor retirement plans because of concerns about cost . in addition , dc participation rates for the u.s. workforce may be low because some employers sponsor a db plan rather than a dc plan . when companies do sponsor employer plans , some workers may not be eligible to participate in their employers' plan because they have not met the plan's minimum participation requirements . in addition , workers may choose not to enroll , or delay enrolling , in a retirement plan for a number of reasons . for example , we found that approximately 15 percent of 401 ( k ) participants between the ages of 15 and 60 initiated at least one form of leakage in 1998 , 2003 , and 2006 , with loans being the most popular type of leakage in all 3 years . we also found that cashouts made when a worker changed jobs , at any age , resulted in the largest amounts of leakage and the greatest proportional loss in retirement savings . further , we reported that while most firms informed participants about the short - term costs of leakage , few informed them about the long - term costs . as we reported in august of 2009 , experts identified three legal requirements that had likely reduced the overall incidence and amounts of leakage , and another provision that may have exacerbated the long - term effects of leakage . specifically , experts noted that the requirements imposing a 10 percent tax penalty on most withdrawals taken before age 59½ , requiring participants to exhaust their plan's loan provisions before taking a hardship withdrawal and requiring plan sponsors to preserve the tax - deferred status of accounts with balances of more than $1,000 at job separation all helped reduce 401 ( k ) leakage . however , experts also noted that the requirement for a 6-month suspension of all contributions to an account following a hardship withdrawal exacerbated the effects of leakage . given trends in coverage since the 1980s , older workers close to retirement age were more likely than younger ones to have accrued retirement benefits in a db plan . in addition , older workers who rely on dc plans for retirement income may also not have time to substantially increase their total savings without extending their working careers , perhaps for several years . further , the value of the income tax deferral on contributions is smaller for lower - income workers than for similarly situated higher - income workers , making participation less appealing for lower - income workers .