query hipdb . complete an employment checklist , which va officials are to use to document the completion of va screening requirements for those practitioners va intends to hire . verify the status of state licenses and national certificates . we selected four of va's credentialing requirements for review because they are requirements that — unlike other credentialing requirements — address information about physicians that can change or be updated with new information periodically . verify that all state medical licenses held by physicians are valid . query the federation of state medical boards database to determine whether physicians had disciplinary action taken against any of their licenses , including expired licenses . verify information provided by physicians on their involvement in medical malpractice claims at va or non - va facilities . query the national practitioner data bank to determine whether a physician was reported to this data bank because of involvement in va or non - va paid medical malpractice claims , display of professional incompetence , or engagement in professional misconduct . we selected four privileging requirements that va identifies as general privileging requirements . in addition to the four general privileging requirements , we selected another privileging requirement because of its importance in the renewal of clinical privileges because it provides clinical service chiefs with information on the quality of care delivered by individual physicians . verify that all state medical licenses held by physicians are valid . verify physicians' training and experience . assess physicians' clinical competence and health status . these recommendations should be fully implemented . we are also concerned that compliance with employment screening requirements for practitioners , including physicians , nurses , and pharmacists , among others , continues to be poor at the facilities we visited . continuing gaps in va's employment screening requirements and mixed compliance with these requirements continue to place veterans at risk . the other report that we are releasing today demonstrates that medical facilities we reviewed largely complied with va's physician credentialing and privileging requirements . however , we identified problems with the appropriate use of physician performance information in the privileging process and the timely submission of medical malpractice information to va's office of medical - legal affairs . additionally , va's lack of internal controls for its facilities to ensure the accuracy of physician privileging information raises concerns that va is at risk for allowing physicians to practice with expired clinical privileges . our reports include the following four recommendations that va should implement to help ensure patient safety: expand the human resource management oversight program to include a review of va facilities' compliance with employment screening requirements for all types of practitioners , provide guidance to medical facilities on how to collect individual physician performance information in accordance with va's credentialing and privileging requirements to use in medical facilities' privileging processes , enforce the requirement that medical facilities submit information on paid va medical malpractice claims to va's office of medical - legal affairs within 60 days after being notified that the claim is paid , and instruct medical facilities to establish internal controls to ensure the accuracy of their physician privileging information . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks .