reconstruction projects in 2004 . from the deposed regime . of the funding available for the reconstruction effort , about $24 billion had been obligated as of the end of april 2004 . of this amount , about $13 billion came from the development fund for iraq and about $8 billion from u.s. appropriated funds . what effect does the transfer of authority to the iraqis have on the u.s. agencies' ability to monitor and audit the reconstruction investment made with these funds ? about $4 billion of the $4.5 billion in u.s. funds appropriated in 2003 and about $4.2 billion of the $19.6 billion in u.s. funds appropriated in 2004 have been obligated . the remaining $2.5 billion in obligated funds came from vested and seized assets . obligations to date have primarily been applied to the operating expenses of the iraqi ministries ; restoration of essential services such as oil , water , and power ; and humanitarian and human services , including the procurement of food and liquid petroleum gas for domestic consumption . figure i.1: total funds available , obligated , and disbursed for iraq reconstruction by source , as of april 2004 of the $13.6 billion pledged , donors have committed about $1 billion to the international reconstruction fund facility for iraq . “vested assets” refers to former iraqi regime assets held in u.s. financial institutions that the president confiscated in march 2003 and vested in the u.s. treasury . the united states froze these assets shortly before the first gulf war . the u.s.a. patriot act of 2001 amended the international emergency economic powers act to empower the president to confiscate , or take ownership of , certain property of designated entities , including these assets , and vest ownership in an agency or individual . an iraqi - led process , endorsed by the iraqi governing council and put into effect by the administrator of the coalition provisional authority , is responsible for coordinating all international assistance for rebuilding and reforming institutions in iraq . however , this process has not had the capability to track the total amounts of bilateral assistance flowing into iraq . the ability to track all international contributions made to support iraq's reconstruction , including bilateral assistance , is an important element for identifying the sectors receiving assistance , identifying any gaps in assistance , and ensuring that assistance is coordinated . as of may 26 , 2004 , the european commission and 18 donor countries had committed the world bank and the u.n. development program administer the irffi in coordination with international donors and iraqi authorities . the donor committee , with members from 14 countries and the european commission , is to oversee the activities of the irffi and endorse its priorities . at a february 2004 international donors meeting held in abu dhabi , participants focused on irffi's operation and funding . specifically , information was shared with donors on iraq's reconstruction plans and project priorities , u.s. assistance spending plans , and the irffi's preferred spending and project plans . table ii.2 presents a summary of the donors' commitments and deposits made to the irffi as of may 26 , 2004 .