investigations . in addition to standard surveys , state survey agencies are required by federal law to investigate ( 1 ) complaints submitted by residents , family members , friends , physicians , and nursing home staff ; and ( 2 ) “facility - reported incidents,” including incidents involving abuse of residents , that are self - reported by the nursing homes . state survey agencies review the information provided through these complaints and incidents and determine if an on - site investigation is required . during this unannounced investigation , the state surveyors assess available evidence to determine whether the allegation can be substantiated . these investigations offer the state survey agency the opportunity to identify and correct care problems in a more timely manner than through the standard surveys . if a surveyor determines that a nursing home violated a federal standard during a survey or investigation , then a deficiency code specific to that standard is cited . this trend for the abuse deficiencies is in contrast to the trend for all deficiencies , which decreased about 1 percent between 2013 and 2017 . at the state level , 32 states had more abuse deficiencies cited in 2017 than 2013 , six states had a consistent number , and the remaining 13 had fewer . ( see app . iii for additional data on abuse deficiencies by state. ) furthermore , abuse deficiencies cited in 2017 were more likely to be categorized at the highest levels of severity — deficiencies causing actual harm to residents or putting residents in immediate jeopardy — than they were in 2013 . specifically , 42.6 percent of the 875 abuse deficiencies were categorized as causing actual harm or posing immediate jeopardy to residents in 2017 , compared to 31.9 percent of the 430 abuse deficiencies in 2013 . ( see fig . in examining the types of survey or investigations conducted to identify abuse deficiencies , we found that , from 2013 to 2017 , the majority ( about two - thirds in each year ) were identified through either a complaint investigation or facility - reported incident investigation . in contrast , for all types of deficiencies , we found the inverse — the vast majority were identified through a standard survey . this demonstrates the unique and significant role that complaint and facility - reported incident investigations have in identifying abuse deficiencies , because they allow for the identification and correction of abuse in a more timely manner than a standard survey . in fact , for the deficiencies for which we were able to identify the source , the percentage of abuse deficiencies identified through facility - reported incident investigations increased from 42.3 percent of the 430 abuse deficiencies in 2013 to 47.4 percent of the 875 abuse deficiencies in 2017 . conversely , for all types of deficiencies , a very small percentage resulted from facility - reported incident investigations — about 5 percent or less each year . ( see fig . we found that enforcement actions — or penalties — were imposed and implemented by cms infrequently each year in response to abuse deficiencies , and that fines were the most common type of implemented penalty .