accordingly , we removed this recommendation . our scope and methodology for responding to our three objectives , presented earlier in the report , and carrying out related work is described in the next sections . to determine whether the office of regulations and rulings ( or&r ) headquarters improved its response time for issuing prospective rulings on the classification , valuation , and marking of imported goods since our september 2000 report , we reviewed hard - copy files for a sample of 325 headquarters cases . or&r had categorized these cases as prospective rulings involving requests for the classification , valuation , and marking of imported goods , and they were closed from february 1 , 2002 , through october 31 , 2002 . we attempted to review a random sample of 344 case files , representing 387 cases categorized in or&r's legal case inventory system ( lcis ) database as prospective rulings , but or&r staff could not locate 19 of the files . we grouped the cases into three categories: those cases that were assigned to or&r attorneys for processing before february 1 , 2002 ; cases assigned from february 1 , 2002 , through june 30 , 2002 ; and cases assigned from july 1 , 2002 , through october 31 , 2002 ; with all cases in each of the three categories closed from february 1 , 2002 , through october 31 , 2002 . such cases have different codes to be entered into lcis . separately , we found that or&r had not issued rulings for an additional 44 of the remaining 281 prospective ruling request cases . the cases originated with letters requesting rulings , but or&r administratively closed 31 of the cases and issued information letters for the other 13 cases . what actions did or&r headquarters take to improve the timeliness of its prospective rulings and to eliminate its backlog of ruling request cases ? did or&r resolve the data reliability challenges it faced with its legal case inventory system , the automated database used to monitor and track the timeliness of prospective rulings ? to address these questions , we reviewed files for a sample of 325 cases , from a random sample of 344 cases , categorized as prospective rulings that were closed by or&r headquarters from february 1 , 2002 , through october 31 , 2002 , covering the classification , valuation , and marking of imported goods . we interviewed or&r management officials and reviewed and collected other pertinent information , such as procedures established to ensure the consistent recording of data on ruling cases in the legal case inventory system ( lcis ) . we also interviewed the chair of coac's subcommittee on or&r , representatives of the american bar association customs law committee and five selected trade associations ( eg , american association of exporters and importers ) identified as being knowledgeable about or&r headquarters prospective rulings , and selected importer representatives . appendix i discusses our scope and methodology in greater detail and provides information about our sampling of cases .