banks . “the pricing of real estate brokerage for services actually offered.” real estate issues , vol . federal trade commission . the residential real estate brokerage industry , vol . 1 ( washington , d.c.: 1983 ) . “uncertainty , efficiency , and the brokerage industry.” journal of law and economics , vol . larsen , j.e . park . “non - uniform percentage brokerage commissions and real estate market performance.” areuea journal , vol . mantrala , s. and e. zabel . “the housing market and real estate brokers.” real estate economics , vol . miceli , t.j. “the multiple listing service , commission splits , and broker effort.” areuea journal , vol . - - - - - “the welfare effects of non - price competition among real estate brokers.” journal of the american real estate and urban economics association , vol . miceli , t.j. , k.a . pancak , and c.f . sirmans . “restructuring agency relationships in the real estate brokerage industry: an economic analysis.” journal of real estate research , vol . miller , n.g . shedd . “do antitrust laws apply to the real estate brokerage industry ? ” american business law journal , vol . munneke , h.j . and a. yavas . “incentives and performance in real estate brokerage.” journal of real estate finance and economics , vol . owen , b.m . “kickbacks , specialization , price fixing , and efficiency in residential real estate markets.” stanford law review , vol . schroeter , j.r. “competition and value - of - service pricing in the residential real estate brokerage market.” quarterly review of economics and business , vol . sirmans , c.f . and g.k. turnbull . “brokerage pricing under competition.” journal of urban economics , vol . turnbull , g.k. “real estate brokers , nonprice competition and the housing market.” real estate economics , vol . yavas , a . “matching of buyers and sellers by brokers: a comparison of alternative commission structures.” real estate economics , vol . yinger , j . “a search model of real estate broker behavior.” the american economic review , vol . zumpano , l.v . hooks . “the real estate brokerage market: a critical reevaluation.” areuea journal , vol . “are brokers' commission rates on home sales too high ? a conceptual analysis.” real estate economics , vol . arnold , m.a . “the principal - agent relationship in real estate brokerage services.” journal of the american real estate and urban economics association , vol . bartlett , r. “property rights and the pricing of real estate brokerage.” the journal of industrial economics , vol . benjamin , j.d. , g.d. jud and g.s . “real estate brokerage and the housing market: an annotated bibliography.” journal of real estate research , vol . - - - - - “what do we know about real estate brokerage ? ” journal of real estate research , vol . carney , m. “costs and pricing of home brokerage services.” areuea journal , vol . crockett , j.h . “competition and efficiency in transacting: the case of residential real estate brokerage.” areuea journal , vol . delcoure , n. and n.g . miller .