respondents . seven of the ten experts and stakeholders we contacted and staff at three of the immigration courts we visited told us that respondents can face challenges due to long delays in scheduling and hearing cases and heavy court caseloads . experts and stakeholders cited challenges in one or more of the following areas: the ability of respondents to produce witnesses or evidence or to obtain pro bono legal representation ; the ability of respondents with strong claims for relief to work or bring family members to the united states ; and the ability of respondents without sufficient claims for relief to remain in the united states longer than if the case had been promptly decided . four of ten experts and stakeholders we spoke with told us that case delays due to the immigration court's case backlog may decrease respondents' ability to produce witnesses or evidence to support their applications for relief . for example , one of these experts and stakeholders told us that due to the backlog , merits hearings are frequently rescheduled . as a result , witnesses for respondents who need to travel to attend a hearing may be less likely to attend a rescheduled hearing . two of these experts and stakeholders also stated that non - detained respondents can also lose track of witnesses who may be able to assist their cases if a significant amount of time passes between the respondent's original merits hearing date and the respondent's rescheduled hearing date . immigration court officials , experts , and stakeholders we spoke with cited challenges for immigration court staff , including increased workloads , limited time for administrative tasks , and decreased morale . immigration judges from four of the six courts we visited told us that delays result in increased work , such as additional motions and evidence to review for each case , changes in immigration law that occur over the life of a case that the immigration judge must consider , and increasingly complicated cases that require more time to complete than if the hearings for these cases had been scheduled and held in a shorter timeframe . immigration judges from four of the six courts we visited also told us that the growing backlog increases the amount of clerical work for court staff because they must continue to process motions and other paperwork for pending cases irrespective of when the next hearing date is scheduled . withholding only . as stated above , uscis refers foreign nationals found to have a reasonable fear of persecution or torture to eoir for “withholding only” proceedings , during which an individual may apply for withholding or deferral of removal under section 241 ( b ) ( 3 ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) or the united nations convention against torture . ( 4 ) what scenarios have been proposed for restructuring eoir's immigration court system and what reasons have been offered for or against these proposals ? to address all four objectives , we analyzed agency documentation , consulted with immigration court system experts and stakeholders , and interviewed eoir and dhs officials from headquarters and six immigration courts .