the final rule is still under review at uscis . uscis also issued guidance in february 2005 designed to increase the efficiency of application processing in cases involving rfes and noids under current regulations . among issues covered in this guidance are appropriate circumstances to approve and deny benefits without issuing an rfe or noid and how to choose between rfes and noids . how does uscis ensure the quality and consistency of adjudicator decisions while eliminating the backlog ? to determine the status of uscis's backlog , we interviewed agency officials and reviewed uscis's backlog elimination plans and updates along with the agency's supporting analyses and compared them with the statutory definition of backlog in the immigration services and infrastructure improvements act of 2000 . to identify actions uscis has taken to eliminate the backlog , we interviewed uscis officials in headquarters and 10 field offices that were selected generally on the basis of workload volume , staffing levels , and backlog levels . because we selected a nonprobability sample of field offices to visit , the results from our interviews with uscis officials in these offices cannot be generalized to uscis offices nationwide . where possible , we corroborated their responses with agency data that we assessed for reliability and determined were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also collected information on uscis's efforts to prevent future backlogs from uscis's planning documents on staffing , budget , and information technology modernization . to estimate the likelihood that uscis would eliminate the backlog on time , we tracked and compared the agency's progress in reducing its workload with the targets uscis established and identified factors that could affect uscis's ability to complete all applications within 6 months or less . to determine how uscis ensures the quality and consistency of adjudicator decisions , we examined uscis's two quality assurance programs and resulting outcomes , and we reviewed the findings and recommendations of an independent study of uscis's quality assurance programs . we conducted our review from september 2004 through september 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the united states citizenship and immigration services , within the department of homeland security , delivers services to aliens and adjudicates their eligibility for various immigration benefits , including naturalization , adjustment of status to lawful permanent resident , employment authorization , and asylum . uscis carries out its service function through a network of field offices consisting of a national benefits center , which serves as a central processing hub for certain benefit applications and utilizes secured depositories in chicago , illinois , and los angeles , california , to collect fees ; 4 service centers , which generally adjudicate applications that do not require interviews with the applicants ; 78 district and local offices ; 31 international offices and 8 asylum offices , which generally adjudicate applications that require interviews ; and 129 application support centers , which collect and process biometric information . appendix ii contains a detailed discussion of uscis's organizational structure . uscis's application - processing procedures vary by application type and by office . figures 1 and 2 depict the agency's process for adjudicating naturalization and adjustment of status applications — its two most common and complex application types .