( fig . 1 illustrates the sequence of key events regarding the requirement from enactment of the dra through february 2007. ) the dra explicitly exempts certain individuals from having to document citizenship , specifically those entitled to or enrolled in medicare , certain individuals receiving supplemental security income , and any additional populations as designated by the secretary of hhs . in december 2006 , congress expanded the list of populations that are exempt , adding individuals receiving social security disability insurance benefits and children in foster care or children who are receiving adoption or foster care assistance . in implementing the dra provision , cms first provided guidance to states in a june 2006 letter to state medicaid directors and subsequently published an interim final rule on july 12 , 2006 , almost 2 weeks after the dra provision went into effect . in the interim final rule , cms expanded upon the list of acceptable documents identified in the dra and published regulations that grouped the documents by level of reliability , creating a hierarchy in the list and restricting the use of less reliable documents . as required under the dra , certain documents , such as u.s. passports , are considered sufficient evidence of citizenship . the dra requires that if an individual does not have one of these primary documents , the individual must produce specific types of documentation establishing citizenship , such as a u.s. birth certificate , as well as documentation establishing personal identity . the regulations published by cms similarly identify primary , or tier 1 , documents to establish citizenship . under the regulations , if individuals do not have primary evidence , they are expected to produce secondary , or tier 2 , evidence of citizenship , such as a military record showing a u.s. place of birth , as well as evidence of identity , such as a state - issued driver's license . if neither primary nor secondary evidence of citizenship is available , individuals may provide third tier evidence of citizenship to accompany evidence of identity . if primary evidence of citizenship is unavailable , secondary and third tier evidence do not exist or cannot be obtained in a reasonable time period , and the individual was born in the united states , then the individual may provide fourth tier evidence of citizenship , along with evidence of identity . ( see table 1 and app . in addition to prescribing a list of acceptable documents for verifying citizenship , the regulations issued by cms specify , with one exception , that documents must be originals or copies certified by the issuing agency . the exception is that for a u.s. birth certificate , which is a tier 2 document , states may use a cross match with a state vital statistics agency to document a birth record . the regulations allow states to accept original documentation from individuals in person or through the mail . under the regulations issued by cms , states must provide applicants and medicaid beneficiaries a “reasonable opportunity” to document their citizenship before denying or terminating medicaid eligibility . states have flexibility in defining the length of the reasonable opportunity period .