officials at the u.s . naval academy also stated that they have no legal concerns with recruiting initiatives , but that gender - based accessions plans must serve an important , governmental objective and be substantially related to achieving that objective . one of the five armed forces we met with has a current quantifiable goal related to the recruitment of women into the officer corps . the air force has a quantifiable goal related to increasing the applicant pool of women into the officer corps , which could in turn serve to increase female officers' accessions . in a june 2014 memorandum , the secretary of the air force directed the air force to institute a wide range of diversity goals for its active duty officer applicant pools , including a 30 percent applicant pool goal for female officers . an air force official stated that the officer applicant pool goal was developed to provide the air force's officer accession sources with the incentive to identify and recruit from untapped sources of officer applicants . an air force official also stated that establishing this goal generated discussions among the officer accession sources about how to achieve this common goal in light of these sources' respective operational differences and that the need to meet the broader goal might potentially result in the accession sources developing their own respective performance measures . such applicant pool goals were also noted in the 2011 military leadership diversity commission report , which recommended developing similar goals for qualified minority applicants to precommissioning officer programs . the military leadership diversity commission stated that one way to ensure that there is a demographically diverse applicant pool is to develop goals for qualified minority applicants . according to the military leadership diversity commission , the goals would not be used during the actual admissions decision but would help ensure that there is a demographically diverse applicant pool from which to select each year . a similar recommendation was made by the defense advisory committee on women in the services in its 2013 report . the defense advisory committee on women in the services recommended that all of the services have targets to gauge progress in increasing the representation of women in the officer corps ( and therefore in the principal accession sources for officers ) . officials with the other recruitment and accession sources with whom we met stated that they do not have clear goals with quantifiable metrics linked with those goals related to the recruitment and accessions of women into the officer corps . army officials stated that they had not received any documented guidance or goals directing them to increase the number of female applicants for officer positions or female officer accessions . similarly , while the secretary of the navy publicly expressed the importance of increasing the number of women in the navy and marine corps , with the exception of submarines , navy and marine corps officials stated that they currently do not have documented guidance or goals directing them to increase the number of female officer applicants or accessions . coast guard officials also stated that although there is an overall intent to increase diversity , they had no specific goals associated with increasing the number of female officer applicants or accessions .