certifications . usaid issued guidance requiring that recipients of all grants and cooperative agreements sign certifications attesting that they are not supporting , and have not supported , terrorists . in signing the certifications , recipients also acknowledged the steps they are to take to help prevent assistance from being provided to terrorists , including reviewing u.s. and un lists of known terrorists . in addition , usaid and state require recipients of assistance to certify that they have not been convicted of , or involved in , a narcotics offense . we reviewed usaid grants and contracts and found that the required certifications were included where required by usaid's regulations . according to state , its letter of agreement with the government of afghanistan requires that each recipient of foreign assistance sign a certification disclosing any past narcotrafficking . state also included this requirement in fund transfers to usaid , justice , and defense . clauses . usaid requires that financial agreements , including contracts and grants , contain a clause intended to familiarize award recipients with their legal responsibilities to comply with the executive order and law prohibiting assistance to terrorists . in addition , both usaid and state require that any financial agreement representing more than $100,000 contain a clause to familiarize award recipients with their legal responsibilities to comply with the law prohibiting assistance to drug traffickers . in our review of the 10 alternative livelihoods program grants and contracts , we found that each agreement included the clauses that were required . vetting . usaid and state require the vetting of individuals and organizations for involvement with drug trafficking , through the review of arrest records and assessment of the credibility of any trafficking allegations . state also requires the vetting of individuals and organizations against criminal and terrorist databases for any involvement in terrorism or human rights violations . according to state , the u.s. embassy runs initial screening of security force personnel against local databases and with nongovernmental organizations . state then forwards biographical data on security forces to the bureau of democracy , human rights and labor and bureau of south and central asian affairs for vetting against classified and unclassified databases to identify criminal conduct , including that related to terrorism , narcotrafficking , and human rights violations . however , usaid's and state's vetting of afghan nationals was constrained by limited or incomplete records and the difficulty of investigating widespread allegations of misconduct . according to state , usaid , and contract officials , after years of conflict , afghanistan lacks many official records , such as birth , identification , and criminal records . according to u.s. officials , this lack of records forced them to rely on word of mouth to vet afghan nationals . moreover , rivals often accuse one another of criminality and affiliation with terrorists or drug traffickers , and it is difficult to investigate the truth of these allegations . to assist with future vetting , state plans to administer lie - detector tests to certain project participants . however , as of july 2006 , state had not been able to initiate the testing .