iv and v ) . both the chairman and the president expressed their full commitment to making the improvements noted in the report , concurred with all of our recommendations , and outlined the actions that lsc's board and management plan to take in response to our recommendations . lsc management also separately provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . lsc's president also suggested three clarifications to our report . first , lsc management stated that “the draft report does not sufficiently address the fact that in 1996 congress mandated that the lsc oig have oversight responsibility for all audit work performed by independent public accountants ( ipa ) and the report should include a fuller discussion of the role of the ipas in the financial oversight of grantees.” we added language to our report to augment our discussion of how the 1996 act clarified that grantee financial statement and compliance audits are performed by ipas and overseen by oig . while these audits serve as an accountability mechanism , they are performed after the fact , and do not include all the grantee oversight objectives and procedures that would be expected of lsc management as part of its responsibilities to manage the affairs of the corporation , such as its grants program and to monitor its grantees to ensure compliance with all applicable laws , regulations , and grant terms . second , lsc's president states that “the draft report supports its conclusion about limited coordination of the work of oce and opp with an isolated example from one grantee visit and fails to note the range of communication and coordination that actually exists between these offices.” we provide the example in the report to illustrate the effect on grantee oversight . our conclusion about the need for improved communication and coordination were also based on interviews with lsc staff and our assessment of lsc's control environment during the course of our work . third , the lsc president stated that while lsc can and will expand its criteria and use of a risk - based approach for assessing risk of weaknesses at its grantees , the draft report did not include all of the risk - based criteria that lsc currently uses in selecting grantees for on - site reviews . we modified our report to add language recognizing that lsc considers the results of grantee self - inspections and potential compliance issues identified in opp program visits and other discussions in selecting grantees for on - site reviews . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . we will then send copies to other appropriate congressional committees , the president of lsc , and the lsc board of directors . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9471 or franzelj@gao.gov .