gao - 17-775 . washington , d.c.: september 29 , 2017 . ( recommendation 1 ) . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the director of the office of management and budget . in an email response , an omb staff member commented that it would be more appropriate and effective to encourage agencies to create an annual evaluation plan , rather than require or direct them to do so . because omb has encouraged agencies to conduct and use evaluations in decision making for several years with mixed success , we believe that a more directive approach is needed . we are sending copies of this report to the director of the office of management and budget , and to appropriate congressional committees . this report is also available at no cost on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2700 or kingsburyn@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs may be found on the last page of the report . staff who made key contributions to the report are listed in appendix ii . we administered a web - based questionnaire on organizational performance and management issues to a stratified random sample of 4,395 from a population of approximately 153,779 mid - level and upper - level civilian managers and supervisors working in the 24 executive branch agencies covered by the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) , as amended . the sample was drawn from the office of personnel management's ( opm ) enterprise human resources integration database as of september 2015 , using file designators for performance of managerial and supervisory functions . the sample was stratified by agency and by whether the manager or supervisor was a member of the senior executive service ( ses ) . the management levels covered general schedule ( gs ) or equivalent schedules in other pay plans at levels comparable to gs - 13 through gs - 15 and career ses or equivalent . in reporting the questionnaire data , we use “government - wide” or “across the federal government” to refer to these 24 cfo act executive branch agencies , and “federal managers” and “managers” to refer to both managers and supervisors . we designed the questionnaire to obtain the observations and perceptions of respondents on various aspects of such results - oriented management topics as the presence and use of performance information , agency climate , and program evaluation use . in addition , to address the implementation of gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) , the questionnaire included a section requesting respondents' views on its various provisions including cross - agency priority goals , agency priority goals , and quarterly performance reviews . this survey is similar to surveys we have conducted five times previously at the 24 cfo act agencies — in 1997 , 2000 , 2003 , 2007 , and 2013 . the questions on gprama provisions and program evaluation use were new in 2013 . the 2017 questionnaire includes new questions on the use of performance information and factors that facilitate the use of program evaluation .