sec . 3521 ( e ) ( 1 ) to conduct an audit of said financial statements ) was unable to express an opinion on the reliability of the army working capital fund's financial statements for fiscal years 1993 through 2004 . to help improve the army depot maintenance activity group's operations , including financial management , in february 1998 , the army materiel command began an effort to replace systems that are at least 30 years old that manage inventory and depot maintenance operations with lmp . according to the army , lmp is intended to transform the army materiel command's logistics operations in six core processes , one being financial management . lmp is to , among other things , improve accounting and reporting on billions of dollars worth of army weapons systems through fully integrated single - source transaction entry , online / real - time data , and u.s. standard general ledger compliance . further , lmp is intended to bring the logistics community to the point of achieving favorable audit opinions on financial statements . lmp became operational at the u.s. army communications and electronics command and tobyhanna army depot in july 2003 . the army plans to implement lmp at the other four depots . in may 2004 , we reported on the army's lack of adequate management oversight over lmp implementation and the problems being encountered after it became operational in july 2003 . as discussed later in this report , the army continued to experience significant lmp implementation problems at the tobyhanna army depot that inhibited the depot from accurately reporting on its financial results of operations , which adversely affected the depot's ability to accurately set customer sales prices . beginning with fiscal year 2005 ( october 2004 ) , the army established a new army working capital fund activity group by merging its depot maintenance and ordnance activity groups . the new activity group — the industrial operations activity group — consolidated the existing five army depots and the army ordnance activities . these two activity groups perform different types of work . the depots repair and overhaul a wide range of assets such as helicopters and tanks , whereas the ordnance activities , among other things , manufacture and sell munitions and large caliber weapons critical to the army's execution of its warfighting mission . the ordnance activity group also provides ammunition stockpile management for all services within dod as well as for foreign military customers . among the benefits of consolidation cited by the army is that the merger of the two activity groups will ( 1 ) create a more integrated business perspective that encourages cooperation and partnership , ( 2 ) eliminate duplication of effort associated with preparing and defending two separate budget submissions for essentially the same type of service , and ( 3 ) focus capital investments on the good of the business entity rather than on the good of the individual installations . we reviewed the army working capital fund fiscal year 2006 / 2007 budget document submitted to the congress in february 2005 . the budget document does not provide information on the army depot maintenance activity group .