gao - 09-541 . ( see fig . case management agencies saw the ability to provide direct financial assistance for items such as home repairs , clothing , or furniture as key to helping clients with their basic needs ; yet such assistance was not always available . an official from a case management umbrella organization said without direct service funds , short - term needs ultimately can become long - term issues because individuals have to rely on the social service system to fulfill their needs and may become dependent on government assistance rather than becoming self sufficient . how did federal agencies oversee the implementation of these disaster case management programs ? what challenges did case management agencies experience in delivering disaster case management services under federally funded programs ? how will previous or existing federally funded disaster case management programs be used to inform the development of a federal case management program for future disasters ? to address these questions , we reviewed the roles and responsibilities of the federal government for disaster recovery services , as well as federal laws , regulations , and guidance related to the federally funded case management programs established to assist victims of hurricanes katrina and rita , including the federal government's authority to establish or fund post - disaster case management programs . we also reviewed prior gao work on best practices for coordination among federal agencies and between federal and nonfederal stakeholders . we interviewed federal officials from fema , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . we focused our review on louisiana and mississippi , as those were the states most directly affected by hurricanes katrina and rita , and conducted site visits to baton rouge and new orleans , louisiana ; and biloxi , gulfport , moss point , jackson , and pascagoula , mississippi . we conducted , either in person or by phone , interviews with organizations involved in disaster case management in these states ( see table 1 in app . i for a comprehensive list of the organizations interviewed ) . during these interviews , we obtained information on , among other topics , coordination between government agencies and case management agencies and challenges to helping clients meet their recovery needs . we selected interviewees to ensure that we spoke to representatives from a range of appropriate organizations serving hurricane katrina and rita victims . in both states we spoke to the majority of disaster case management providers for the katrina aid today ( kat ) program and selected providers for the disaster housing assistance program ( dhap ) . we did not interview disaster case management providers who served victims that relocated to other states . the views of the disaster case management providers we spoke with cannot be generalized to all organizations that provided disaster case management services to victims of hurricanes katrina and rita . in addition to the interviews , we obtained summary data on kat clients from the coordinated assistance network database maintained by the american red cross and received record - level data from the tracking - at - a - glance database used for dhap .