nih . we reviewed the health research extension act and accompanying nih policy to identify the information that federal research facilities must provide to nih to be eligible for public health service funding . we also reviewed nih's guidance to research facilities on how to obtain eligibility for funding . to assess the guidance , we examined its implementation through nih and other federal agencies' actions . in particular , we determined whether nih had current approvals for all federal research facilities receiving such funding through interviews with nih officials and by reviewing nih documents . we then reviewed a sample of 16 assurances from federal facilities chosen by randomly selecting a facility from each agency or sub - agency that had approved animal care and use programs . we compared the information in the selected assurance documents with nih's guidance to determine whether the documents contained key information . we also took steps to assess the reliability of information that aphis provided us about federal agencies and facilities that report to it under the animal welfare act and information that nih provided on federal research facilities receiving public health service funding . in particular , we cross - checked animal use information from aphis with animal use information we obtained directly from the 10 agencies in our review of their facilities' research activities . in addition , we checked summary data on animal use that we obtained from aphis against the annual reports that federal agencies sent to aphis under the animal welfare act to determine whether the data were consistent . we also reviewed nih's website for information about research facilities with approved assurances , and we reviewed nih documentation and queried nih officials about their process for ensuring that facilities receiving public health service funding for animal research have an assurance . based on these steps , we determined that the aphis and nih information on federal facilities that conduct animal research was sufficiently reliable for examining aphis and nih guidance to agencies on reporting about their animal use programs . to examine the extent to which aphis and nih share information on animal use with the public , we interviewed agency officials and reviewed agency websites . in particular , we interviewed aphis officials to identify the agency's current policies and procedures for collecting and posting to its website the annual reports the agency receives from research facilities . we reviewed the aphis website to document the timespan covered by the data that are posted and the methods by which the data can be searched by the public . we also reviewed aphis's posting of annual report data against usda's data quality requirements , which state that usda's agencies and its offices will strive to ensure that the information they disseminate for the public is substantively accurate , reliable , and unbiased and presented in an accurate , clear , complete , and unbiased manner . we interviewed nih officials to identify the agency's policies and procedures for making public information about research facilities that seek approval for a public health service animal welfare assurance , such as the identity of facilities with approved assurances or descriptions of their animal care programs .