appeals . doe indicated that its process for rejected applications should be made more transparent and stated that the lgp continues to implement new strategies intended to reduce the need for any kind of appeals , such as enhanced communication with applicants including more frequent contact , and allowing applicants an opportunity to provide additional data at doe's request to address deficiencies doe has identified in applications . while these actions are encouraging , they do not fully address our findings , especially in the areas of appeals and applicant feedback . we continue to believe that doe needs systematic mechanisms for applicants to appeal its decisions and to provide anonymous feedback . doe's written comments on our findings and recommendations , along with our detailed responses , are contained in appendix vi . in addition to the written comments reproduced in that appendix , doe provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . ii ) . however , the departmentwide performance goals are too few to reflect the full range of policy goals for the lgp . for example , there is no measurable performance goal for job creation . doe officials said that applicants with nuclear projects were allowed to remain in a queue because of the expectation that requests would substantially exceed available loan guarantee authority and that the applications would be of high quality . according to doe officials , they based this expectation on information available about projects that are seeking licenses from the nuclear regulatory commission . doe officials also explained that they ranked nuclear generation projects for similar reasons — and also to give applicants with less competitive projects the chance to drop out of the process early , allowing them to avoid the expense involved in applying for a loan guarantee . however , all of the solicitations issued through 2008 initially received requests that exceeded the available loan guarantee authority ( see app . v ) , so nuclear projects were not unique in that respect . in addition , applicants with coal - based power generation and industrial gasification facility projects paid application fees equivalent to those paid by applicants with nuclear generation projects but were not given rankings prior to paying the second application fee ( see app . iv ) . to provide eere applicants with earlier feedback on the competitiveness of their projects , doe instituted a two - part application for the 2009 eere solicitation — a change from the 2008 eere solicitation . doe officials stated that they made this change based on lessons learned from the 2008 eere solicitation . while this change appears to reduce the disparity in treatment among applicants , it remains to be seen whether doe will make similar changes for projects that employ other types of technologies . we did not evaluate the financial or technical soundness of the projects for which applications were submitted . we conducted this performance audit from january 2009 through july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .