nasa . in our review of nasa's design of control activities , we found that nasa has documented procedures for conducting improper payment risk assessments ; however , the procedures used for improper payment risk assessments conducted for fiscal years 2014 through 2016 were outdated . specifically , the documented procedures , dated 2012 , did not account for changes to ipia in 2013 or updates to omb's guidance issued in fiscal year 2014 . in june 2017 , nasa subsequently updated its procedures for improper payment risk assessments to properly address omb's current improper payments guidance . the updated procedures also included a description of key control activities designed to help ensure that all nasa programs and activities , other than oig activities , have undergone an improper payment risk assessment . according to nasa officials , nasa's improper payment risk assessment process specifically excluded oig activities because its oig receives its own appropriation , and therefore , oig activities are not considered part of nasa's programs or activities for improper payment risk assessments . in addition , nasa officials stated that nasa oig activities are excluded from the improper payment risk assessments because of concerns regarding nasa oig's independence as nasa oig conducts the agency's annual ipera compliance audit . nasa could not provide us with any guidance or documentation that specifically addresses the exclusion of oig activities . the nasa oig is part of nasa , and ipia requires that improper payment risk assessments be performed for each program and activity that the agency head administers . to the extent that the potential threat to oig independence prevents nasa from conducting a risk assessment of payments made by the oig's programs and activities , the nasa administrator may transfer this responsibility to the oig . by not making an assessment , nasa has not determined whether oig programs and activities are susceptible to significant improper payments . standards for internal control in the federal government states that management should develop control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks and implement control activities through policies . when an agency does not have properly designed policies and procedures to help ensure that all programs and activities are assessed for susceptibility to significant improper payments at least once every 3 years , there is an increased risk that the agency may not always identify all risk - susceptible programs and activities , resulting in incomplete improper payment estimates . performing improper payment risk assessments and reporting on such assessments are key to identifying programs and activities that may be susceptible to significant improper payments . agencies' nonadherence to the omb guidance to report on the results of their risk assessments may result in congress not having the information necessary to monitor and take prompt action to address problematic programs . most of the nine selected agencies did not properly design control activities to include all programs and activities in their improper payment risk assessments at least once every 3 years during fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2016 , the time period of our review .