epa agreed with these recommendations in its comments on the report . in 2013 , epa issued final guidelines laying out expectations for epa's regional oversight and issued a memorandum to its regional managers highlighting their oversight responsibilities . however , in a subsequent report issued in july 2016 , we found that epa's 2013 guidance did not completely address our recommendation to provide sufficient guidance to states to fulfill their oversight responsibilities . we also found that according to epa officials , the agency planned to make changes to some of the program's measures of effectiveness . although epa has taken some action , these recommendations remain open pending epa's ( 1 ) ensuring that the guidelines to states incorporate specific instructions on how to review states' plans and criteria for ensuring funded projects reflect characteristics of effective implementation and tangible results , and ( 2 ) improving its measures of program effectiveness . we have identified many benefits — process and programmatic improvements and financial benefits — based on epa taking actions on our recommendations and related work . since fiscal year 2007 , we have identified improvements to epa's operations and programs in categories such as management and operations , water issues , and public health and environmental justice . in addition , we have identified financial benefits resulting from the implementation of our recommendations and our related work . the following are examples of process improvements we have identified based on actions epa has taken in response to our recommendations . in august 2015 , we reviewed epa's grant management program , including the extent to which its grants management plan followed leading practices for federal strategic planning . figure 2 shows the status of the 318 recommendations . in august 2013 , we found that epa did not have a specific process for program offices that led regulatory workgroups to document how the agency considers children's health risks in rulemakings and other actions or how the agency's analyses comply with the 1995 policy . we recommended that epa require lead program offices to document their decisions in rulemakings and other actions regarding how health risks to children were considered and that their decisions be consistent with epa's children's health policy . for recommendations that we made over 4 years ago ( i.e. , fiscal years 2007 to 2012 ) , epa had implemented 77 percent . for recommendations made since fiscal year 2013 , epa had implemented 34 percent . the 318 recommendations we made to epa since fiscal year 2007 fall into six broad categories that relate to epa operations and programs and generally align with many of the goals and strategies identified in epa's fiscal year 2014-2018 strategic plan . these six broad categories are: ( 1 ) management and operations ; ( 2 ) water issues , which includes water infrastructure , drinking water , water quality , and ecosystem restoration ; ( 3 ) environmental contamination and cleanup , which includes environmental cleanup , pollution prevention , hazardous and other waste programs , and emergency management ; ( 4 ) toxics , chemical safety , and pesticides ; ( 5 ) public health and environmental justice ; and ( 6 ) air quality , climate change , and energy efficiency .