part 15 . information — information generally restricted from public disclosure but that is not classified national security information.3 ssi is an sbu category specifically required by statute ( other examples include protected critical infrastructure information and privacy act information ) . categories of sbu information not specifically mandated by statute include for official use only and law enforcement sensitive information . the freedom of information act ( foia ) is the primary process for releasing ( and for prohibiting the release of ) sbu information to the public , as appropriate . ssi , by statute , is exempt from disclosure under foia . attachment i , contained in appendix i , illustrates differences between information designated ssi by tsa and classified national security information . tsa , through its ssi authority , prohibits the public disclosure of information obtained or developed in the conduct of security activities that , for example , would be detrimental to transportation security . according to tsa , ssi is created by tsa and by airports , aircraft operators , and other regulated parties when they are establishing or implementing security programs or documentation to address security requirements . according to tsa , safeguarding information as ssi allows controlled information sharing with stakeholders to meet tsa's mission to protect the nation's transportation systems . ssi regulations allow for the sharing of ssi with covered persons ( as defined in 49 c.f.r . § 1520.7 ) having a need to know — including airport operators , aircraft operators , foreign vessel owners , tsa employees , and other persons . ssi falls into 1 ( or more ) of 16 categories , which tsa has divided into three types: categorical ( automatically ssi ) , judgment ( requires a judgment or analysis ) , and determination ( requires written determination by an office with determination authority ) .4 additional background information on the ssi regulatory authority , including a list of the 16 categories , is included in attachment i , contained in appendix i . according to tsa officials , tsa determination authority only applies to ssi designated pursuant to 49 c.f.r . § 1520.5 ( b ) ( 9 ) ( iii ) , ( 16 ) , and 1520.5 ( c ) . the designation criteria consistently and appropriately . for example , certain written responses to questions submitted by tsa to the house appropriations homeland security subcommittee were designated as ssi . however , 1 month earlier , the agency had not treated this same information as sensitive . “lacking a central policy program office for ssi has led to confusion and unnecessary classification of some materials as ssi . adherence to handling requirements within tsa has been inconsistent , and there have been instances where ssi has been mishandled outside of tsa . identification of ssi has often appeared to be ad - hoc , marked by confusion and disagreement depending on the viewpoint , experience , and training of the identifier . strictures on the release of ssi and other ssi policy or handling – related problems have occasionally frustrated industry stakeholders , congress , the media , and our own employees trying to work within the confines of the restrictions .