( see table 4. ) in addition to those named above , lawrence e. dixon , patricia lentini , stefano petrucci , and kenneth patton made key contributions to this report . see appendix iii for major contributors . the department of defense ( dod ) uses commercial carriers for two different kinds of peacetime airlift moves: the first ( called fixed buy ) is a set contract for “channel flights” made on a regular weekly schedule from u.s. bases to fixed points across atlantic and pacific routes . the second ( called expansion buys ) includes airlift bought after the start of the fixed buy contract to support exercises , contingencies , special airlift assignment missions , and growth in channel requirements . from fiscal years 1992 through 1997 , dod contracts for commercial passenger and cargo business averaged over $611 million a year . from fiscal years 1998 through 2001 , contracts increased to an average of almost $640 million a year . in fiscal year 2002 , contracts increased significantly to almost $1.3 billion , which air mobility command officials attributed to missions flown in support of operation enduring freedom , the operation in afghanistan . standard pallets also fit aboard all military cargo aircraft . in order to fit aboard other wide - body aircraft such as the dc - 10 or the md - 11 , cargo handlers at military bases must disassemble and rebuild the standard pallets to fit the aircrafts' lower profile ( see fig . some cargo carrier officials said they could not bid on the amount of peacetime business they believe they are entitled to based on their craf participation . the mrs - 05 modeled craf aircraft carrying only bulk cargo . according to air force officials , the u.s. commercial cargo fleet has limited ability to carry oversized cargo and no ability to carry outsized cargo . they stated that it is difficult , from a planning perspective , to model craf aircraft carrying oversized cargo because the models would need to distinguish between the types of oversized cargo and the types of aircraft . in assigning mobilization value points , dod measures each volunteered passenger or cargo aircraft against the capacity and airspeed of a b - 747-100 . participants in the aeromedical evacuation segment of craf receive double the mobilization value points because of the significant reconfiguration their aircraft ( b - 767s ) must undergo . ii for annual amounts since fiscal year 1998 ) . we conducted our review between january and october 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . participants with 62 percent of the wide - body cargo aircraft committed to craf are not able to bid on most peacetime cargo business because they do not have b - 747s . an amc official said that most requests for cargo aircraft require a 90-ton capacity , the same as that of a 747-type aircraft but slightly more than those of other wide - body aircraft such as the md - 11 ( 86 tons ) or the dc - 10 ( 75 tons ) .