none resulted in a fatality . in addition , there have been only two train derailments involving trains in revenue service that were transporting passengers during the 5-year period , both occurring in fiscal year 1999 . a wmata safety official said that neither of these incidents resulted in injuries . table 3 shows rail collisions and derailments occurring during fiscal years 1996 through 2000 . table 4 shows that bus passenger injury and bus collision incident rates have remained stable during fiscal years 1996 through 2000 , although both total injuries and collisions increased over the last year . according to wmata , it suspects increases in bus ridership as well as inexperienced operators driving in increasingly congested traffic areas and on new and extended routes as the cause for increased bus incidents . for example , wmata recently hired 766 new operators to cover retirements . nevertheless , wmata considers more than 60 percent of these incidents to be nonpreventable . wmata has new and planned programs to reduce bus incidents , such as recognition programs , spot checks , a mentor program , promotional programs , route assessments , and new traffic warning signs to prevent rear - end collisions . during fiscal years 1996 through 2000 , there were a total of 21 fatalities in wmata's transit system — 11 fatalities in the metrobus and 10 in the metrorail systems . of the 11 bus fatalities , 5 involved bus collisions with other vehicles , 4 involved persons being struck by a bus , 1 person died on board a bus during an accident , and 1 person died while alighting a bus . of the 10 rail fatalities , 4 were suicides , 2 involved escalator entrapment , 2 occurred boarding or alighting trains , 1 was the wmata employee killed in the 1996 incident mentioned previously , and 1 was a person killed when struck by a train . wmata's metro transit police department is responsible for the system's transit security — which has been defined as freedom from intentional danger for passengers , employees , and the transit system . the department has jurisdiction and arrest powers on wmata property throughout the 1,500 square mile transit zone that includes maryland , virginia , and the district of columbia and has an authorized strength of 320 sworn and 103 civilian personnel . ( 2 ) what efforts has wmata made to establish and monitor safety and security within its transit system ? ( 3 ) to what extent does wmata follow established best practices in planning , selecting , and budgeting for its capital investments ? in addressing the first two questions on operations and maintenance and safety and security , we performed a broad review of a myriad of issues facing wmata by interviewing knowledgeable officials throughout wmata and other organizations that affect the agency and by reviewing pertinent documentation . to emphasize the importance of system security , wmata's metro transit police department established a set of comprehensive security activities documented in its system security program plan .