it happened to me . management generally discourages and does not empower staff to feel comfortable reporting patient safety conditions . ( continued from previous page ) [in a subsequent interview , leaders told about how the program was progressing. leader 1: we must change doing what you're told without questioning orders . we tell nurses that it's ok to challenge physicians in an atmosphere of mutual respect . we're establishing it as a facility goal , keeping it on the front burner and keeping it a priority . leader 2: since leaders began visiting staff meetings to get the word out on close call reporting , we've noticed a change — a significant reduction in the fear of reporting close calls . not all fear is gone , but the close call program is a success . leader 3: leadership raised safety consciousness with the close call airplane accident lesson . if it had been handed to us as just another memo , it might have been thrown away , but when leaders are there in person to answer questions , then it raises people's awareness of patient safety . physician 1: leadership here went out and talked about patient safety . their support and emphasis and bringing their level of importance to it made the program happen . staff at one facility told us that va's leadership supported the program and the patient safety culture by teaching , coaching , and role modeling patient safety concepts to their staff in more than a hundred small meetings . va's leaders had a three - part agenda in their initial staff meetings . first , they taught a scenario in which two pilots failed to communicate well enough to avoid a fatal crash . the first officer did not cross - check and challenge an order from his captain to descend in a wind shear , resulting in the plane's crashing and killing 37 people . facility leaders depicted the strong parallels — - including the communication effects of unequal power relationships and hierarchical decisionmaking discussed earlier — - between the pilots' communication to save the plane and clinicians' communications to save the patient . second , they discussed the importance of communications in medical care , coaching lower - level staff to speak up when they saw adverse events and emphasized the importance of two - way communication . finally , they introduced a new close call reporting program at the facility and modeled for staff that they supported this type of reporting in introducing the new program and its elements . “leaders' effective promotion of patient safety in staff meetings” presents a portion of one such meeting and also interviews with va staff when they discussed how the staff meetings had raised their consciousness about patient safety . “leaders' effective promotion” represents more than a hundred small meetings conducted at one facility that successfully demonstrated that patient safety was a priority for the organization . when top leaders attended staff meetings , staff listened to their message . it may be no coincidence that this facility had the highest rating for comfort in reporting , according to the findings of our survey .