( see figs . the majority of human resource officials we interviewed consider themselves to be adequately represented on the core design team . other characteristics of the team members are described in appendix iii . according to dhs officials , dhs - specific slots on the core design team were filled by individuals chosen by agency executives after determining the number of seats to be allocated to the different agency components . in selecting team members , officials sought representation from across the organizational components of the department , individuals with field experience , and individuals with some expertise in human resources management . race , gender , and occupational diversity were other factors considered when selecting participants . additionally , naae selected one dhs employee to participate on the team and afge and nteu each selected four professional staff members to participate . dhs recently completed a noteworthy communications strategy that provides a structured and planned approach to communicate with dhs stakeholders regarding the human capital system . the objectives of the plan are to: raise awareness , disseminate information , and promote a clear understanding of the new human capital system ; manage stakeholder expectations and address their concerns ; and provide opportunities for a two - way dialogue . we have recently reported that organizations undergoing a transformation should establish a communication strategy that ensures a consistent message is delivered and seeks to genuinely involve stakeholders in the process . the communications plan , completed in june 2003 , represents an important and substantive effort and contains four broad pieces that are consistent with the key practices we have identified as important to successful communication during transformations . first , the plan identifies internal and external stakeholders , the concerns of each stakeholder group , and the specific communication channels to be used to communicate to that stakeholder group . second , the plan articulates the key messages to be delivered to each stakeholder group . third , an action plan identifies the communication channel to be used , the timeline for its use , and the dhs and opm staff responsible for implementation . finally , the plan identifies the feedback mechanisms to be used to ensure there is a two - way dialogue . moving forward , dhs faces some challenges in successfully implementing its communications plan . first , in addition to the key messages articulated in the plan , dhs will need to provide information to clarify areas of confusion that were identified during our interviews . these include: the roles opm , dhs , and the senior review advisory committee have in the process ; the factors that will influence the secretary and director's final decisions on which options to propose ; the role of the contractor in the design process ; the likelihood of the core design team drafting legislative proposals for areas dhs does not have authority to change ( i.e. , premium pay and hiring ) ; the possibility of there being multiple personnel systems instead of one ; the implementation process . a second challenge will be to ensure that preexisting communication channels within each departmental component deliver a message that is consistent in tone and content with the central communication strategy .