reorganization . possible chapter 11 outcomes , which can be used in combination , include ( 1 ) sale of the company ( in whole or in part ) , which is sometimes called a section 363 sale because that section of the code applies to sales that are free and clear of creditor claims and interests ; ( 2 ) liquidation of the company's assets with the approval of the court through means other than a 363 sale ; and ( 3 ) actual reorganization of the company in which it emerges from bankruptcy with new contractual rights and obligations that replace or supersede those it had before filing for bankruptcy . the debtor , creditors , trustee , or other interested parties , may initiate adversary proceedings — in effect , a lawsuit within the bankruptcy case to preserve or recover money or property to subordinate a claim of another creditor to their own claims , or for similar reasons . furthermore , the chapter 11 trustee or others may bring a preference action ( a type of avoidance action ) challenging certain payments made by a debtor to a creditor generally within 90 days prior to the bankruptcy filing . in addition , fraudulent avoidance actions generally can be taken on transfers made within 2 years prior to a bankruptcy if payments are determined to be fraudulent . as such , an avoidance action can question the payment as a preferential or fraudulent transfer of assets and require payments to be returned to the debtor . large , complex financial companies that are eligible to file for bankruptcy generally file under chapter 11 of the code . such companies operating in the united states engage in a broad range of financial services including commercial banking , investment banking , securities and commodities trading , derivatives transactions , and insurance . many of them are organized under both u.s. and foreign laws . the u.s. legal structure is frequently premised upon the ownership by a parent holding company of various regulated subsidiaries ( such as depository institutions , insurance companies , broker - dealers , and commodity brokers ) and other nonregulated subsidiaries that engage in a variety of financial activities . many of these businesses have centralized business lines and operations that may be housed in a holding company or in one or more subsidiaries . smaller banking institutions also are organized as holding companies , but many of these hold few , if any , assets outside a depository institution and generally engage in a narrower range of activities . certain financial institutions may not file as debtors under the code and other entities face special restrictions in using the code: insured depository institutions . under the federal deposit insurance act , fdic serves as the conservator or receiver for insured depository institutions placed into conservatorship or receivership under applicable law . insurance companies . insurers generally are subject to oversight by state insurance commissioners , who have the authority to place them into conservatorship , rehabilitation , or receivership . broker - dealers . broker - dealers can be liquidated under the securities investor protection act ( sipa ) or under a special subchapter of chapter 7 of the code .