these efforts are not trivial . the primary causes of space acquisition problems in our view include ( 1 ) the tendency to start space programs too early , that is , before there has been assurance that the capabilities being pursuing can be achieved within resources and time constraints and ( 2 ) the tendency to attempt to achieve all requirements in one step rather than gradually . the gps iiia program was structured to avoid these problems and ensure the program has the right knowledge for moving forward into the acquisition process . moreover , our work has cited prior acquisition strategies in which the lack of contractor oversight was a problem . again , the actions being taken on gps iiia put controls in place to strengthen oversight and government involvement . we also recognize that the gps iiia program took steps to produce realistic cost estimates , which has generally not been done in the past . nevertheless , there is still a high risk that the air force will not meet its schedule for gps . first , it is aiming to deploy the gps iiia satellites 3 years faster than the iif satellites . second , the time period between the contract award and first launch for gps iiia is shorter than most other major space programs we have reviewed . third , gps iiia is not simply a matter of replicating the iif program . though the contractor has had previous experience with gps , it is likely that the knowledge base will need to be revitalized . the contractor is also being asked to develop a larger satellite bus to accommodate the future gps increments and to increase the power of a new military signal by a factor of ten . in view of these and other schedule issues , we believe that there is little room in the schedule to accommodate difficulties that the contractor or program may face . where does this leave the wide span of military , civil , and other user of gps ? if the air force does not meet its schedule goals for development of gps iiia satellites , there will be an increased likelihood that in 2010 , as old satellites begin to fail , the overall gps constellation will fall below the number of satellites required to provide the level of gps service that the u.s. government is committing to providing . the performance standards for both ( 1 ) the standard positioning service provided to civil and commercial gps users and ( 2 ) the precise positioning service provided to military gps users commit the u.s. government to at least a 95 percent probability of maintaining a constellation of 24 operational gps satellites . because there are currently 31 operational gps satellites of various blocks , the near - term probability of maintaining a constellation of at least 24 operational satellites remains well above 95 percent . however , dod predicts that over the next several years many of the older satellites in the constellation will reach the end of their operational life faster than they will be replenished , and that the constellation will , in all likelihood , decrease in size .