about 15,000 facilities registered by the deadline . according to an epa official , two factors , other than noncompliance , likely contributed to the difference between epa's estimate and the actual number of registrants . first , epa may have overestimated the number of facilities subject to the regulation . second , some facilities took actions to avoid being regulated under the program , such as reducing chemical inventory below the thresholds that trigger the reporting requirement , replacing a regulated chemical with one not covered by the requirement , or eliminating a particular regulated chemical . an epa headquarters official from the office responsible for chemical preparedness noted that registering a risk management plan in and of itself does not necessarily indicate that a facility has undertaken all necessary actions . according to the official , the “paper plan” submitted to epa captures certain details , but it is the underlying program elements , properly implemented , that protect the public from accidental chemical releases . he stated that there may be facilities that have registered plans with epa but still have deficiencies in their underlying program . although epa had reviewed to varying degrees about 15 percent of the risk management plans registered as of the end of fiscal year 2001 , the agency does not have a complete picture of the accuracy of most risk management plans . all risk management plans registered with epa were electronically verified to check for completeness ; if all data fields had entries , the plan was considered complete . after that check , epa reviewed some of the plans for accuracy or internal consistency . as of september 30 , 2001 , epa had reviewed about 2,200 of the approximately 15,000 registered plans for accuracy . these reviews consisted of about 1,500 desk audits of the plans and about 700 on - site inspections . according to an epa official , the agency's ability to perform more comprehensive reviews has been constrained by resources . most regions performed some desk audits , which ranged from reviewing a few elements of the plans to reviewing the entire plan . most epa regional officials who performed desk audits said they used guidance issued by headquarters as a basis for their audits or as a supplement to their own procedures . inventory forms are required for approximately 500,000 materials . see appendix ii for an example of a chemical inventory form . additionally , epcra requires the formation of local emergency planning committees whose members include , at a minimum , local police , fire , civil defense , public health , environmental , and transportation officials , as well as representatives of facilities subject to the emergency planning requirements , community groups , and the media . there are approximately 3,500 local emergency planning committees across the nation . under the act , the committees are required to develop and periodically review emergency response plans for their communities that , among other things , identify chemical facilities and outline procedures for response personnel to follow in the event of a chemical incident . the chemical facilities are required to supply emergency response information to the local emergency planning committee for incorporation into the emergency response plans .