agencies are needed . gao / nsiad - 94-62 . washington , d.c.: february 7 , 1994 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . according to u.s . forces japan officials , these initiatives may involve multiple construction projects to satisfy the requirements of the initiatives as well as detailed coordination between the government of japan and the local communities to gain consensus for these projects . in 2004 , the united states and japan began a series of sustained security consultations aimed at strengthening the u.s. - japan security alliance to better address today's rapidly changing global security environment . dod's defense policy review initiative established a framework for the future of u.s. force structure in japan designed to create the conditions to reduce the burden on japanese communities and create a continuing presence for u.s. forces in the pacific theater by relocating units to other areas , including guam ( app . i shows the location of guam ) . this initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the marine corps presence on okinawa to include relocating 8,000 marines and their estimated 9,000 dependents to guam . more than 10,000 marines and their dependents will remain stationed in okinawa after this relocation . another initiative includes the closure and replacement of marine corps air station futenma at a less densely populated location on okinawa by the 2014 goal as a result of local concerns involving safety and noise . dod officials view the success of the futenma replacement facility as a key objective of the initiative that will need to be completed in order for other realignment actions to take place . previously , the united states and japan were unsuccessful in closing and replacing the marine corps air station futenma as a part of the special action committee effort on okinawa . in recent years , dod has been undergoing a transformation that has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of u.s. military forces overseas since the end of the korean war . the initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet cold war threats as well as bring home u.s. forces while stationing more flexible , deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world . as part of its transformation , dod has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater u.s. military flexibility to combat conventional and asymmetric threats worldwide . the marine corps realignment from okinawa to guam is just one of several initiatives to move military forces and equipment and construct supporting military facilities on guam . in addition to the marine corps' move to guam , the navy plans to enhance its infrastructure , logistic capabilities , and waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing , combat logistics force ships , submarines , surface combatants , and high - speed transport ships at naval base guam .