gao - 19-51 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2018 . ( recommendation 2 ) . in written comments on a draft of this report , the air force concurred with both of the recommendations . the air force also noted initial actions it has taken to develop an aircraft maintainer retention strategy . the air force's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the acting secretary of defense , and the secretary of the air force . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made significant contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess the extent to which the air force had aircraft maintainer staffing gaps , we compared staffing levels authorized by the air force for enlisted aircraft maintainers — for the active and reserve components — with the actual number of maintainers available to staff those positions for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . we selected this timeframe to capture staffing levels before and after the air force's fiscal year 2014 reduction in end strength , and fiscal year 2017 was the most recent year for which complete data were available at the time of our review . specifically , we analyzed the data to identify overall maintainer staffing gaps , as well as any gaps by maintenance specialty and skill level . in addition , we compared maintainer personnel requirements to authorized staffing levels — the number of those requirements that are funded — for the overall maintainer population , each maintenance specialty , and each skill level . to assess the reliability of the air force's requirements , authorized staffing levels , and actual staffing levels ( for both the active and reserve components ) , we reviewed related documentation ; assessed the data for errors , omissions , and inconsistencies ; and interviewed officials . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to describe the air force's aircraft maintainer staffing levels and associated gaps from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . additionally , we conducted interviews with relevant air force , air national guard , and air force reserve command officials to identify reasons for staffing challenges and actions the air force has taken to address them . to assess the extent to which the air force experienced attrition of aircraft maintainers , we calculated maintainer loss rates — the number of maintainers who leave the career field or the air force within the fiscal year ( for reasons such as separation or retirement ) over the number of maintainers at the start of the fiscal year — for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . we calculated loss rates for the overall maintainer population as well as by skill level and maintenance specialty for the active and reserve components .