moreover , the plan is not complete . in particular , it does not ( 1 ) contain an accurate and up - to - date test schedule , ( 2 ) identify any metrics for measuring testing progress , and ( 3 ) clearly define and completely describe the roles and responsibilities of various entities that are involved in system testing . further , the sbinet system program office has not performed individual component testing as part of integration testing . as of july 2008 , agency officials reported that component - level tests had not been completed and were not scheduled to occur . dhs has not effectively defined and managed sbinet requirements . while the program office recently issued guidance that is consistent with recognized leading practices , this guidance was not finalized until february 2008 , and thus was not used in performing a number of key requirements - related activities . in the absence of well - defined guidance , the program's efforts to effectively define and manage requirements have been mixed . for example , the program has taken credible steps to include users in the definition of requirements . however , several requirements definition and management limitations exist . one of the leading practices associated with effective requirements development and management is engaging system users early and continuously . in developing the operational requirements , the system program office involved sbinet users in a manner consistent with leading practices . despite the absence of baselined cop and project - level requirements , the program office has proceeded with development , integration , and testing activities for the block 1 capabilities to be delivered to tucson 1 and ajo l. as a result , it faces an increased risk of deploying systems that do not align well with requirements , and thus may require subsequent rework . another leading practice associated with developing and managing requirements is maintaining bidirectional traceability from high - level operational requirements through detailed low - level requirements to test cases . specifically , it conducted requirements - gathering workshops from october 2006 through april 2007 to ascertain the needs of border patrol agents and established work groups in september 2007 to solicit input from both the office of air and marine operations and the office of field operations . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cbp's sbi program is to leverage technology , tactical infrastructure , and people to allow cbp agents to gain control of the nation's borders . within sbi , sbinet is the program for acquiring , developing , integrating , and deploying an appropriate mix of surveillance technologies and command , control , communications , and intelligence ( c3i ) technologies . the surveillance technologies are to include a variety of sensor systems aimed at improving cbp's ability to detect , identify , classify , and track items of interest along the borders . unattended ground sensors are to be used to detect heat and vibrations associated with foot traffic and metal associated with vehicles .