to this end , the office has taken several steps . for example , it submitted its first annual report to congress that summarized the departments' efforts toward achieving full interoperability and the status of key activities completed to set up the office . further , the office developed 11 standard operating procedures in areas such as program management oversight , strategic communications , and process improvement . however , the office has not yet carried out other key responsibilities identified in its charter that are fundamental to effective it program management and that would be essential to effectively serving as the single point of accountability . the interim director stated that the departments expect to share 70 percent of inpatient discharge summaries and expand the system to an air force and a navy site by the september deadline . nevertheless , the official added that to better meet clinicians' needs , dod will need to further expand the inpatient medical records system . in this regard , the department has established a future goal of making the inpatient system operational for 92 percent of dod's inpatient beds by september 2010 . the departments also expect to demonstrate an initial capability to scan service members' medical documents into the dod electronic health record and share the documents electronically with va by september 2009 . according to the program office interim director , the departments were in the process of setting up an interagency test environment to test the initial capability to query medical documents associated with specific patients as of late june 2009 . he stated that the departments expect to begin user testing at up to nine sites by september 2009 . further , development of an integrated master schedule is a key it program management activity , especially given the magnitude and complexity of the departments' efforts to achieve full interoperability . according to dod guidance , an integrated master schedule should identify detailed project tasks and the associated start , completion , and interim milestone dates ; resource needs ; and relationships ( eg , sequence and dependencies ) between tasks . while the program office has begun to develop an integrated master schedule as required by its charter , the current version does not include the attributes of an effective schedule . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the use of information technology ( it ) to electronically collect , store , retrieve , and transfer clinical , administrative , and financial health information has great potential to help improve the quality and efficiency of health care and is important to improving the performance of the u.s. health care system . historically , patient health information has been scattered across paper records kept by many different caregivers in many different locations , making it difficult for a clinician to access all of a patient's health information at the time of care . lacking access to these critical data , a clinician may be challenged to make the most informed decisions on treatment options , potentially putting the patient's health at greater risk . the use of electronic health records can help provide this access and improve clinical decisions .