( fig . 2 shows the completed fire station. ) also under construction were the boiler house and the administration / cafeteria building , seen in figure 3 . the concrete outer shells of building 101 and the administration / control building had been completed . while building 101 was still open to the elements and contained no inner walls , russian subcontractors were installing outlets and control panels inside the drywall of the administration building . ( see fig . 4 for a comparison of the construction work completed on building 101 in november 2003 and november 2005. ) we also observed piping and wiring being installed above ground for site wide electrical , heat , and water utilities . despite such progress , the cwdf project has not met scheduled milestones , primarily because of a delay in awarding the contract for the completion of the ctr - funded destruction building ( building 101 ) , pictured in figure 4 . in january 2005 , dod estimated that the cwdf would cost $1.039 billion and be transferred to the russian federation by july 2009 . however , in march 2006 , dod officials stated that they were unable to estimate when the entire facility will be completed and at what cost until they award a contract for the completion of building 101 . as of february 2006 , dod estimated that the construction of the entire cwdf was about 40 percent complete , compared with the more than 52 percent scheduled for completion at that time . as indicated in figure 5 , the construction of certain key structures is behind schedule , including the destruction building ( building 101 ) , the control building ( administration building ) , the boiler house , and the water circulation building . building 101 is on the “critical path” , that is , delays in finishing the building will prolong construction on other parts of the shchuch'ye facility . although the exterior shell of building 101 is on schedule , the award of the construction contract for the remainder of building 101 is behind schedule . parsons had planned to award the subcontract for the balance of the building in june 2005 , but it may not be awarded until summer 2006 . since october 2005 , parsons has incurred costs for personnel salaries , rent , and transportation of more than $3 million per month , which will continue until the subcontract is awarded . where possible , parsons has reduced or delayed recruitment of personnel planned for management of building 101 . construction activity is still ongoing at other buildings throughout the site . the delay in awarding the contract for the remainder of building 101 has impacted the overall schedule for completing the facility's construction . as part of its program management , dod estimates dates for key project milestones at shchuch'ye . these include a milestone schedule with objective ( ideal ) completion dates , threshold ( latest acceptable ) dates , and estimated completion dates for key activities . as of may 2006 , however , dod does not expect to meet key milestone dates for the cwdf . according to this schedule ( as shown in fig .