attorneys . fbi referrals decreased about 23 percent , from 6,941 matters in fiscal year 2001 to 5,331 matters in fiscal year 2003 . at the same time , referrals by all other agencies increased by about 15 percent , from 5,851 matters in fiscal year 2001 to 6,726 in fiscal year 2003 . other lead agencies and departments for referring white - collar crime cases included the department of health and human services and the social security administration , with health care and federal program fraud and other white collar crime referrals ; the u.s . postal service , with referrals of tax and bank fraud , and other white - collar crime matters ; the u.s. secret service ; and the internal revenue service , with securities and other fraud referrals . fbi violent crime referrals decreased about 10 percent from 5,003 matters in fiscal year 2001 to 4,491 matters in fiscal year 2003 . ( 2 ) how has fbi's shift in priorities affected federal efforts to combat white - collar and violent crime ? to examine the effect of fbi's post - september 11 shift in resources to national security priorities on federal efforts to combat domestic drug crime , we analyzed data related to ( 1 ) the combined nonsupervisory field agent resources devoted to drug enforcement by the fbi and dea ; ( 2 ) the number of newly opened fbi and dea drug matters ; ( 3 ) the number of drug matters referred from all federal agencies to u.s. attorneys' offices for prosecution . we also conducted semistructured interviews to determine what impacts , if any , selected headquarters and field law enforcement officials have observed . to examine the effect of the fbi's post - september 11 priority shifts on federal efforts to combat white - collar and violent crime , we analyzed data indicating the number of such matters referred to u.s. attorneys' offices for prosecution from the fbi and all other federal agencies . in addition , we included in our semistructured interview for law enforcement officials questions related to impacts observed , if any , on violent and white - collar crime caseloads and enforcement activities . the interviewees , although working in locations that experienced some of the sharpest reductions in fbi drug program resources , are not representative of all locations or even of all of those locations that experienced similar reductions in resources . the data we analyzed and interviews with law enforcement officials should be considered as short - term indicators with limitations in their ability to determine the effect of fbi priority shifts . because the reliability of fbi , dea , and executive office for u.s . attorneys ( eousa ) information management systems data is significant to the findings of this review , we also interviewed officials of fbi , dea , and eousa to determine what steps they take to assess the accuracy of data elements in these systems and what limitations , if any , they have identified with the data elements used for our review .