delinquent payment . cardholders under 21 were more likely to experience minor delinquencies ( 30 or 60 days past due ) than older cardholders , according to the federal reserve bank of richmond study . at the same time , young cardholders were substantially less likely to experience serious delinquency ( 90 days past due and longer ) . the study also found that cardholders who got their credit cards earlier in life were less likely to experience a serious default later in life . we provided a draft of this report to cfpb and the federal reserve . we incorporated technical comments from these agencies as appropriate . parental responsibility . the student monitor and sallie mae studies found that the college student , rather than the parent , was most often responsible for making credit card payments ( 79 percent in the student monitor study and 92 percent in the sallie mae study ) . late payment fees . one quarter of students in the 2013 student monitor study reported paying a late payment fee at least once since acquiring a credit card , with almost half of that group incurring more than one late fee . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , cfpb , the federal reserve , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or cackleya@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . this report examines ( 1 ) the trends associated with and characteristics of college affinity card agreements , ( 2 ) the extent of marketing for college affinity and college student credit cards , and ( 3 ) what is known about the effect of the use of affinity cards and student credit cards on student credit card debt . to determine the characteristics of the agreements , we first reviewed and analyzed affinity card agreements between issuers and schools or affiliated organizations from calendar years 2009-2012 . we downloaded information for all those agreements in effect during those years from public databases managed by the federal reserve and cfpb . we analyzed the agreements to identify general trends and characteristics . we assessed these data by interviewing federal reserve and cfpb staff knowledgeable about the data and checking the data for illogical values or obvious errors . we use “college affinity card” to refer to a credit card issued in conjunction with an agreement between a credit card issuer and an institution of higher education or an affiliated organization ( such as an alumni association or foundation ) . we use “college student credit card” to refer to a credit card established for and targeted to college students .