the consumer requests an extension . a 60-day extension is provided . each extension based on these factors is onetime only , the cms officials told us . other than granting these extensions , the marketplace did not apply good - faith - effort authority in any other way for 2016 enrollment , officials told us . cms also did not otherwise waive , amend , or extend verification or eligibility controls in 2016 , officials told us . we asked cms officials for details on the number of applications that benefited from good - faith - effort extensions for 2016 , including the reason for granting the extensions and types of inconsistencies at issue , and as of august 2016 officials had yet to respond . in the case of duplicate enrollments , our fictitious applicant was first approved for subsidized coverage in the california marketplace and then — using the same identity — applied and was approved for a qualified health plan in virginia and for medicaid in west virginia . when our applicant made the medicaid application , a federal marketplace representative flagged the applicant as potentially fraudulent . nonetheless , the applicant was told that he was eligible for coverage . cms officials told us they consider it highly unlikely , and thus low risk , that individuals would apply for multiple plans for themselves , given the cost of paying premiums on more than one plan . but they also acknowledged they are interested in the possibility that multiple enrollments could represent identity theft , and said they are working on approaches to identify such situations . as cms has reported to us previously , officials during this review also said the agency is unaware of any fraud in individual consumer applications for federal marketplace coverage . apart from individual - consumer - level fraud , instances have occurred in which agents or brokers have submitted applications for people without their knowledge , for financial gain , such as if the agent / broker is working for an organization and is paid on commission based on the number of people enrolled , cms officials told us . the officials said some consumers have reported to the agency that they have been enrolled without their knowledge . cms officials declined to provide other details , saying work in this area is law - enforcement sensitive . in responding to consumer complaints , cms has recently developed a capability for service - center representatives to direct complaint information to a program - integrity office for investigation into waste , fraud , or abuse , cms officials told us . they likewise said further details were unavailable . overall , according to cms officials , the federal marketplace has made a number of improvements to the eligibility and enrollment process , as well as the process for resolving application inconsistencies . in particular , cms officials said the agency has focused on providing applicants with specific details of what documentation is required , and that notices sent to consumers have been improved . as a result , more consumers are sending proper documentation with appropriate information in response to marketplace requests , and applicant inconsistencies are down .