health group of plans . excluding snps , ma plans with lower enrollment were more likely to be in the good health group than plans with higher enrollment . ( see fig . about two - thirds of ma plans with 10 to 75 beneficiaries were in the good health group of plans , while roughly one - third of ma plans with the largest enrollment ( 2,863 to 92,950 beneficiaries ) were in the good health group . while snps of any plan size were most likely to have beneficiaries in the poor health group , 58 percent of the smallest snps were in the poor health group and 73 percent of the largest snps were in the poor health group . ( see fig . hmos , including snps , in the good health group of plans tended to be located in areas where the percentage difference between the 2008 ma payment benchmarks and estimated 2008 ffs spending was smaller . ma payment benchmarks averaged 13 percent higher than estimated ffs spending in areas where hmos in the good health group of plans were located , but benchmarks were 16 percent higher where hmos in the poor health group were located . for contract year 2010 , cms modified the process it used to ensure ma plan benefit packages do not discriminate against beneficiaries in poor health . the agency revised the way it determines cost - sharing thresholds used to identify benefit packages that are likely discriminatory , and as a result , some of the thresholds used in contract year 2010 reviews allowed higher cost - sharing amounts than in previous years . cms also revised its process for contacting plans for benefit package modifications by contacting all , instead of a selection of , ma plans found to have cost sharing that exceeded cms thresholds . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from april 2009 through april 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings . most medicare beneficiaries can choose to receive covered services through medicare ffs or through an ma plan — which operates under medicare part c — if one is offered where they live . maos are allowed flexibility in designing their plan benefit packages and cost sharing for certain services can vary widely by ma plan . ma plans operate under annual contracts between maos and cms and must offer benefits that are covered under medicare ffs . these benefits consist of part a hospital insurance , which covers inpatient stays , care in skilled nursing facilities , and some home health care ; and part b medical insurance , which covers certain physician , outpatient hospital , and laboratory services , among other services . all beneficiaries enrolled in part b are charged a part b premium . in general , in order to enroll in a ma plan , beneficiaries must be entitled to benefits under part a and enrolled in part b .