revisits . multiple revisits are an indicator of more serious problems in achieving or sustaining compliance . the points for revisits are as follows: 0 for the first revisit , 50 for the second revisit , an additional 75 ( total 125 ) for the third revisit , and an additional 100 ( total 225 ) for the fourth revisit . ms has changed its scope and from 1999 to 2004 , each state had two sffs at any one time , which they selected from a list of four candidates , and the sff methodology assign a different numb eficiency data . der of points to deficiencies using only about 1 year of in 2005 , cms expanded the program's scope by changing the number of sffs from 1 to 6 per state ( excluding alaska ) , for a total of 136 , and altered the sff methodology by changing the points assigned to deficiencies and using about 3 years of deficiency data , weighted equally . in 2007 , cms began requiring states to notify a nursing home and its other accountable parties ( i.e. , the nursing home's administrator , owners , operators , and governing body ) when the nursing home was designated as an sff . in 2008 , cms began designating sffs on the nursing home compare web site and also changed the scoring methodology to assign weights to each year , such that the most recent year's standard and complaint surveys are given the greatest weight . during the course of our work , cms implemented its five - star system for nursing homes . every nursing home in the united states is rated from one ( much below average ) to five ( much above average ) stars . the five - star system provides an overall quality rating based on individual ratings for three separate components: ( 1 ) assessment of federal quality standards from standard surveys and complaint investigations , which cms refers to in the five - star system as health inspections ; ( 2 ) ratings on nursing home staffing levels ; and ( 3 ) ratings on quality of care measures . in december 2008 , cms's nursing home compare web site began reporting the star ratings that nursing homes receive for each component of the five - star system as well as an overall quality rating . according to cms officials , as of march 2009 the rating for the health inspections component was based on cms's sff methodology , with one variation: the five - star system assigns more points to d - through i - level deficiencies than does the sff methodology . ( see table 2. ) cms explained that it changed some of the points assigned to deficiencies in the five - star system because the purpose is different from that of the sff program . the sff program focuses on facilities in each state whose performance is consistently extremely poor , and so it assigns many points to immediate jeopardy deficiencies relative to other , lower - level deficiencies .