some interviews covered multiple grant programs . interviews covered 9 agencies and 42 programs for which charter schools are potentially eligible . the survey response rate was 78 percent . the survey collected data on the federal discretionary grant programs to which charter schools applied in school year 2008-2009 , the most recent information about grant applications available at the time of our survey , the outcome of the applications , schools' lea , nonprofit and for - profit status , school size , and the demographic characteristics of their students . we analyzed whether charter schools' characteristics , such as size of student body and years of operation were related to whether or not they applied for federal grants . we also conducted site visits to new york city , new york ; columbus , ohio ; and miami - dade , florida ; school districts to interview representatives of the school districts and charter schools about charter schools' experience in applying for federal grants . to identify federal discretionary grant programs for which charter schools may be eligible , we matched and merged two governmentwide lists of federal k - 12 education grant programs and screened them to select only discretionary grant programs that provided funding , which yielded a list of about 90 programs . we obtained the lists of federal k - 12 education grant programs from the national resource center for charter school finance and governance and gao's prior work . to confirm the programs on our list , we contacted agency officials who managed the programs . to further refine the list , we developed a questionnaire to collect basic descriptive information for each program from the responsible agency official . in addition to collecting program information , the questionnaire allowed us to confirm , exclude , and add programs based on consultations with agency officials . our final list contained 47 programs for which charter schools are potentially eligible . to determine what role education has played in helping charter schools establish their eligibility for federal programs , we interviewed agency officials with oversight responsibility for the federal discretionary grant programs identified in study question 1 . we asked about any experience they had with charter school applicants to the programs , outreach they had conducted to inform charter schools about their eligibility , and any challenges charter schools faced in establishing their eligibility for the programs . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . appendix i provides a detailed description of our methodology and its limitations , as well as our scope . we conducted this performance audit from october 2009 to december 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . charter schools are public schools created to address a number of concerns with the educational system . intended as a means to address failing schools and to encourage innovation in public education policy , charter schools operate with more autonomy than traditional public schools .