this practice was continued for allocations in 2010 . in 2011 , however , the isotope program divided the price for helium - 3 to be used for non - cgmp applications into two categories: one for federal agencies and their grantees and one for commercial and nonfederal agencies . table 3 shows the different prices for helium - 3 , per liter , beginning with 2009 . doe and nnsa are taking actions to increase the supply of helium - 3 by , among other things , pursuing other sources and recycling helium - 3 from retired equipment . specifically , nnsa officials said that nnsa is in discussions with ontario power generation ( opg ) to determine the feasibility of obtaining helium - 3 from opg's stores of tritium . opg has accumulated this tritium as a by - product of producing electricity using heavy - water nuclear reactors . according to opg officials , it owns 16 heavy - water nuclear reactors that are currently operating that have produced enough tritium to initially yield approximately 100,000 liters of helium - 3 . according to nnsa officials , once this initial amount is recovered , opg estimates that its stores of tritium may yield about 10,000 liters of helium - 3 annually . combined with nnsa's current annual production of helium - 3 , obtaining helium - 3 from opg could boost the united states' supply to about 18,000 to 20,000 liters per year . in addition , dhs and doe have expressed interest in exploring the option of extracting helium - 3 from natural helium , or helium - 4 . helium - 3 is found in small quantities in natural helium and could possibly be extracted from the nation's helium reserve near amarillo , texas , that is managed by the department of the interior's bureau of land management . the bureau of land management estimates that approximately 125,000 liters of helium - 3 may be present in the helium reserve , which could be extracted over the next 10 years . doe officials estimate that a similar reserve of natural helium in wyoming could yield another 200,000 liters of helium - 3 that could be extracted over the life of the reserve . dhs officials note , however , that a feasibility study is needed to determine whether it would be cost - effective to extract helium - 3 from natural helium . federal agencies and private sector companies have started to recycle helium - 3 from unused equipment in order to boost the supply . for example , an analysis conducted by doe shows that it can extract helium - 3 from retired tritium storage beds at its tritium extraction facility at the savannah river site . doe estimates that it could extract 8,000 to 10,000 liters from these storage beds every 8 to 10 years , beginning as early as 2012 . additionally , doe surveyed its national laboratories and identified over 1,500 liters of helium - 3 in unused equipment and storage cylinders that could be reused immediately . dhs has also identified retired equipment from which helium - 3 can be extracted . private companies have also started to recycle helium - 3 from decommissioned radiation detection portal monitors .