some states included other exceptions . for example , alabama , kansas , and nebraska allow the use of eminent domain to clear a defective title under certain circumstances . twenty - four of the 29 states changed their eminent domain procedures or added new requirements ( see also fig . some states placed the burden of proof on the condemning authority to show that the use is public , the taking is necessary to remove blight , or both . for example , colorado law states that the condemning authorities must prove by a preponderance of evidence that the eminent domain taking is for a public use . furthermore , colorado law sets a higher standard if the purpose is to eliminate blight — requiring condemning authorities to show by clear and convincing evidence that the taking is necessary for the elimination of blight . in addition , some of these states require condemning authorities to provide improved or additional public notice and hearings prior to condemning a property . utah law requires that written notice be provided to the property owner of each public meeting at which a vote on the proposed taking is expected to occur and that the property owner must be given an opportunity to be heard on the proposed taking . west virginia redefined the requirement for public notice to require a certified letter be sent to the property owner informing the owner about the public hearing and the right to an inspection to determine if the property is blighted . sometimes these steps overlap . land acquisition laws generally require compensation be paid to the owner of a property that a public authority has acquired , including acquisitions by eminent domain . all 50 state constitutions require that just or fair compensation be paid to those whose property has been taken through eminent domain . just compensation is a payment by the government for property it has taken under eminent domain , usually the fair market value , so that the owner theoretically is no worse off after the taking . as mentioned earlier , the united states constitution stipulates that eminent domain use by a government authority must include just compensation to the property owner . some state constitutions , including georgia and montana , provide for payment of expenses above the fair market value of the property such as , in certain circumstances , attorney's fees or litigation expenses incurred in determining adequate compensation . the land acquisition process often includes relocation of either the property owner or residents and businesses located in the property acquired by the authority ; federal and state laws also address the costs involved in relocation . requirements in the ura , the federal law governing the provision of relocation benefits to displaced parties , are applicable to all acquisitions — including voluntary acquisitions achieved through negotiated settlements and acquisitions through eminent domain — of real property for federal or federally assisted programs or projects . the ura provides benefits to displaced individuals , families , businesses , and nonprofit organizations . the types of benefits provided depend on factors such as ownership , tenancy , and use of property ( commercial versus residential use ) .