b . an independent decision maker — someone other than the individual who gathered the evidence for the lawful authority acting on the application — reviews the evidence . c. a record of the matter is created and maintained for review . proper record: in determining whether to grant relief , the lawful authority receives evidence concerning and considers the: a . circumstances regarding the firearms disabilities imposed by 18 u.s.c . § 922 ( g ) ( 4 ) ; b. applicant's record , which must include , at a minimum , the applicant's mental health and criminal history records ; and c. applicant's reputation , developed , at a minimum , through character witness statements , testimony , or other character evidence . proper findings: in granting relief , the lawful authority issues findings that: a . the applicant will not be likely to act in a manner dangerous to b . granting the relief will not be contrary to the public interest . de novo judicial review of a denial: the state provides for the de novo judicial review of relief application denials that includes the following principles: a . if relief is denied , the applicant may petition the state court of appropriate jurisdiction to review the denial , including the record of the denying court , board , commission or other lawful authority . b . in cases of denial by a lawful authority other than a state court , the reviewing court as the discretion to receive additional evidence necessary to conduct an adequate review . c. judicial review is de novo in that the reviewing court may , but is not required to , give deference to the decision of the lawful authority that denied the application for relief . required updates to state and federal records: pursuant to § 102 ( c ) of the niaa , the state , on being made aware that the basis under which the record was made available does not apply , or no longer applies: a . updates , corrects , modifies , or removes the record from any database that the federal or state government maintains and makes available to nics , consistent with the rules pertaining to the database ; and b. notifies the attorney general that such basis no longer applies so that the record system in which the record is maintained is kept up to date . recommended procedure: it is recommended ( not required ) that the state have a written procedure ( eg , state law , regulation , or administrative order ) to address the update requirements . under doj regulations , the fbi is to be responsible for validating and maintaining data integrity of records in nics — including mental health and unlawful drug use records — and does so through triennial on - site audits and proactive validation processes in each state that uses or contributes to the nics index . according to officials from the fbi's cjis division , the cjis audit unit conducts the on - site audits every 3 years and the validation processes are held between each audit .