( see app . iii for more detailed information about the survey results. ) this lack of familiarity about the dtv transition among american consumers could be problematic . if consumers are unfamiliar with dtv — particularly with benefits such as high definition television — they are less likely to purchase digital television sets . yet , if few consumers purchase digital television sets , producers have little incentive to provide much digital content and cable systems have little incentive to carry the digital signal . thus , consumer awareness of the transition — and subsequent consumer adoption of dtv equipment — is a key element in facilitating the transition . first , in the digital world , each copy is an exact replica of the original , whereas in the analog world , each successive copy degrades in quality . second , digital content can be easily and widely transmitted on the internet , whereas analog copies must typically be physically transferred from user to user . in october 1998 , the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) was signed into law . the dmca amended and updated the copyright act of 1976with respect to the use of copyrighted works in digital contexts . chairman powell's april 2002 proposal for voluntary industry actions to speed the dtv transition suggested several actions that sought to increase consumer awareness . the chairman called on broadcast stations to use their analog channel to promote the content on their digital channel . he also called on cable systems to market their dtv products and programming on the air and in customers' monthly bills . in addition , he asked dtv equipment manufacturers and retailers to market broadcast , cable , and satellite dtv options to consumers at the point - of - sale . in response to this proposal , the 10 largest cable operators said they would do more to advertise and market their value - added dtv programming , and consumer electronics makers said they would use point - of - sale promotions and a national public awareness campaign to promote dtv set - top boxes . in addition , in january 2002 , the broadcast and consumer electronics industries formed a joint initiative to increase awareness and understanding of dtv through promotional activities in select cities . fcc itself has not undertaken any significant activities to raise public awareness about the dtv transition and its implications . broadcast networks in particular are concerned that without protection for over - the - air content on dtv , content providers will move their programming to cable and satellite channels where copyright protection is stronger . to address copy protection for over - the - air content , studios want the use of a “broadcast flag,” which would identify rules for how particular content could be used . the flag would be recognized by technology embedded in digital television sets and other devices that receive dtv broadcast signals . for example , the flag might signal to a copy device that the user is allowed to make personal copies of a particular television program but would prevent that user from distributing those copies on the internet .