, larger airports in larger cities ) . my statement today focuses on funding for airport development . specifically , this statement discusses trends in ( 1 ) aviation activity at airports since 2007 , ( 2 ) costs of airports' planned development , and ( 3 ) federal funding and airports' revenues that may be available to finance development costs . this statement draws from our body of work , completed from june 2007 through june 2014 examining airport and aviation - industry trends . specific products from this work are cited throughout the statement . because of the size and duration of airport development — for example , planning , funding and building a new runway can take more than a decade and several hundred million dollars to complete — long - term debt is used to help finance these types of projects . while almost all airport sponsors in the united states are states , municipalities , or public authorities , there is a significant reliance on the private sector for finance , expertise , and control of airport assets . for example , the majority of airport employees are employed by private sector entities , such as vendors and baggage handlers , and private companies also own and operate some airports . under congressional authorization , since 1996 , faa has piloted an airport privatization program that relaxes certain restrictions on the sale or lease of airports to private entities . since 2007 , economic pressures — including record - high fuel prices and the recession of 2007 through 2009 — helped spark a wave of consolidation across the airline industry . for instance , delta acquired northwest in 2008 , united and continental merged in 2010 , southwest acquired airtran in 2011 , and us airways and american airlines received u.s. district court approval for their proposed merger in april 2014 . as part of this restructuring and a more general focus on capacity decisions , u.s. airlines have reduced the number of flights they offer passengers in certain markets . we found in june 2014 , based on our analysis of dot data , that there were 1.2 million fewer scheduled domestic flights at large , medium , and small hub , and nonhub airports in 2013 than during 2007 . the greatest reduction in scheduled flights occurred at medium hub airports , which decreased nearly 24 percent from 2007 through 2013 , compared to a decrease of about 9 percent at large hub airports and about 20 percent at small hub airports over the same time period . medium hub airports also experienced the greatest percentage reduction in air service as measured by available seats ( see fig . however , because airlines are now better able to match capacity to demand , planes are fuller than they have ever been . as a result , passenger boardings did not fall as much as either the number of flights or available seats . according to our analysis of dot's data from 2007 through 2012 , passenger boardings decreased approximately 17 percent at medium hub airports and about 2 percent at large hub airports , but increased more than 4 percent and about 3 percent at small hub and nonhub airports , respectively .