gao - 13-337 . washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2013 . we are not making any recommendations in this report . dod opted not to provide formal comments on a draft of this report , but provided technical comments , which were incorporated into this report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; and the commandant of the marine corps . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the contact named above , kimberly seay , assistant director ; vijay j. barnabas ; julie corwin ; mae jones ; barbara joyce ; carol petersen ; michael silver ; and michael willems made key contributions to this report . defense infrastructure: improved guidance needed for estimating alternatively financed project liabilities . military housing: enhancements needed to housing allowance process and information sharing among services . gao - 11-462 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2011 . military housing privatization: dod faces new challenges due to significant growth at some installations and recent turmoil in the financial markets . gao - 09-352 . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2009 . military housing: management issues require attention as the privatization program matures . details about each project follow . in december 2006 , the navy awarded its first pilot project to privatize housing for junior unaccompanied personnel at naval station san diego , california . the project included the privatization of one existing building and the construction of three new buildings . according to navy officials , the existing building includes 258 “modules” built to the 1995 dod standards for housing for unaccompanied personnel , each featuring two sleeping rooms and a small common area . the new buildings include 941 “market - style” two - bedroom apartments , and , in total , the san diego project provides 2,398 bedrooms . the existing building , which was conveyed to the developer , was intended to house junior unaccompanied personnel ( e - 4 / petty officer third class and below ) , and the new buildings were intended to house mid - level unaccompanied personnel ( e - 4 / petty officer third class with more than 4 years of service to e - 6 / petty officer first class ) . the three new buildings became available to rent within a 4-month period , beginning in december 2008 . navy officials told us that delivering 1,882 new beds within 4 months caused significant occupancy challenges , and that the target population of e - 4 to e - 6 has never been realized because of the on - base location of the project .