at this time , the effectiveness of these steps is unknown . nor does irs have any data on the actual impact on voluntary compliance . irs did project that a one percent improvement in k - 1 reporting levels would result in approximately $1.7 billion in additional tax reported . irs developed a plan for the schedule k - 1 matching program that , according to irs , relied on established project management principles . however , irs did not timely implement two parts of the plan . first , irs did not test the feasibility of focusing the program on interest and dividend income until after recommending such a focus and communicating the recommendation to taxpayers , tax preparers , and other stakeholders . second , after changing the plan , irs did not clearly communicate with taxpayers , tax preparers or other stakeholders about the changes . failure to timely implement these two parts of the plan led to compliant taxpayers being surprised and burdened by the notices they received and ultimately resulted in irs halting the schedule k - 1 notification process before all 97,200 notices were sent to taxpayers . in planning the schedule k - 1 matching program , irs officials said they relied on established principles from its enterprise life cycle ( elc ) project management approach , the same strategy irs has used for planning and implementing its ongoing information systems modernization efforts . irs developed a series of k - 1 matching program management plans including those covering transcription and compliance management , risk management , and internal and external stakeholder communications . the tracking reports should give irs management information before all notices are sent out about the effectiveness of the changes made to the program . the k - 1 compliance management plan called for performing two tests before selecting cases for the k - 1 matching program . as discussed earlier , the revised program covered underreported trade or business , rental real estate , other rental activity , and guaranteed payment flow - through income . although the program communication plan called for communicating with internal and external stakeholders , irs failed to inform taxpayers , tax preparers , and other stakeholders of the changes it made to the matching program and the potential for the changes to increase burden on compliant taxpayers . an irs official responsible for the k - 1 program stated that a communication breakdown resulted in mixed messages being shared with stakeholders about the type of cases that would be selected for the k - 1 matching program . interest and dividend income were identified as low risk because they are easily identified on individuals' tax returns . short and long - term capital gains and royalties were considered a moderate risk because the k - 1 information was less likely to be accurate or the income could be harder to locate on individuals' returns . income from trade or business activities , rental real estate , other rental activities , and guaranteed payments was considered high risk because it could be much harder to isolate on individuals' returns . for example , some taxpayers would reduce or net their flow - through income in these four categories by subtracting carryover losses or expenses .