( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this product to the department of defense for comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendations . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the air force , and the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the house armed services committee report accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 contained a provision for us to review the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to develop space command and control capabilities . this report ( 1 ) assesses the status of and plans for ongoing air force efforts to develop advanced command and control capabilities for space , and ( 2 ) identifies challenges the air force faces in developing these capabilities . to assess the status of and plans for ongoing air force efforts to develop advanced command and control capabilities for space , we analyzed air force space command and control ( c2 ) program increment demonstration and planning retrospective reports for the first three increments and examined acquisition strategies for relevant programs , including acquisition strategies and addenda for joint space operations center ( jspoc ) mission system ( jms ) increments 1 and 2 . we also examined the air force's draft acquisition strategy for space c2 and dod's draft acquisition strategy for major agile software programs ; reviewed space c2 document mapping planned capabilities to the specific requirements that will be met by program deliveries ; and analyzed status updates from the space c2 program and the combined space operations center and program update briefings prepared for congressional staff by the jms and space c2 programs and the national space defense center . in addition , we analyzed space c2 program plans in conjunction with interim dod guidance for agile software acquisition , the joint chiefs of staff cyber survivability endorsement implementation guide , the office of the secretary of defense guidance on cybersecurity operational test and evaluation procedures in acquisition programs and dod enterprise development , security and operations ( devsecops ) processes ; and examined the principal dod space advisor's capabilities based assessment which included issues relating to space c2 . the space c2 program is one of the first dod software - intensive programs to move away from the traditional approach and into the more modernized agile development methodology . program officials told us that many of the problems with jms's development stemmed from its more traditional approach , and that with the space c2 program they wanted to avoid circumstances that did not lead to program success .