gao - 11-194 . washington , d.c.: february 10 , 2011 . ( see fig . 1 for a timeline of key rtt grant activities to date. ) grantee states must meet additional requirements throughout the 4-year rtt grant period . grantees must obligate all funds by the end of their 4- year grant period and must liquidate all obligations no later than 90 days after their grant term ends . education , however , may grant extensions for states beyond the 90 days on a case - by - case basis . any funds not obligated and liquidated by september 30 , 2015 , will revert to the u.s. treasury , according to education officials . also , education required rtt grantee states , school districts , and schools to identify and share promising practices — with the federal government and the public — that result from implementing rtt projects . this requirement includes making rtt data available to stakeholders and researchers and publicizing the results of any voluntary evaluations they conduct of their funded activities . education's policy is to monitor grantee states to ensure they meet their goals , timelines , budgets and annual targets , and fulfill other applicable requirements . according to education officials , the department's monitoring plan for states emphasizes program outcomes and quality of implementation , while also ensuring compliance with rtt program requirements . they said the monitoring process for rtt grantees builds on the process that the department uses to monitor all discretionary grants . this process includes , among other things , ( 1 ) establishing working partnerships with grantees in order to effectively administer and monitor awards , ( 2 ) reviewing and approving administrative changes to grants , ( 3 ) monitoring projects for performance and financial compliance , ( 4 ) providing technical assistance and feedback to grantees on their progress , and ( 5 ) reviewing final outcomes and disseminating information about successful results . in addition , education requires states to monitor how school districts use rtt funds . education's institute of education sciences ( ies ) is conducting a series of national evaluations of rtt state grantees as part of its evaluation of programs funded under the recovery act . in september 2010 , ies awarded two contracts to evaluate rtt implementation , outcomes , and impacts on student achievement . one evaluation will examine multiple recovery act programs , including rtt , and the other evaluation will focus on rtt and the school improvement grants program . several briefs and reports are expected from these studies and , according to education , the first one may be available in the summer of 2011 . officials in 6 of the states we interviewed — including 2 states that received an rtt grant and 4 states that did not receive one — reported making policy changes to reform their education systems in order to be more competitive for rtt . those policy changes included new state legislation and formal decisions made by executive branch entities , such as the governor or state board of education ( see table 2 ) .