likelihood of participating in head start . table 15 shows that before adjusting for other factors , children of parents with limited english proficiency had higher odds of participating in head start when all ethnic / racial groups were considered together ( odds ratio = 1.39 ) . the same was true when asians were considered separately ( odds ratio = 3.81 ) , but no significant effect of parents' limited english proficiency was found for hispanics ( odds ratio = 0.98 ) . after controlling for other characteristics , children of parents with limited english proficiency had significantly lower odds of participating in head start when all racial / ethnic groups were considered together ( odds ratio = 0.67 ) , and when hispanics were considered separately ( odds ratio = 0.69 ) , but significantly higher odds among asians ( odds ratio = 1.90 ) . likelihood of receiving any nonparental care . table 12 shows that before adjusting for other factors , the effect of parents' limited english proficiency on the likelihood of receiving any type of nonparental childcare was negative and significant for all groups considered together , and for hispanics and asians considered separately ( odds ratios of 0.28 , 0.38 , and 0.40 , respectively ) . after controlling for these other factors , the differences between children of parents with limited english proficiency and other parents in terms of their receipt of any type of child care were smaller for all groups considered together and for hispanics ( odds ratios of 0.77 and 0.75 , respectively ) , but not statistically significant among asians ( odds ratio of 0.85 ) . while almost all of the control variables attain statistical significance in the model that included all racial and ethnic groups , the statistical significance of individual control variables in the models including only asian or hispanic children varies . likelihood of receiving financial assistance for child care . both entities are housed within acf . ccb provides block grants to states through ccdf to subsidize child care expenses of eligible families . in contrast , the office of head start awards grants for the operation of head start programs directly to local public or private organizations , school systems , or indian tribes . the flow of funds under ccdf and head start is shown in figure 2 . ccdf is used to subsidize the child care expenses of low - income families with children under age 13 and to improve the overall quality and supply of child care . the goals of the program are to ( 1 ) allow each state maximum flexibility in developing child care programs and policies ; ( 2 ) promote parental choice to empower working parents to make their own decisions on the child care that best suits their family's needs ; ( 3 ) encourage states to provide consumer education information to help parents make informed choices about child care ; ( 4 ) assist states to provide child care to parents trying to achieve independence from public assistance ; and ( 5 ) assist states in implementing the health , safety , licensing , and registration standards established in state regulations . ( 2 ) what challenges do these families face in accessing these programs ?