increasing premiums . increased contributions by retirees to health care premiums is another area where plan sponsors have continued to make changes to control their health care expenditures . kaiser / hewitt data showed that 79 percent of surveyed employers had increased retiree contributions to premiums in the past year , and 85 percent reported that they were very or somewhat likely to increase these contributions for the 2005 plan year . retiree contributions for new retirees aged 65 and over increased , on average , 24 percent from 2003 to 2004 , according to the kaiser / hewitt study . the mercer 2003 study reported that employers varied retiree premium contributions , with medicare - eligible retirees paying on average about 38 percent of plan premiums when the cost was shared between the employer and the retiree , an increase of approximately 4 percentage points since 1999 . four of the 12 fortune 500 plan sponsors we interviewed also reported changes to premiums . for example , one plan sponsor made a change in 2004 to increase premiums for all individuals retiring after january 1 , 2004 , consistent with increases in premiums for active workers , whereas previously retirees kept the same premiums for life . officials we interviewed representing unions and their members also cited increased premiums for many retired union workers . some employers are also beginning to offer access - only coverage to some or all retirees , in which employers allow retirees to buy into a health plan at the group rate , but without any financial assistance from the employer . for example , according to 2003 mercer data , about 37 percent of retiree health plans for employers with 500 or more employees required medicare - eligible retirees to pay the full cost of the employment - based plan . thirteen percent of the kaiser / hewitt employers reported making a change in the past year to provide access - only coverage to retirees , with retirees paying 100 percent of the costs . a supplement to the 2004 kaiser / hret survey examined the percentage of medicare - eligible retirees with access - only coverage and found that 5 percent of medicare - eligible individuals who are retired from employers with 200 or more employees that offer retiree health benefits had such coverage . which mma prescription drug coverage options do plan sponsors say they are likely to pursue and what effect will these options likely have on health benefits for medicare - eligible retirees ?