pub . 101-428 , 104 stat . 928 ( 1990 ) ; pub . 106-553 , 114 stat . those reported by the other federal police forces . ( 3 ) what level of retirement income do current uscp benefits provide and what costs are associated with the proposed benefit enhancements ? in addition to uscp , we selected nine other federal police forces to include in our review , based on ( 1 ) prior work on federal police forces , ( 2 ) inclusion in the office of personnel management's ( opm ) occupational series for police officers ( 0083 ) , and ( 3 ) the number of officers located in the washington , d.c. metropolitan area or who receive washington , d.c. locality pay.functionally equivalent to police officers designated under opm's 0083 according to uscp officials , uscp police officers are police series.located in the washington , d.c. metropolitan area . uscp and the three police forces with enhanced retirement benefits offered among the highest minimum entry - level salaries , ranging from $52,020 to $55,653 , as shown in table 2 . at $55,653 , uscp and the supreme court police offered the highest minimum entry - level salaries to their police officers . nih police and postal security force offered the lowest minimum entry - level salaries among the 10 police forces , at $38,678 and $38,609 , respectively . uscp reported routinely having a wider variety of duties than other federal police forces . these duties ranged from routinely protecting members of congress to buildings . for example , uscp officials stated that their main focus is protecting life and property , and thus , in addition to routinely protecting members of congress , they also protect members' families throughout the entire united states , as authorized , as well as congressional buildings , parks , and thoroughfares . conversely , the postal security force reported having fewer duties , and the protective duties that it does have , including routinely protecting employees and buildings , are ones that all or most of the police forces , including the uscp , also have . postal security force officials stated that their officers' primary duty is routinely protecting the united states postal service buildings and mail processing facilities . figure 1 identifies the reported routine protective duties of uscp and the nine federal police forces we reviewed . we selected nine federal police forces that have officers who are part of , or functionally equivalent to , opm's 0083 police series and who have at least 50 officers who are located in the washington , d.c. metropolitan area or receive washington , d.c. locality pay . the nine federal police forces are: further , uscp has approximately 1,800 police officers bureau of engraving and printing police ( bep police ) , federal bureau of investigation police ( fbi police ) , federal emergency management agency police ( fema police ) , national institutes of health police ( nih police ) , pentagon force protection agency police ( pentagon police ) , supreme court police , united states park police ( park police ) , u.s .