cost . we included studies that reported findings related to savings to health care payers , which are those parties generally responsible for paying claims for health care services , because we believed they would be the most applicable to determining the effects of electronic prescribing on costs for medicare . we did not review studies that estimated potential savings for providers , such as savings associated with reductions in time spent writing prescriptions or resolving questions about prescriptions . the studies evaluated the effects of a variety of different types of electronic prescribing technology , such as stand - alone electronic prescribing systems and ehr systems that include electronic prescribing – related functions . according to the healthcare information and management systems society ( himss ) , ehr systems also typically include information such as patient demographics , progress notes , problems , medications , vital signs , past medical history , immunizations , laboratory data , and radiology reports . additionally , computerized physician order entry ( cpoe ) systems ( also referred to as computerized provider order entry systems or computerized prescriber order entry systems ) allow for electronic ordering of medications and may include other functions , such as ordering laboratory procedures and referrals . hospitals may employ cpoe systems as part of a strategy to reduce medication errors . some organizations and published studies evaluated the effects of electronic prescribing systems that had clinical decision support ( cds ) capabilities , which can include checks for allergies , drug – drug interactions , overly high doses , clinical conditions , and other patient - specific dose checking , and can provide access to information on patient medical histories , pharmacy eligibility , and formulary and benefits . it is important to note that the electronic prescribing systems evaluated by the organizations we obtained information from and published studies we reviewed may have had technical capabilities that differ from the technological requirements in the electronic prescribing program or the ehr program . the studies utilized a variety of different methodologies , including the following: ( 1 ) pre - post methodologies , which compare dimensions of quality or cost before and after the implementation of electronic prescribing systems or cpoe systems ; ( 2 ) comparison methodologies , which are used to compare dimensions of quality , cost , or both between a control group ( i.e. , one that does not electronically prescribe ) and an intervention group ( i.e. , one that does electronically prescribe ) ; and ( 3 ) cost simulations and cost - benefit analyses that projected the costs and savings of implementing electronic prescribing systems . some studies identified compared a population of providers that electronically prescribed to a population that did not ( eg , handwrote prescriptions ) . for example , some studies identified a population of providers who had access to electronic prescribing systems and compared them to a population of other providers who did not have access to electronic prescribing systems , while other studies identified prescriptions before cpoe implementation and compared those prescriptions to prescriptions transmitted after cpoe implementation . other studies only looked at populations of providers known to be electronic prescribers .