dod refers to these funds as coalition support funds . congress has continued to make such funds available in each subsequent fiscal year . second , dod's annual appropriations act in 2005 authorized dod to use funds from its operations and maintenance accounts to provide supplies and services ; transportation , including airlift and sealift ; and other logistical support to coalition forces supporting military and stability operations in iraq . dod refers to these funds as lift and sustain funds . this authority has also been continued in subsequent appropriations acts . according to a dod official , both coalition support funds and lift and sustain funds are used for any requirements that could be appropriately paid for from operations and maintenance accounts , including airlift , sealift , and sustainment services such as feeding and billeting for coalition troops , among other things . in addition , a dod official stated that both of these funds are used to support nations whose economic conditions prevent them from fully funding their troops' presence in iraq . the key distinction between the coalition support and the lift and sustain funds is that coalition support funds are used to reimburse countries for costs they incur , and lift and sustain funds are used to reimburse u.s. military departments for services they provide to support eligible countries . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for these purposes . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in march 2003 , the united states — along with the united kingdom , australia , and other members of the coalition — began combat operations in iraq . the original “coalition of the willing” consisted of 49 countries ( including the united states ) that publicly committed to the war effort and also provided a variety of support , such as direct military participation , logistical and intelligence support , over - flight rights , or humanitarian and reconstruction aid . the term “coalition of the willing” refers to those countries that declared political support for the war effort ; not all of these countries contributed troops to multinational operations . between december 2003 and may 2007 , 39 countries ( including the united states ) — some of which were not original coalition members — provided troops to support operations in iraq . three sources of funding help support non - u.s. coalition troops in iraq: coalition support funds , lift and sustain funds , and peacekeeping operations funds . first , the emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act of 2003 authorized dod to use up to a certain amount of its operations and maintenance funds to reimburse countries for the logistical and military support they provided to u.s. military operations in iraq . third , the state department provided peacekeeping operations ( pko ) funds in 2003 and 2004 to provide basic supplies and equipment such as armor and medical supplies to coalition troops in iraq . these funds were used to make initial equipment purchases for countries participating in polish and u.s. - led divisions in iraq . many nations and various international organizations are supporting the efforts to rebuild iraq through multilateral or bilateral assistance .