however , there are several gaps in these measures . in an effort to address these concerns , the program manager recently noted in the 2008 annual report that as the ise matures , he expects the performance management approach will itself mature to move from measuring individual agency progress to measuring the overall performance of the ise . after september 2001 , state and local governments began to establish fusion centers to improve information sharing across levels of government and varying disciplines and to prevent terrorism or other threats . by september 2007 , almost all states and several local governments had established , or were in the process of establishing , fusion centers . as we reported in october 2007 , these centers varied in their level of maturity , capability , and characteristics . for example , while some centers were just starting out , officials in many ( 43 of the 58 ) fusion centers we contacted described their centers as operational . of these operational centers , 9 opened in the couple of years after september 2001 , while 34 opened since january 2004 . in terms of capability , we reported that these centers ranged from a center with analysts and access to networks and systems from dhs , fbi , and state and local entities operating at a top secret level to a center that had just appointed an officer in charge and lacked access to any of these federal networks and systems . however , our work showed that most of the operational fusion centers we contacted had adopted scopes of operations and missions that included more than just counterterrorism - related activities . for instance , officials in just over half of the operational centers we contacted said that their scopes of operations included all - crimes or all - crimes and terrorism , and several noted the link between crimes and terrorism as a rationale for adopting a broader scope of operations . officials in about half of the operational centers said that their centers included all - hazards information , such as that related to public health and safety or emergency response . overall , center officials we contacted during our review told us that adopting a broader focus than counterterrorism helped provide information about all threats , and including additional stakeholders that could provide staff and support could help increase the centers' sustainability . but there is still important and critical work left to do . this includes better integrating all of these changes and initiatives into a set of functioning policies , processes , and procedures for sharing ; continuing to break down agency stovepipes and cultures that promoted protection over sharing ; monitoring and measuring progress ; and maintaining momentum .