( see app . i for a listing of project stakeholders and researchers involved in rspa's multimodal research programs. ) although rspa has developed an annual plan and taken other steps to facilitate research coordination , it has not fully met legislative and dot requirements for coordinating departmental research . figure 1 summarizes these requirements and the extent to which rspa has met them . ( 2 ) to what extent has rspa fulfilled requirements for evaluating research within dot ? and ( 3 ) what types of multimodal research has rspa conducted since 1999 , and what have been the results ? to address questions regarding rspa's efforts to coordinate and evaluate the department's research efforts , we examined pertinent legislation , dot policy guidance , and dot performance reports and plans as well as reports and documents provided by rspa , including the department's research , development , and technology plan . although we did not review the individual research programs and agendas of each dot modal administration , we reviewed external assessments conducted by us and the national research council's transportation research board regarding rspa's role and efforts in coordinating dot research . further , we interviewed rspa officials , including rspa's associate administrator for innovation , research , and education ( hereafter associate administrator ) ; officials from the volpe national transportation systems center in cambridge , massachusetts ; and all of the members of the department's research and technology coordinating council ( hereafter coordinating council ) , to discuss research coordination efforts and identify potential improvements . at the time of our review , the council was made up of 15 members representing the department's office of the assistant secretary for transportation policy , office of intelligence and security , office of the assistant secretary for budget , office of intermodalism , united states coast guard , federal aviation administration , federal highway administration , federal railroad administration , national highway traffic safety administration , federal transit administration , maritime administration , rspa , bureau of transportation statistics , federal motor carrier safety administration , and transportation security administration . in addition , to determine the types and status of multimodal research that rspa conducted , we ( 1 ) reviewed and analyzed rspa budget data from fiscal years 1999 through 2003 and ( 2 ) reviewed rspa's multimodal project plans agreements and published project results for the same period . ( one of rspa's multimodal research programs — the transportation infrastructure assurance program — is also the subject of a separate gao review. ) we conducted our review from september 2002 through february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . rspa has both legislative and departmental responsibilities for coordinating and evaluating dot's research and development programs , which , in fiscal year 2002 , amounted to about $1 billion . the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) made dot responsible for establishing a strategic plan for surface transportation research . the plan is to include a discussion of efforts to coordinate federal surface transportation research and technology development activities to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort .