sba administers 19 of the 80 programs . furthermore , businesses conducting contract work for va must be listed in the database to receive contracting preferences for veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses . while sba continues to agree that evaluating program outcomes is important , to date the agency has not yet committed resources for such an evaluation . in may 2010 , we reported that va had made limited progress in implementing an effective verification program . the 2006 act requires that va give priority to veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses when awarding contracts to small businesses and provides for the use of sole - source and set - aside contracts to achieve contracting goals va must establish under the act . the act also requires va to maintain a database of veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and verify the ownership , control , and veteran or service - disabled status of businesses in the database . the database would be available to other federal agencies . this verification requirement is unique to va. for other federal agencies , the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program is a self - certification program and therefore is susceptible to misrepresentation ( that is , ineligible firms participating in the program ) . while the 2006 act requires va to use the veteran preferences authorities to award contracts only to verified businesses , va's regulation did not require that this take place until january 1 , 2012 . since our may 2010 report , congress passed the veterans small business verification act requiring va to accelerate its time frame for verifying all businesses in its mandated database . va has set a target date of july 31 , 2011 , to do so . in fiscal year 2009 , 25 percent of the contracts awarded using veteran preference authorities went to verified businesses . at the time of our report , va had verified about 2,900 businesses – – approximately 14 percent of businesses in its database of veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses . among the weaknesses we identified in va's verification program were files missing required information and explanations of how staff determined that control and ownership requirements had been met . va's procedures call for site visits to further investigate the ownership and control of higher - risk businesses , but the agency had a large and growing backlog of businesses awaiting site visits . furthermore , va contracting officers awarded contracts to businesses that were denied after the verification process . finally , although site visit reports indicate a high rate of misrepresentation , va had not developed guidance for referring cases of misrepresentation for investigation and enforcement action . such businesses would be subject to debarment under the 2006 act . to help address the requirement to maintain a database of verified businesses , we recommended that va develop and implement a plan for a more thorough and effective verification program .