table 1 highlights these practices . dod is attempting to implement some of these practices for its major weapon programs . for example , as part of its strategy for enhancing the roles of program managers in major weapon system acquisitions , the department has established a policy that requires formal agreements among program managers , their acquisition executives , and the user community that set forth common program goals . these agreements are intended to be binding and to detail the progress a program is expected to make during the year and the resources the program will be provided to reach these goals . dod is also requiring program managers to sign tenure agreements so that their tenure will correspond to the next major milestone review closest to 4 years . over the past few years , dod has also been testing portfolio management approaches in selected capability areas — command and control , net - centric operations , battlespace awareness , and logistics — to facilitate more strategic choices for resource allocation across programs . within the space community , cost estimators from industry and agencies involved in space have been working together to improve the accuracy and quality of their estimates . in addition , on specific programs , actions have been taken to prevent mistakes made in the past . for example , on the gps iiia program , the air force is using an incremental development approach , where it will gradually meet the needs of its users , use military standards for satellite quality , conduct multiple design reviews , exercise more government oversight and interaction with the contractor and spend more time at the contractor's site , and use an improved risk management process . on the sbirs program , the air force acted to strengthen relationships between the government and the sbirs contractor team , and to implement more effective software development practices as it sought to address problems related to its flight software system . correspondingly , dod's office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics is asking space programs to take specific measures to better hold contractors accountable through linking award and incentive fees to program milestones . dod interim space guidance also asks space programs to make independent technology readiness assessments at particular points in the acquisition process and to hold requirements stable . furthermore , the air force , u.s. strategic command , and other key organizations have made progress in implementing the operationally responsive space ( ors ) initiative . this initiative encompasses several separate endeavors with a goal to provide short - term tactical capabilities as well as identifying and implementing long - term technology and design solutions to reduce the cost and time of developing and delivering simpler satellites in greater numbers . ors provides dod with an opportunity to work outside the typical acquisition channels to more quickly and less expensively deliver these capabilities . in 2008 , we found that dod has made progress in putting a program management structure in place for ors as well as executing ors - related research and development efforts , which include development of low cost small satellites , common design techniques , and common interfaces .