during the hazard . however , a pandemic poses some unique challenges . during the peak weeks of an outbreak of a severe influenza pandemic in the united peak weeks of an outbreak of a severe influenza pandemic in the united states , an estimated 40 percent of the united states workforce might not states , an estimated 40 percent of the united states workforce might not be at work due to illness , the need to care for family members who are be at work due to illness , the need to care for family members who are sick , or fear of becoming infected . moreover , an influenza pandemic is sick , or fear of becoming infected . moreover , an influenza pandemic is likely to occur in several waves , each lasting up to 6 to 8 weeks , with likely to occur in several waves , each lasting up to 6 to 8 weeks , with outbreaks occurring simultaneously across the country . outbreaks occurring simultaneously across the country . as part of the summits , the secretary of health and human services signed memorandums of understanding ( mou ) with each state that identified shared common goals and shared and independent responsibilities between hhs and the individual state for influenza pandemic planning and preparedness . for example , the mou between hhs and the state of california noted that states and local communities are responsible under their own authorities for responding to an influenza pandemic outbreak within their jurisdictions and having comprehensive influenza pandemic preparedness plans and measures in place to protect their citizens . in addition , to further assist states and localities with their influenza pandemic preparedness efforts , hhs funded the national governors association to conduct a series of influenza pandemic regional workshops for states , the first five of which are discussed earlier . a national governors association official stated the association held nine workshops between april 2007 and january 2008 and that it is not planning to conduct additional influenza pandemic workshops for states . in addition , in may 2008 , fema hosted an influenza pandemic exercise and seminar for senior executives . the purpose of the exercise , which involved fema officials , the pandemic region a pfo team , and a number of states in pandemic region a , was to determine best practices for communication and coordination during an influenza pandemic response . the senior executive seminar , which included officials from cdc , hhs , dhs , and a number of states in pandemic region c , was intended to address pandemic risk , challenges , and issues , both regionally and nationally . fema is also planning to host another influenza pandemic seminar in may 2008 for the other states in pandemic region c that did not participate in the previous seminar . despite these efforts , state and local officials from all of the states and localities we interviewed told us that they would like additional federal influenza pandemic guidance from the federal government on specific topics to help them to better plan and exercise for an influenza pandemic .