oecd . pensions at a glance 2013: oecd and g20 indicators . paris , france: oecd publishing , 2013 . “is there a retirement crisis ? ” national affairs , no . biggs , andrew g. and glenn r. springstead . “alternate measures of replacement rates for social security benefits and retirement income.” social security bulletin , vol . blahous , charles p. public trustee for social security . what workers need to know about social security as they plan for their retirement . pang , gaobo and sylvester j. schieber . understanding social security's income replacement measurements . arlington , va: april 30 , 2014 . pang , gaobo and mark warshawsky . “retirement savings adequacy of u.s. workers.” benefits quarterly , vol . pang , gaobo and mark j. warshawsky . “calculating savings rates in working years needed to maintain living standards in retirement.” benefits quarterly , vol . pang , gaobo and mark j. warshawsky . “implications of some deficit reduction proposals for retirement savings.” benefits quarterly , vol . pang , gaobo and mark j. warshawsky . “the employer's decision to provide health insurance under the health reform law.” benefits quarterly , vol . poterba , james m. “retirement security in an aging population.” american economic review , vol . purcell , patrick j . “federal employees' retirement system: the role of the thrift savings plan.” journal of deferred compensation , vol . rhee , nari and ilana boivie . the continuing retirement savings crisis . washington , d.c.: national institute on retirement security , 2015 . schieber , sylvester . independent consultant . what workers need to know about social security as they plan for retirement . statement before the united states house of representatives , committee on ways and means , subcommittee on social security , 113th cong. , 2nd sess. , july 29 , 2014 . scholz , john karl and ananth seshadri . “what replacement rates should households use ? ” university of michigan retirement research center working paper , vol . seshadri , ananth . “measuring optimal savings using a life - cycle model of consumption,” presented at 2014 ici retirement summit . washington , d.c. , april 4 , 2014 . social security administration , office of the chief actuary . replacement rates for retirees: what makes sense for planning and evaluation ? actuarial note 155 . baltimore , md: july 2014 . social security administration , office of the chief actuary . replacement rates for hypothetical retired workers , actuarial note 2014.9 . baltimore , md: july 2014 . turner , john a. and hazel a. witte . retirement planning software and post - retirement risks . sponsored by the society of actuaries and the actuarial foundation . schaumburg , il: society of actuaries , december 2009 . vanderhei , jack . “measuring retirement income adequacy: calculating realistic income replacement rates.” employee benefit research institute issue brief , no . 297 ( september 2006 ) . wu , april yanyuan , nadia s. karamcheva , alicia h. munnell , and patrick purcell . “how do the changing labor supply behavior and marriage patterns of women affect social security replacement rates ? ” center for retirement research at boston college working paper , vol . 16 ( july 2013 ) .