gateway . the gateway program aims to build a sustainable platform in lunar orbit to support human lunar exploration and scientific experiments by nasa and its commercial and international partners . nasa is planning for gateway to maneuver to different orbits around the moon , which will allow access to a variety of locations on the lunar surface . the gateway program is the first program nasa has designated as a tightly coupled program . the program is composed of multiple projects , which are responsible for executing portions of the gateway mission . individual teams manage the projects and each project will have its own cost estimate and launch readiness date . gateway program management is responsible for ensuring the overall integration of all the individual projects . see figure 3 for a description of the three gateway projects that nasa has initiated . in addition to gateway , nasa initiated several other programs: human landing system . the human landing system , or lunar landers , is to provide crew transportation from gateway to the lunar surface and back and demonstrate capabilities required for deep space missions . nasa anticipates that there will be three stages to the landers — a descent , ascent , and transfer stage — but the number of stages may vary depending on the contractors that nasa selects to develop the system . nasa is planning for the descent stage to serve as a crew and cargo lander ; the ascent stage to bring crew back to gateway from the lunar surface ; and the transfer stage to transfer the ascent and descent stages from gateway orbit to a lower lunar orbit for the landing . space suits . nasa plans to update the design of its space suits , which supply life support , including oxygen and water , among other things , to astronauts . the updates include additional protection from extreme temperatures and hazards in the lunar environment , such as dust ; increased mobility ; and extended service life for lunar surface operations . commercial lunar payload services . under commercial lunar payload services , commercial partners provide end - to - end commercial payload delivery services to the surface of the moon . in some cases , nasa changed the acquisition strategy to increase the speed of development work . for example , nasa had planned to build the habitation and logistics outpost in - house , but due to the 2024 acceleration announcement , now plans to award a contract for its development . in addition , nasa changed its plans to acquire the human landing system as an integrated system instead of by stage to meet the accelerated timeline . nasa developed a broad agency announcement for the human landing system with the goal of awarding contracts by the end of january 2020 . nasa released a draft broad agency announcement for the integrated system in july 2019 , about 4 months after receiving direction to land humans on the moon by 2024 . human landing system program officials raised concerns about the program's ability to meet the 2024 timeline , but said they are trying to mitigate this risk by incorporating input from prior studies and feedback from industry into the program's draft broad agency announcement .