reg . as of july 2015 , dhs had not implemented the program but , according to the dhs semiannual regulatory agenda published in june 2015 , a final rule for the program is anticipated in october 2015 . see 80 fed . reg . 35,030 , 35,031 ( june 18 , 2015 ) . standards in standards for internal control in the federal government for documenting transactions and significant decisions . to determine how dhs has measured results , we compared iscd's performance measure with criteria in the nipp for evaluating the effectiveness of risk management efforts by , among other things , collecting performance data to assess progress in achieving outputs and outcomes . we interviewed iscd headquarters officials responsible for overseeing the cfats program to confirm our understanding of their processes and systems for authorizing , approving , and inspecting facilities for compliance . finally , we conducted four site visits to observe two authorization inspections and two compliance inspections . we selected inspection locations in california , oregon , maryland , and texas based on geographic dispersion and to cover different types of chemical facilities regulated by the cfats program . while the information obtained from these inspections cannot be generalized to all inspections , it provides insight and context on how iscd conducts cfats inspections . for further details on our scope and methodology , see appendix ii . we conducted this performance audit from september 2014 to july 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the cfats program is intended to ensure the security of the nation's chemical infrastructure by identifying , assessing the risk posed by , and requiring the implementation of measures to protect high - risk chemical facilities . section 550 of the dhs appropriations act , 2007 , required dhs to issue regulations establishing risk - based performance standards for chemical facilities that , as determined by dhs , present high levels of risk , and required vulnerability assessments and the development and implementation of site security plans for such facilities.the cfats interim final rule in april 2007 and appendix a to the rule , dhs published published in november 2007 , lists 322 chemicals of interest ( coi ) and the screening threshold quantities amount for each . according to dhs and subject to certain statutory exclusions , all facilities that manufacture chemicals of interest as well as facilities that store or use such chemicals as part of their daily operations may be subject to cfats . in general , however , only chemical facilities determined to possess a requisite quantity of coi ( that is , the screening threshold quantity ) and that are subsequently determined to present high levels of security risk — that is , covered facilities — are subject to the more substantive requirements of the cfats regulation .