ii. ) we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in the interest of clarity , i want to note at the outset that we are defining overlaps as similar food safety - related activities being performed by more than one agency — such as the training of food inspectors . we are defining duplication as essentially identical activities performed by more than one agency — such as inspecting the same food - processing facility for compliance with sanitation and / or good manufacturing practices requirements . the safety and quality of the u.s. food supply is governed by a highly complex system stemming from 30 principal laws related to food safety that are administered by 15 agencies . in addition , dozens of interagency agreements are intended to address a wide range of food safety - related activities . the federal system is supplemented by the states , which have their own statutes , regulations , and agencies for regulating and inspecting the safety and quality of food products . usda and fda , within the department of health and human services , have most of the regulatory responsibilities for ensuring the safety of the nation's food supply and account for most federal food safety spending . under the federal meat inspection act , the poultry products inspection act , and the egg products inspection act , usda is responsible for the safety of meat , poultry , and certain egg products . fda , under the federal food , drug and cosmetic act , and the public health service act , regulates all other foods , including whole ( or shell ) eggs , seafood , milk , grain products , and fruits and vegetables . appendix 1 summarizes the agencies' food safety responsibilities . the existing statutes also give the agencies different regulatory and enforcement authorities . for example , food products under fda's jurisdiction may be marketed without the agency's prior approval . on the other hand , food products under usda's jurisdiction must generally be inspected and approved as meeting federal standards before being sold to the public . under current law , udsa inspectors maintain continuous inspection at slaughter facilities and examine each slaughtered meat and poultry carcass . they also visit each processing facility at least once during each operating day . for foods under fda's jurisdiction , however , federal law does not mandate the frequency of inspections ( which fda typically conducts every 1 to 5 years ) . although recent legislative changes have strengthened fda's enforcement authorities , the division of inspection authorities and other food safety responsibilities has not changed . as we have reported , usda traditionally has had more comprehensive enforcement authority than fda ; however , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 granted fda additional enforcement authorities that are similar to usda's . for example , fda now requires all food processors to register with the agency so that they can be inspected . fda also has the authority to temporarily detain food products when it has credible evidence that the products present a threat of serious adverse health consequences .