gao - 10-778t . washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2010 . april 21 , 2009 . commercial aviation: airline industry contraction due to volatile fuel prices and falling demand affects airports , passengers , and federal government revenues . gao - 09-393 . we also analyzed airline schedule data . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this testimony . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the airline industry has experienced considerable merger and acquisition activity since its early years ; especially immediately following deregulation in 1978 . figure 1 provides a timeline of mergers and acquisitions for the four largest surviving airlines , assuming an american – us airways merger , based on passengers served . a flurry of mergers and acquisitions occurred during the 1980s , when delta and western airlines merged , united acquired pan am's pacific routes , northwest acquired republic airlines , and american and air california merged . in 1988 , merger and acquisition review authority was transferred from dot to doj . since 2000 , american acquired the bankrupt airline twa in 2001 , america west acquired us airways in 2005 , while the latter was in bankruptcy ; delta acquired northwest in 2008 ; united acquired continental in 2010 ; and southwest acquired airtran in 2011 . certain other attempts at merging since 2000 failed because of opposition from doj or employees and creditors . for example , in 2000 , an agreement was reached that allowed northwest to acquire a 50 percent stake in continental ( with limited voting power ) to resolve the antitrust suit brought by doj against northwest's proposed acquisition of a controlling interest in continental . in 2006 , the proposed merger of us airways and delta fell apart because of opposition from delta's pilots and some of its creditors , as well as its senior management . since deregulation in 1978 , the financial stability of the airline industry has become a considerable concern for the federal government due , in part , to the level of financial assistance it has provided to the industry through assuming terminated pension plans and other forms of assistance . from 1979 through 2012 , there have been at least 194 airline bankruptcies , according to airlines for america ( a4a ) , an airline trade group . while most of these bankruptcies affected small airlines that were eventually liquidated , 4 of the more recent bankruptcies prior to american's ( delta , northwest , united , and us airways ) are among the largest corporate bankruptcies ever , excluding financial services firms .