however , these changes will not be easy to undertake . this was particularly evident in sbirs high up until 2004 . while experiences would caution dod not to pile on new requirements , customers often demand them fearing there may not be another chance to get new capabilities since programs can take a decade or longer to complete . third , space programs have historically attempted to satisfy all requirements in a single step , regardless of the design challenge or the maturity of the technologies to achieve the full capability . increasingly , dod has preferred to make fewer , but heavier , larger , and complex “battlestar galactica - like” satellites , that perform a multitude of missions rather than larger constellations of smaller , less complex satellites that gradually increase in sophistication . this has stretched technology challenges beyond the capability of many potential contractors and vastly increased the complexities related to software — a problem that affected sbirs high and aehf , for example . our reviews have identified additional factors that contribute to space acquisition problems , though less directly affecting cost and schedule problems we have reported on . for example , consolidations within defense supplier base for space programs have made it more difficult for dod to incorporate competition into acquisition strategies . since 1985 , there were at least ten fully competent prime contractors competing for the large programs and a number that could compete for subcontracts . arguably today , there are only two contractors that could handle dod's most complex space programs . dod has exacerbated this problem by not seeking opportunities to restructure its acquisitions to maximize competition , particularly for the small suppliers who have a high potential to introduce novel solutions and innovations into space acquisitions . in the 1990s , dod also structured contracts in a way that reduced oversight and shifted key decisionmaking responsibility onto contractors . dod later found that this approach — known as total system performance responsibility , or tspr — magnified problems related to requirements creep and poor contractor performance . another factor contributing to problems is the diverse array of officials and organizations involved with a space program , which has made it even more difficult to pare back and control requirements . the space radar system , for example , is expected to play a major role in transforming military as well as intelligence - collecting operations and other critical governmental functions , such as homeland security . as a result , its constituency includes combatant commanders , all of the military services , intelligence agencies , and the department of homeland security . the global positioning system not only serves the military , it provides critical services to civilian users , the transportation sector , the information technology sector , among many other industries . in addition , short tenures for top leadership and program managers within the air force and the office of the secretary of defense has lessened the sense of accountability for acquisition problems and further encouraged a short - term view of success , according to officials we have interviewed . though still in a pre - acquisition phase , tsat and space radar have already had one program director each .