private industry . for example , ge global research , a private research laboratory , has entered into a wfo agreement with lawrence livermore national laboratory to help refine wind prediction and control capabilities at wind farms . under this agreement , the laboratory is evaluating high - resolution wind farm modeling tools in natural terrain using high - performance computers to run wind simulation and forecasting models . foreign entities . for example , following the events at the fukushima daiichi nuclear power station resulting from the earthquake and tsunami in march 2011 , tokyo electric power company ( tepco ) entered into a wfo agreement with the savannah river national laboratory and the pacific northwest national laboratory . the laboratories were to evaluate and define the scope of work for tepco to accomplish a number of tasks including the prevention of underground water contamination and the treatment and disposal of nuclear waste . the laboratories each drew upon their expertise in these areas to develop a schedule for how the work could proceed and to identify the necessary equipment , materials , facilities , personnel , and the costs to perform the work . doe has not ensured that wfo program requirements are consistently met . specifically , doe has not ensured compliance with requirements for the approval of wfo projects , cost recovery , program reviews , and annual reporting . according to doe's wfo order , wfo projects must meet specific doe requirements , including being consistent with or complementary to doe's missions and those of the laboratories , not hindering those missions , and not placing the laboratories in direct competition with the domestic private sector . a doe contracting officer or other authorized doe designee is required to determine whether a proposed wfo project has met all of these requirements before approving or certifying the work . these determinations may not be delegated to the laboratories . however , doe officials from site offices at 8 of the 17 laboratories told us that the laboratories provide written justification in the wfo package to support , or determine , that some or all of the requirements are met and that the doe officials have often accepted the laboratories' determinations without taking steps to independently verify them . doe officials cited various reasons for relying on the laboratories to make the determinations . for example , an official from one site office told us that he relies on the laboratory's determination that wfo projects are consistent with the mission . he explained that he does not believe that the laboratory would accept work that would be inconsistent with its mission . similarly , an official at another doe site office explained that she relies on the laboratory's determination that the work cannot be performed by the private sector because she believes the laboratory staff are better informed about the capabilities available in the private sector . by relying on the laboratories' determinations without taking steps to independently verify the information , doe does not have assurances that the wfo projects selected meet doe's requirements .