app . lexis 4844 ( tex . ct. app . how is the life settlement market organized ? how are the life settlement market and its participants regulated ? what challenges are policy owners , investors , and life insurance companies facing in connection with the life settlement market ? and related investments , materials collected from the web sites of life settlement brokers and providers , and information from firms offering life settlement investments . reviewed licensing records in 34 states ( where providers were required to be licensed ) to compile a list of providers . we then conducted a survey of those 49 providers licensed in two or more states to collect data on their settlement transactions over the past 4 years . we received responses from 25 providers . interviewed seven providers , four brokers , three institutional investors , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the financial industry regulatory authority ( finra ) , three state insurance regulators , three state securities regulators , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , the north american securities administrators association ( nasaa ) , the life insurance settlement association ( lisa ) , the life settlement institute ( lsi ) , the institutional life markets association ( ilma ) , the insurance studies institute , and three attorneys specializing in life settlements . we attended two life settlement industry conferences . scope and methodology ( continued ) . and federal securities laws and regulations ; federal and state court cases , as well as sec and state securities enforcement actions involving life settlements or related investments ; model acts or similar guidance created by naic , the national conference of insurance legislators ( ncoil ) , and nasaa ; academic , regulatory , and other studies on the regulation of life settlements ; and related gao reports . we conducted a survey of state regulators from 50 states and the district of columbia to obtain information about their life settlement laws and regulations . we received responses from 45 states and the district of columbia . for this objective , we generally interviewed the same entities identified in objective one . scope and methodology ( continued ) . a u.s. supreme court decision in 1911 ( grigsby v. russell , 222 u.s. 149 ) determined in effect that a valid life insurance policy is personal property that may be sold by its owner . historically , policy owners who have had unneeded or unaffordable life insurance could surrender their policies to their life insurers for the cash surrender value . for each question below , we provide the aggregated responses of the providers . some providers did not answer every question on the survey ( as noted below where applicable ) . because no comprehensive life settlement data exist , we were not able to estimate the share of the market held by the providers responding to our survey . what was the total number of life insurance policies purchased by your firm in calendar year ? 2006 – 3,148 b . what was the total face value of the policies purchased by your firm in calendar year ? 2006 – $5,501,932,247 b .