ii ) . as a result , fda spent more than was required . user fees will pay for this review and analysis . fda anticipates delivery of a report of the consultant's findings and recommendations in fiscal year 2005 . the agency would then consider these recommendations in planning any changes to enhance its performance . while pdufa has increased the funds available for fda's drug and biologic review activities , funds for fda's other activities have constituted a smaller portion of fda's total budget since implementation of pdufa . according to fda officials , two factors may have contributed to the reduced share of fda funds allocated to other activities . first , pdufa requires that each year fda spend increasing amounts from its annual appropriation on the drug and biologic review process in order to collect and spend user fee revenues . according to agency officials , fda had difficulty determining the amount spent until the end of the year . second , fda officials said that during fiscal years 1994 through 2001 , the agency did not receive sufficient increases in its annual appropriation for salaries and expenses to cover annual pay increases for all employees . to ensure that the agency could meet the spending baseline for the drug review program and fund the pay raises , fda officials reduced available resources for other activities , such as reviewing over - the - counter and generic products and inspecting medical product manufacturing facilities . multiple review cycles have occurred for several reasons . for example , after its initial review of an application , fda may ask the sponsor to provide new information , such as new clinical trials or data analyses , to address deficiencies in the initial application . once the sponsor provides the requested information , fda undertakes another review cycle to examine the information . also , if fda completes its assessment late in the review cycle , it can be difficult to resolve issues with the sponsor before the review decision deadline . in these cases , fda may issue an approvable letter that advises the sponsor that the application will be approved if certain issues are resolved . issuing an approvable letter enables fda to meet its performance goals without making a final decision on the application . it also results in the application going through another review cycle . both fda and the pharmaceutical / biotechnology industry have acknowledged that to allow fda to meet pdufa review goals , drug and biologic applications are going through more review cycles . while the industry's goal is to obtain approval of an application , fda can meet the pdufa goal by completing its review and issuing an action letter . our analysis of approvals confirms that an increased proportion of applications are going through several review cycles . a smaller percentage of drugs was approved in the first review cycle in 2001 than in previous years ( see fig . for example , in 1998 , 54 percent of standard new drugs and biologic applications were approved in the first review cycle . in 2001 , 37 percent of standard new drugs and biologic applications were approved in the first review cycle .