circuit . the court does not allow media video or audio coverage of oral arguments , but , beginning in september 2013 , has provided audio recordings of arguments on its website using the court's own equipment . arguments are to be posted by 2 p.m. the same day they are heard by the court . court officials stated that providing such audio coverage requires minimal resources and there have been no implementation challenges . see appendix iv for additional details on the video and audio policies and procedures , coverage requests and online views , and policy implementation for the u.s. courts of appeals for the second , ninth , and d.c . circuits . courts of last resort in 49 states have written policies that allow media video and audio coverage of oral arguments and almost all of these courts have video or audio of oral arguments available online . the d.c. court of appeals — the district of columbia's court of last resort — has no written policies on media video or audio coverage of oral arguments , and according to the court's clerk , does not allow such media coverage . however , the court itself streams live audio of all oral arguments on its website and , according to the clerk , streams live video of some arguments . although the written policies of the courts in 49 states allow media video and audio coverage , the features of these policies vary . for instance , some state policies prohibit coverage of oral arguments in certain types of cases , such as juvenile proceedings , or unless parties affirmatively consent to it , which may limit coverage , while policies in other states require that judges make an on - the - record finding in order to prohibit coverage , which indicates that there is a strong presumption that coverage is allowed . table 3 summarizes media video and audio policy features and availability of oral arguments online of state and d.c. courts of last resort . see appendix v for information on the courts of last resort in each of the 50 states and the district of columbia . while courts of last resort in 49 states have written policies that allow media video and audio coverage of oral arguments , the procedures they follow to do so vary . for instance , the supreme court of california , which we visited , both allows media organizations to use their own cameras in the court and provides a live video feed that media organizations can access upon request , while the florida supreme court , which we also visited , partners with a local public broadcasting station to provide video coverage . the information that follows further illustrates variations in the policies and procedures of these two courts . supreme court of california . the court's rules allow video and audio coverage of oral arguments by the media upon request and list 18 factors for judges to consider when deciding whether to grant or prohibit coverage , such as the importance of promoting public access to the judicial system and the privacy rights of all participants in the proceeding . the court permanently began allowing coverage in 1984 .