monitoring . a program has been instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures . demonstrated progress . ability to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures and in resolving the high - risk area . these five criteria form a road map for efforts to improve and ultimately address high - risk issues . addressing some of the criteria leads to progress , while satisfying all of the criteria is central to removal from the list . figure 2 shows the five criteria and illustrative actions taken by agencies to address the criteria . importantly , the actions listed are not “stand alone” efforts taken in isolation from other actions to address high - risk issues . that is , actions taken under one criterion may be important to meeting other criteria as well . for example , top leadership can demonstrate its commitment by establishing a corrective action plan including long - term priorities and goals to address the high - risk issue and using data to gauge progress — actions which are also vital to monitoring criteria . as we reported in the february 2017 high - risk report , the federal government's efforts to address information security deficiencies had fully met one of the five criteria for removal from the high - risk list — leadership commitment — and partially met the other four , as shown in figure 3 . we plan to update our assessment of this high - risk area against the five criteria in february 2019 . based on our prior work , we have identified four major cybersecurity challenges: ( 1 ) establishing a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy and performing effective oversight , ( 2 ) securing federal systems and information , ( 3 ) protecting cyber critical infrastructure , and ( 4 ) protecting privacy and sensitive data . to address these challenges , we have identified 10 critical actions that the federal government and other entities need to take ( see figure 4 ) . the four challenges and the 10 actions needed to address them are summarized following the table . the federal government has been challenged in establishing a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy and in performing effective oversight as called for by federal law and policy . specifically , we have previously reported that the federal government has faced challenges in establishing a comprehensive strategy to provide a framework for how the united states will engage both domestically and internationally on cybersecurity related matters . we have also reported on challenges in performing oversight , including monitoring the global supply chain , ensuring a highly skilled cyber workforce , and addressing risks associated with emerging technologies . the federal government can take four key actions to improve the nation's strategic approach to , and oversight of , cybersecurity . develop and execute a more comprehensive federal strategy for national cybersecurity and global cyberspace .