( recommendation 3 ) . see table 2 for tsa's policy . tsa also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . while dhs concurred with our recommendation to revise tsa's policy to include reporting on contracts over $30 million for services associated with the operation of security - related technology , in its letter , dhs stated that not all services associated with an srt should be subject to tsara's reporting requirements . specifically , it noted that tsa will revise policy language and instructions to ensure that the justification analysis and certification analysis required under tsara is submitted prior to the award contracts and blanket purchase agreements for services that would result in new capabilities , enhancements , or otherwise upgrade srt . it distinguishes these services from services that are indirectly related to the srt or used to keep the srt operational , such as deployment and system integration . we agree with this distinction and do not consider all of the associated services mentioned in this report as necessary for inclusion in tsa's revised policy . further , we recognize that tsa , in conjunction with feedback from congress , is best positioned to determine the services included in its revised policy for reporting under tsara , consistent with its interest in avoiding duplicative or administratively burdensome reporting and delays in the acquisition process . tsa's tsara implementation strategy memo states , “o support and ensure congress is receiving the necessary information regarding critical tsa acquisitions , tsa will focus on security screening related technologies” which will ensure “the necessary actions are implemented for those technologies the public directly interacts with ( i.e . is impacted by ) .” according to tsa officials , security screening related technologies , i.e . tsa spends hundreds of millions of dollars each year developing , acquiring , deploying , and maintaining technologies in furtherance of its mission to ensure civil aviation security . through tsara , congress sought to address challenges faced by tsa in effectively managing its acquisitions and procurements by specifying measures for tsa to implement that align with identified acquisition best practices and increase the transparency and accountability of tsa's srt acquisitions . overall , tsa has policies and procedures in place to accomplish many of the reforms sought by tsara , but more could be done to improve the transparency of its spending on srts . specifically , reporting on individual task and delivery orders as well as associated services under tsara's report and certification provision would help tsa ensure that congress has timely information it could use to effectively oversee tsa acquisitions . tsa took a positive step towards greater transparency on srt spending with its first notifications to congress in august 2018 — in accordance with its policy — , but tsa's existing policy does not require similar notification for associated services or for individual task and delivery orders issued that exceed $30 million . further , while tsa developed the tsara implementation strategy memo , which serves as tsa's policy for implementing tsara , designated roles and responsibilities for tsara's requirements , and outlined tsa's approach to implement each requirement , tsa has not clearly documented and internally communicated its parameters on what constitutes an srt under tsara .