i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact elizabeth curda , director , education , workforce , and income security issues at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or curdae@gao.gov . we obtained and analyzed data from fema call centers that operate fema's helpline . we also visited florida , puerto rico , texas , and the u.s. virgin islands in june and july 2018 to interview state or territorial emergency managers , public health and human services officials , and representatives of nonprofit disability organizations , among others . we also interviewed fema officials from headquarters and staff deployed to each disaster location , including staff focused on assisting individuals with disabilities . more detailed information on the scope and methodology for that work can be found in appendix i of the issued report . to update progress fema has made toward addressing our recommendations from the may 2019 report , we interviewed fema officials and analyzed documents they provided . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . however , individuals with disabilities may not have requested accommodations or reported their disability and related needs during fema's registration - intake due to the unclear questions . as a result , the registration process may have under - identified people with disabilities . in the days after hurricane maria affected puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands — when survivors from harvey and irma were concurrently contacting the helpline — up to 69 percent of calls went unanswered and the daily average wait time for answered calls peaked at almost an hour and a half , according to our analysis of fema data . while long wait times could be burdensome for all individuals , state officials and disability advocates we interviewed said long wait times were especially burdensome for people with certain disabilities , such as those with attention disorders or whose assistive technology prevents multi - tasking when waiting on hold . unclear registration questions: fema's registration process did not give individuals a clear opportunity to state they have a disability or request an accommodation because the registration did not directly ask registrants to provide this information . according to fema officials at the time , information about disability - related needs can help fema staff match individuals with disabilities with appropriate resources in a timely and efficient manner and target additional assistance , such as help with the application process . for example , in puerto rico , an estimated 21.6 percent of people have disabilities , according to 2017 census data . however , less than 3 percent of all registrants in the territory answered “yes” to the disability - related question in response to hurricanes irma and maria .