iii. ) in its letter , fcc neither agreed nor disagreed with the report's findings . fcc provided comments on the presentation of certain facts related to usf programs . fcc said that although our report finds that uncertainty about the amount of high - cost support rus borrowers would receive under fcc's reformed universal service program has negatively affected investment in broadband , fcc recently adopted an order eliminating a rule that may have unintentionally encouraged carriers to limit their investment in broadband networks . we added text to our report about this order . additionally , fcc noted the adoption of a mechanism to mitigate the impact of reduced icc on providers . we moved our text discussing this mechanism from a footnote to the body of the report and also noted that fcc's usf / icc transformation order was never intended to be revenue - neutral for providers . we also provided a draft of this report to usda for review and comment . in an email received on may 9 , 2014 , a management analyst with usda on behalf of the assistant administrator , telecommunications program , stated that rus generally agreed with the facts presented in the report and will strive to fully implement our recommendations . however , rus commented on the presentation of six facts in the report . first , rus said that it did not agree with our presentation of a map of areas served by rus broadband loans ( fig . rus's comments indicated that the map may overstate the extent of loan service areas . however , the intent of this map is not to illustrate the extent of loan service areas but rather to illustrate the geographic distribution of rus loans ; the title and legend for the map clearly note that it reflects counties and territories with one or more approved rus loans and we include a note explaining our methodology below the map . many factors affect changes in economic activity . in any particular place , economic activity can be influenced by natural resources in that area and the current fortunes of whatever industries have located there historically , among other factors . in any particular time , regional or national economies may be growing rapidly or may be in recession . in addition , the degree to which any area is connected to the broader economy has implications for economic performance . in this regard , the quality of access to transportation networks has long been identified as among the important factors explaining economic development . more recently , access to broadband infrastructure has been thought of in this context , and particularly in the case of rural communities , real and perceived lack of broadband access has been thought to hinder economic development and has provided the motivation for the rus broadband loan program , among others . given that broadband infrastructure is one of many factors that could be associated with economic activity , it may be difficult in a modeling context to assemble all of the factors that may be necessary to distinguish one county from another in terms of its resources , industrial structure , and labor force characteristics , among other things . fcc also reformed the icc system .