( see fig . regarding the catch - up contribution provision of egtrra , although it was intended to help older workers , particularly women , catch up in saving for retirement , a higher percentage of men than women made catch - up contributions . further , a higher percentage of men also contributed at or above the statutory limit on these contributions . specifically , among the 10 percent of eligible dc participants making catch - up contributions in 2007 , 77 percent were men and 23 percent were women . further , men made up 74 percent of those contributing at or above the catch - up contribution limit , while women made up only 26 percent ( see fig . what has been the trend in new private pension plan formation in recent years ? what are the characteristics of dc participants contributing at or above the statutory dc contribution limits and how might this have changed as the limits have increased ? how might incentives to increase retirement saving by low - income workers through modifications of the saver's credit affect retirement income ? what might be the long - term effect of the recent financial crisis on retirement savings for u.s. workers ? we used the department of labor's data from the form 5500 as well as published data from the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) on plan formation . we also used data from the 2007 survey of consumer finances ( scf ) to examine characteristics of dc participants . we used a microsimulation model to assess the possible effects of modifying existing tax incentives for low - income workers . to evaluate the effects of the financial crisis on retirement savings , we reviewed and synthesized recent studies and interviewed retirement and financial experts . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . we conducted our work from february 2010 to march 2011 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product . pension tax preferences are structured to provide incentives for employers to start and maintain voluntary , tax - qualified pension plans and to ensure that participants receive an equitable share of the tax - favored benefits . the tax treatment for dc and defined benefit ( db ) plans are similar . however , dc plan contributions are subject to specific limits and db plans allow deductions for contributions to fund future benefits ( plus a cushion amount ) , which may total several times the dc tax - deferred contribution dollar limit . importantly , such benefits cannot exceed the maximum yearly benefit — which is $195,000 per participant per year — and the allowable contribution in any year also depends on a variety of actuarial factors , including the ages of the participants and the funded status of the plan . ( see table 1 for a summary of dc contribution limits. )