coal . construction of a precommercial coal gtl plant is estimated at $1.7 billion , while construction of a commercial coal gtl is estimated at $3.5 billion . biomass . potential costs associated with biomass gtl are uncertain , given the early stage of the technology . infrastructure costs associated with both biomass and coal gtls are expected to be substantial , given the necessary modifications to pipelines , refueling centers , and storage facilities . coal . experts project that , at most , 80,000 barrels per day could be produced by 2015 and 1.7 million barrels per day by 2030 . these conditions have renewed interest in a long - standing question: will oil supply continue to expand to meet growing demand , or will we soon reach a maximum possible level of production — a peak — beyond which oil supply can only decline ? historically , u.s. oil production peaked around 1970 at close to 10 million barrels per day and has been generally declining ever since , to about 5 million barrels per day in 2005 . while recent discoveries raise the prospect of some increases in u.s. oil production , significant reductions in world oil production could still have important consequences for the nation's welfare . the united states imported about 66 percent of its oil and petroleum products in 2005 , and the u.s. economy — particularly the transportation sector — depends heavily on oil . overall , transportation accounts for approximately 65 percent of u.s. oil consumption . new technologies have been introduced that displace some oil consumption within the sector , but oil consumption for transportation has continued to increase in recent years . according to a 2005 report prepared for doe , without timely preparation , a reduction in world oil production could cause transportation fuel shortages that would translate into significant economic hardship . the u.s. government addresses or examines world oil supply in several ways . for example , doe is responsible for promoting the nation's energy security through reliable and affordable energy , including oil . doe supports development of technologies for producing and using oil and for making alternative fuels , such as ethanol or hydrogen . the department also publishes statistics on energy production and consumption through eia . in addition , the united states geological survey ( usgs ) , within the department of the interior ( interior ) , assesses the amount of oil throughout the world . the united states also is a member of the international energy agency ( iea ) , an organization of 26 member countries whose objectives include coping with disruptions in the oil supply and providing information on the international oil market , among other things . in this context , we ( 1 ) examined when oil production could peak , ( 2 ) assessed the potential for transportation technologies to mitigate the consequences of a peak and decline in oil production , and ( 3 ) examined federal agency efforts that could reduce uncertainty about the timing of peak oil production or mitigate the consequences . in conducting our work , we identified and reviewed key studies on when oil production will peak .