( app . iii provides additional details on the 87 land in trust applications with decisions in fiscal year 2005. ) according to our analysis of bia files , processing times for applications with decisions in fiscal year 2005 were lengthened by inaction on the part of either the applicant or bia . for example , according to bia files , the pacific region application that took almost 19 years to process was submitted in 1986 by an individual tribal member to place 5.42 acres of land in trust . bia found that the application lacked required documents and , therefore , could not process the application until it received these documents . the applicant did not provide the necessary documents until 1991 . while the application was deemed complete in 1991 , according to our file review , the regional office did not issue a notice to interested parties of the proposed trust acquisition until 2002 . however , in the same year , the bia pacific regional director ordered processing stopped on the application because the applicant's tribal affiliation was uncertain . bia and the applicant worked to resolve this issue , and bia approved the application on february 25 , 2005 , almost 19 years after its submission . while the bia file stated clearly that processing on the file was halted initially due to inaction on the part of the applicant , it did not provide an explanation regarding why the application was not acted upon by the bia from 1991 to 2002 . in other cases processed at the horton agency office in kansas , our file review showed several applications were closed by the agency in 2005 because of inaction on the part of the tribe ; one of these applications had been submitted in 1991 . bia officials also noted that access to the internet would increase their ability to process land in trust applications in a timely manner . off - reservation applications awaiting review by bia's central office have not been processed in a timely manner . again , bia is considering imposing a 120-business day time frame , or about 6 months , for issuing a decision on off - reservation applications once an application is complete . according to bia central office staff , there was nearly a 2-year period between december 2003 and november 2005 when no off - reservation land in trust applications were cleared by the assistant secretary . on average , the 28 off - reservation applications we reviewed had been pending in the central office for 1.4 years by the end of fiscal year 2005 — almost three times longer than the 6-month time frame under consideration . using the time frame under consideration as a guide , and allowing 30 days for state and local comments , we found that at least 22 of the 28 off - reservation applications pending at the central office were not processed in a timely manner . the most recent application forwarded to the central office had been pending for about 1 month , while the oldest application had been pending for over 3 years .