fps . fps identifies providers for zpics to investigate , with the goal of identifying aberrant billing patterns early so that zpics can investigate suspect providers before they generate large amounts of potentially fraudulent claims . zpics prioritize their investigations according to cms guidance , which states that zpics should give priority to investigations with the greatest program impact and / or urgency . cms's program integrity manual defines such investigations as those involving patient abuse or harm , multistate fraud , high dollar amounts of potential overpayments , likely increase in the amount of fraud or enlarged pattern of fraud , and complaints made by medicare supplemental insurers . in addition , with the implementation of fps in july 2011 , cms directed the zpics to investigate certain high - risk leads from that system . as part of their investigations , zpics initiate administrative actions against medicare providers or suppliers , coordinating with cms and macs to carry out those actions , which may result in medicare savings . ( see table 2 for the administrative actions zpics may initiate as part of their investigations. ) for example , zpics may initiate payment suspensions that allow cms to stop payment on suspect claims and prevent the payment of future claims until an investigation is resolved . in addition , a zpic may recommend to cms that the agency revoke a provider's medicare billing privileges and will coordinate with a mac to implement that action following cms approval . in addition to administrative actions , zpics may forward vulnerabilities identified during an investigation to cms for consideration as possible local or national prepayment edits . in addition to administrative actions , if a zpic investigation uncovers suspected instances of fraud , the zpic must refer the investigation to hhs oig for further examination and , if hhs oig declines to investigate , the zpic may refer the issue to the fbi or any other interested law enforcement entity , such as a u.s. attorney's office . a zpic investigation that is referred to and accepted by law enforcement for further exploration and potential prosecution is then called a case . as long as law enforcement entities have not closed a case , it is considered open by both law enforcement and zpics . cms also requires zpics to support hhs oig , the department of justice ( doj ) , and other law enforcement entities with their medicare fraud investigations . this support can be for these entities' own , independently initiated cases , or for those that zpics initiated and then referred to law enforcement . zpics provide support on zpic - initiated and non - zpic - initiated cases by responding to law enforcement requests for information . these requests may be for data analysis ; provider enrollment records , which zpics obtain from macs ; medical review ; or other investigative support . zpic contracts cover three areas of work: 1 . fee - for - service program integrity work . zpics are to identify and investigate potential fraud in medicare fee - for - service . the contracts for this work outline four categories of investigations: part a , part b , durable medical equipment ( dme ) , and home health and hospice .