reg . 49,886 ( oct. 1 , 2001 ) , subsequently withdrawn by 70 fed . reg . economic systems , inc. ( econsys ) , a study of compensation payments for service connected disabilities ( september 2008 ) . institute of medicine of the national academies , a 21st century system for evaluating veterans for disability benefits ( 2007 ) . how well do va's procedures position the agency to ensure that tdiu benefit decisions are supported ? what alternative options have been proposed for revising the eligibility requirements and design structure for tdiu benefits ? the data included information such as the beneficiaries' age , schedular disability ratings , benefit discontinuations and total amounts paid in disability benefits . to assess the reliability of the data , we obtained detailed information from agency officials on the methods used to generate the data requested , including limitations and assumptions made by vba officials . in addition , we performed logic testing of the computer program va used to extract the data . through these means , we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of analyzing age - related trends in the tdiu beneficiary population and the benefit payments . to describe the procedures va uses to support tdiu eligibility decisions , we examined relevant federal laws , regulations and procedures for new and continuing claim determination decisions , including the tdiu policy manual and guidance documents . we also conducted interviews with va and its veterans benefits administration ( vba ) officials in their central office , and six regional offices . these offices were selected to represent a range of tdiu caseloads , percentages of claims resulting in granted benefits , accuracy of eligibility reviews , and geographic locations ( boston , massachusetts ; denver , colorado ; manchester , new hampshire ; new orleans , louisiana ; portland , oregon ; and seattle , washington ) . during our visits to five of these regional offices ( the sixth office served as a preliminary site visit ) , we held 11 discussion groups of 2 to 3 rating specialists using an interview protocol . we also interviewed quality review team ( qrt ) coaches , qrt members , and regional office management . we reviewed training materials and quality assurance data provided by the regional officials . in addition , we conducted a non - generalizable file review of 34 randomly - selected claims resulting in granted and denied benefits decided between april 2012 and april 2014 . to identify the options that have been proposed to revise the tdiu eligibility and structure , we reviewed prior va proposals , cbo options for reducing the federal budget deficit , and literature related to tdiu . we also conducted interviews with five disability experts familiar with tdiu benefits and representatives of two veterans service organizations ( vso ) to obtain their views on any potential opportunities and challenges the options pose . we did not independently assess the individual merits or accuracy of the views expressed by the experts and vso representatives . we conducted this performance audit from january 2014 to june 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .