many of these individuals have children . as of 2007 , an estimated 1.7 million children under the age of 18 had a parent in prison — an increase of almost 80 percent since 1991 ( see fig . fathers comprise more than 90 percent of the parents in prison and their numbers increased about 75 percent between 1991 and 2007 . meanwhile , the number of incarcerated mothers , who were more likely to be primary caretakers before incarceration , more than doubled during this time . children who are minorities are disproportionately more likely to have an incarcerated parent than white children . ( 3 ) in what ways do hhs and doj help child welfare and corrections agencies in working with these children and their incarcerated parents ? to address these questions , we used several methodologies . first , we reviewed relevant national data on foster care children maintained by hhs and on incarcerated parents from surveys , administered by doj's bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , of inmates in state and federal prisons and local jails . we reviewed the methods and survey design used to produce the data from both of these sources , as applicable , and , through interviews with knowledgeable agency officials and our own analyses , we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . second , we conducted structured telephone interviews with state administrators of child welfare and corrections agencies in 10 selected states to gather relevant information on the extent to which states collect data on our target population , state policies and programs , and officials' perspectives on challenges and areas in which additional federal assistance would be useful . states were selected to represent nearly half of the prison inmates and foster care children in the united states and for geographic variation . some states were also selected because they had been identified by researchers and professionals knowledgeable on these topics as having strategies ( policies , programs , or practices ) aimed at supporting parent - child ties either statewide or in localities within the state . for these 10 states , we also reviewed selected child welfare statutes and other policies . third , to gather more in - depth information at the local level , we conducted site visits in 4 of the 10 states and interviewed local child welfare officials and caseworkers ; dependency court judges ; corrections staff primarily from prison facilities as well as a few jails ; community service providers ; and , in a few cases , incarcerated parents and former foster care youth . the information we gathered from our phone interviews and site visits is not generalizable to all states and localities . in addition , while we collected information about relevant strategies used in our selected states , we did not review how widespread these were practiced in each state . fourth , we interviewed hhs and doj officials knowledgeable about pertinent agency activities and reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , policies and other agency documentation .