nasa implemented all of these recommendations . will the system perform as expected under adverse conditions ? iv&v is required to examine software on all projects with a life cycle cost over $1 billion , other projects over $250 million with a higher risk classification , or those specifically selected by the nasa chief , safety and mission assurance . once selected , a portfolio - based risk assessment is developed to identify top - level mission capabilities and a risk based assessment process identifies the most important system capabilities and the software components that play the most important role in the mission . iv&v officials noted that due to limited resources , they examine mission and safety critical software and they do not have the funding to examine all programs or projects across nasa's portfolio . generally , iv&v officials stated that they believe jwst's software development is going well , but the testing that lies ahead — when the different components are integrated — will be a challenge . for example , iv&v officials noted that jwst's software build is the largest they have reviewed for a science mission , but not the largest they have reviewed across nasa as some human exploration operations are larger . they said that most of jwst's software required to position and deploy the telescope will be examined by iv&v . however , they noted that jwst's integration is more challenging , primarily due to the number of software developers involved . while most science programs or projects have two to four software developers , jwst has eight . jwst's software development has been examined by iv&v since fiscal year 2004 and , according to officials , will likely continue to be examined until after launch when operations begin . iv&v officials said they do not examine the software for the launch vehicle . while iv&v's function requires independence from programs and projects , there have been recent changes in funding that have reduced its financial independence to some extent . organizationally , the iv&v facility remains independent by reporting to the office of the director of goddard and the office of safety and mission assurance at nasa headquarters — not to the programs or projects it examines . however , financially , starting in 2015 , an iv&v financial management official said that 75 percent of the iv&v's funding came from nasa headquarters via the agency management operations fund and the remaining 25 percent was divided amongst the various mission directorates . this changed from the past 10 years , when 100 percent of the iv&v facility's budget came from the agency management operations to ensure the independence of the iv&v office . we have previously found that financial independence requires that the funding for iv&v be controlled by an organization separate from the development organization . this ensures that the effort will not be curtailed by having its funding diverted to other program needs , and that financial pressures cannot be used to influence the effort . as a user of iv&v's expertise , jwst , via the use of program cost reserves , contributed a small portion of funding to the software iv&v facility to help fund their budget in fiscal year 2015 .