reg . eb - 5 program adjudicators to fdns for fraud concerns.2015 , on the basis of detailed reviews by fdns staff located in headquarters and overseas , fdns determined that the sources of funds in many of these petitions contained a high risk for fraud . in addition , ice hsi headquarters officials provided us with cases of immigrant investors using overseas preparers to submit counterfeit documentation to fraudulently show that funds were lawfully obtained , which can make determining the legitimacy of the source of funds challenging . further , ice hsi officials stated that they are concerned that overseas document preparers and recruiters may try to use increasingly sophisticated methods to circumvent program controls . uscis officials said that ipo and fdns did not have a means to verify self - reported immigrant financial information with many foreign banks . to what extent has uscis implemented efforts to address any identified fraud risks in the eb - 5 program ? to what extent has uscis increased its capacity to verify job creation and used valid and reliable methodologies for reporting program outcomes and overall economic benefits ? to determine the extent to which uscis and its interagency partners have assessed fraud risks in the eb - 5 program and what risks they have identified , we examined past audit findings by gao and dhs oig , and reviewed fraud risk assessments conducted by dhs , uscis , state , sec , fbi , and ice hsi . we interviewed uscis , sec , fbi , and ice hsi headquarters officials and analyzed uscis processes , procedures , and training for detecting , preventing , and investigating fraud and compared them against standards in standards for internal control in the federal government , gao's fraud risk management framework , and gao's strategies to manage improper payments . to gain the perspective of regional center program participants on the types and prevalence of fraud in the program , we also interviewed the principals of two regional centers located in proximity to uscis headquarters and the uscis california service center , which we visited because it was primarily responsible for administering the eb - 5 program prior to the program's transfer to uscis headquarters' new immigrant investor program office . we also interviewed officials about fraud risks in the eb - 5 program from a national industry association representing eb - 5 program regional centers and a national immigration lawyers association in washington , d.c. , as well as sec and ice officials in california during our site visit to the uscis california service center . although the information from these interviews and the site visit is not representative of all eb - 5 industry stakeholders' perspectives , they provided insights into the fraud risks and vulnerabilities of the program . we also reviewed a nonprobability sample of 28 eb - 5 program files for immigrant investors and regional centers uscis approved to participate in the program to identify any potential fraud indicators and review internal controls . while the files we reviewed are not representative of all completed and approved applications and petitions , they did provide us with information about different immigrant investor and regional center circumstances .