not provided . goal met ? host student loan repayment symposium , national default prevention day and a number of forums . outcomes the national cdr for 1998 was 6.9 percent , reported in 2000 ; the national cdr for 1999 was 5.6 percent , reported in 2001 ; and the national cdr for 2000 was 5.9 percent , reported in 2002 . a total of 1,500 schools participated in national default prevention day , which familiarized schools with fsa promoted default management software such as late stage delinquency assistance program . 2000: enter into no more than six voluntary flexible agreements ( vfas ) . 2001: implement and monitor at least four vfas no later than march 2001 . 2002: monitor the existing four vfas and provide oversight . provide loan data to schools to aid in counseling . accept proposals from guaranty agencies . establish vfas for guaranty agencies or provide greater operating flexibility . use performance measures developed in conjunction with guaranty community to monitor compliance and performance . fsa received eight vfa proposals . one proposal was approved and awaited public comment . three others were pending . agreements signed with guaranty agencies in wisconsin , texas , massachusetts , and california . common general indicators used to evaluate performance of four vfas in comparison to other guaranty agencies . interim report released because of insufficient time to draw final conclusions on effectiveness of vfas . as of january 10 , 2003 , fsa's draft had not received clearance for release by the secretary.. common general indicators created to evaluate the performance of each vfa performance and with guaranty agencies not participating in the agreements . the measures include: analyzing the dollar ratio of lender held loans , utilizing a trigger rate , and determining effectiveness at collection recoveries strategies from symposium used in repayment publication . created reports identifying “buckets” of delinquency , identifying basic characteristics of delinquent borrower . implemented a pilot using credit 2001: submit a report to the congress on the viability of expanding the vfa pilot . 2002: publish and release vfa report to the congress work with the guaranty agency community to establish common performance metrics primarily in the areas of delinquency , default aversion and collections . provide a report to the congress consistent with 1998 authorizing legislation on the current status of the vfas . use data from indicators , input from guaranty agency community as well as departmental offices to draft report . develop performance measures with community workgroup , including vfas and other guaranty agencies to gain consensus . regional staff will perform validation with program reviews . 2000: reduce the lifetime default rate . 2001: establish a program and multi - year goals , to reduce the cohort and lifetime default rates . goal / strategy description 2002: implement a multi - year program to further reduce cohort and lifetime default rates . utilize the financial partners data mart as a basis to establish risk management assessment ability of lenders , servicers , and guarantee agencies . identify institutions abusing fsa programs through data mining using student information . actions templates for improvements . develop tools to better predict default rates and risk analysis . outcomes modeling to prioritize due diligence efforts . goal met ?