we confirmed this with air force officials . documentation in the contract file for the 4 contracts indicated that the product service code was not correct . for example , one incorrectly coded air force contract was for the air force tricare liaison to coordinate referrals and ensure that medical paperwork was provided to external providers for continuity of care , which , according to the contract's performance work statement , did not involve the direct supervision or control by government staff — a defining feature of personal services contracts . the correctly coded contracts were all for medical personnel , such as dental assistants , nurses , and pharmacy technicians at various air force installations . we found that 13 of the 15 contracts we selected were incorrectly coded in fpds - ng as personal services contracts . of the 13 incorrectly coded contract actions we reviewed , 2 were task orders for billeting services . the sample of contracts both personal and nonpersonal included in our review is not generalizable to a larger universe , but is designed to provide illustrative examples of characteristics and use of personal service contracts at the selected agencies and components , and for comparison of characteristics of personal and nonpersonal services contract awards . we reviewed the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , obtained supplemental regulations and policy documents from the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) within the office of management and budget , and from the agencies we reviewed that detailed agency responsibilities with respect to personal services contracts . we interviewed agency personnel concerning their responsibilities for awarding personal services contracts , for preparing the data entered in fpds - ng , for preparing the annual inventory of contracted services , and reviewing the contracts subsequent to inventory preparation . to gain further insight into fpds - ng , agency - specific service contract inventories , and contract files , we interviewed officials from the air force , army , navy , usaid , and the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , including osd general counsel and osd's total force manpower and resources directorate . dod concurred with gao's recommendations . in 2011 , ofpp issued guidance , ofpp policy letter 11-01 , on the performance of inherently governmental and critical functions . the guidance was intended to assist agencies in ensuring that only federal employees perform work that is inherently governmental . the guidance contained examples of the types of work that would be considered inherently governmental . some examples include determination of budget policy , hiring decisions for federal employees , the direction and control of intelligence or counterintelligence operations , and administering contracts , among others . the far states that contracts shall not be used to perform inherently governmental functions , but the regulation provides that this prohibition does not apply to personal services contracts issued under statutory authority . therefore , there is room for improving procedures to help ensure accurate information is recorded . we did not identify similar issues at usaid , which reported spending more than $123 million on personal services contracts in fiscal year 2015 .