gao - 01-873 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2001 . hud is the mission regulator of the enterprises . the secretary of hud has general regulatory power over the enterprises to ensure that they carry out their mission as stated in their charters . the act requires the secretary to establish annual goals for purchases of mortgages on low - and moderate - income housing , special affordable housing , and housing in central cities , rural areas , and other under - served areas . when hud establishes housing goals , it must look at several factors , including the need for the enterprises to remain in sound financial condition . first , hud assumed that the enterprises would have difficulty determining exactly when a downturn would begin and projecting its length and severity . this assumption limited management's ability to mitigate risk . second , hud assumed that the enterprises would be required to provide ongoing and meaningful support to the secondary mortgage market during a prolonged period of severe economic conditions ; and therefore , the enterprises could not stop purchasing mortgages that might generate losses in a stressful environment . other plausible scenarios could lead to assumptions showing that incorporating new business might mitigate risk and improve capital adequacy . according to fannie mae officials , for example , including new business using the enterprises' current underwriting standards and guarantee fees would result in a lower capital requirement . the officials pointed out that in a falling interest rate environment , the credit quality of an existing mortgage portfolio would typically decline as the less risky mortgages are refinanced and the more risky ones remain . including new business that encompasses the newly refinanced mortgages would lower credit risk and thus result in a lower capital requirement . an alternative plausible set of assumptions showing that incorporating new business might mitigate risk and improve capital adequacy could presume that the enterprises would change their business practices to reduce risks in a stressful environment . for example , during a stressful period , the enterprises might implement stricter underwriting standards and increase their guarantee fees in reaction to possible declines in mortgage credit quality . while ofheo's risk - based capital requirement is a key element in ensuring the enterprises' financial safety and soundness , other mechanisms also exist to limit risk taking by the enterprises . the proposed basle accord revisions , which address banking supervision , list the three “mutually reinforcing pillars” that help ensure the financial safety and soundness of banks . these pillars — risk - based capital requirements ( discussed in this report ) , market discipline , and supervisory review — should also be used to address safety and soundness oversight of the enterprises . based on our work on bank and gse safety and soundness supervision and our review of the proposed basle accord revisions , we have concluded that capital regulation in isolation does not provide sufficient oversight . market discipline can curb risky behavior by the enterprises to the extent that the enterprises' customers and creditors will demand that the enterprises stay fiscally strong in order to fulfill their obligations . market discipline works best when firms fully and publicly disclose their financial conditions .