the solution should have no legal restrictions . these four criteria are: 1 . the equipment must work without affecting or collecting information from the general public located outside the correctional facilities' secure perimeter . the equipment must work with all cellular phone protocols . the overall cost of equipment and installation must be fair and reasonable . once ost is satisfied that the technology meets most of these criteria , ost tests the equipment at bop headquarters and then sends it out to one or more prison institutions for testing by staff in a prison environment . once tested , institutional staff then provide ost with a brief written response or phone call regarding their views of the equipment's effectiveness . how do bop's inmate telephone rates compare to those charged by other correctional systems ; how does bop use the revenues generated by its telephone charges ; and what are the implications of lowering its rates ? how many cell phones have been confiscated within bop and selected state institutions , and what is the reported impact , if any , of cell phone use on overall prison security and criminal activity ? to what extent have bop and selected state prisons taken actions to prevent or minimize cell phone smuggling and use ; what is known about the actions' effectiveness ; and how has bop coordinated information sharing internally and with states ? this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . doj deemed some of the information in the prior report as sensitive but unclassified - law enforcement sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about methods by which cell phones are smuggled into prisons . in addition , at doj's request , we have omitted information regarding bop conclusions on strategies tested and implemented by bop to address cell phone smuggling and use . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine how bop's prison telephone rates compare to those charged by other correctional systems , bop's use of telephone revenues , and the implications of lowering rates , we reviewed bop's policies and procedures related to its inmate telephone system , the costs and revenues of this system , the rates bop charges inmates , inmate amenities funded through the system , and data on phone services from 2008 through 2010 . we also interviewed and gathered data from bop management — including officials with the bop trust fund , which manages the finances of the inmate telephone system — as well as officials with the department of defense , which also provides phone services to inmates , in order to determine how their rates compare with those charged by bop . in addition , from march through june 2011 , we gathered and analyzed data on inmate telephone rates from eight selected state docs .