gao - 06-567 . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2006 . data quality: improvements to count correction efforts could produce more accurate census data . gao - 05-463 . washington , d.c.: june 20 , 2005 . these estimates are referred to as postcensal population estimates . they start with the most recently available decennial census data and for each year adjust population counts for births , deaths , and migration . because these population estimates are more current than the decennial population counts , the distribution formulas for federal grants often use these data . for example , the allocation formula for the social services block grants uses the most recent postcensal population estimates to distribute funds . while the decennial census and postcensal estimates provide annual data , the current population survey provides monthly data . this survey's sampling design relies on information developed for the decennial census and its data are revised annually to be consistent with the postcensal estimates . the survey is primarily designed to generate detailed information about the american labor force , such as the number of people unemployed . data from this survey are also used to allocate funds for programs , for instance programs under the workforce investment act . another survey , the american community survey ( acs ) , provides detailed socioeconomic characteristics for the nation's communities . the acs relies on information developed for the decennial census and its annual data are controlled to be identical to postcensal population estimates . currently , the acs provides information on communities with populations over 65,000 . data from the acs are also used to allocate federal funds , such as determining fair market rent levels used in the section 8 housing voucher program . because the acs is to replace 2010 census long form socioeconomic data , it is expected that acs data will be used more extensively in other federal assistance programs in the future . beginning in 2010 , 5-year estimates will be available for areas to the smallest block groups , census tracts , small towns , and rural areas . beyond their use by the federal government , the population counts and estimates are also used extensively by state and local governments , businesses , nonprofits , and research institutions . population - based data drawn from the decennial census , postcensal population estimates , and the acs play critical roles in the conduct of community development programs undertaken by the federal , state , and local governments . such data are central to the conduct of the federal government's community development block grant program ( cdbg ) , the federal government's 13th largest formula grant program with $3 billion in obligations in fiscal year 2004 . since 1974 , this program has provided $120 billion to help communities address a host of urban problems ranging from poverty and deteriorating housing to population loss and social isolation . given the breadth of the program's objectives and the diversity of the nation's communities , cdbg employs four formulas to allocate funds among 50 states , the district of columbia , and 1,080 local governments .