terrorist attacks . several years ago , the taxpayer paid $50,000 for the truck and , over time , depreciated the basis in the truck to $30,000 . if the insurance company paid $35,000 in reimbursement for the truck and the taxpayer used the $35,000 to purchase replacement property of any type that is held for productive use in a trade or business within 5 years after the close of the tax year of payment by the insurance company , the taxpayer would not recognize a gain . an aggregate of $8 billion of tax - exempt private activity bonds , called qualified new york liberty bonds , are authorized to finance the acquisition , construction , reconstruction , and renovation of certain property that is primarily located in the liberty zone . qualified new york liberty bonds must finance nonresidential real property , residential rental property , or public utility property and must also satisfy certain other requirements . the mayor of new york city and the governor of new york state may each designate up to $4 billion in qualified new york liberty bonds . the mayor of new york city effective for bonds designates $120 million of qualified new york liberty bonds to finance the construction of an office building in the liberty zone . assistance act of issued after march 9 , 2002 ( the date of enactment of the job creation and worker 2002 ) , and on or before december 31 , 2004 advance refunding bonds	 be issued to pay principal , interest , or redemption price on state designates $70 million refunding bonds issued an aggregate of $9 billion of advance refunding bonds may the governor of new york effective for advance certain prior issues of bonds issued for facilities located in new york city ( and certain water facilities located outside of to refinance bonds that new york city ) . under this benefit , certain qualified bonds , which were outstanding on september 11 , 2001 , and had exhausted existing advance refunding authority before september 12 , 2001 , are eligible for one additional advance refunding . the mayor of new york city and the governor of new york state may each designate up to $4.5 billion in advance refunding bonds . of advance refunding bonds after march 9 , 2002 , financed the construction of december 31 , 2004 hospital facilities in new york city . the liberty zone tax benefits were enacted as part of the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 , pub . we will make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . this report was prepared under the direction of jonda van pelt , assistant director . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact her at ( 415 ) 904-2186 or vanpeltj@gao.gov or me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were evan gilman , edward nannenhorn , lynne schoenauer , shellee soliday , anne stevens , and james wozny .