data in the two systems are again reconciled . the reporting system in cbs allows staff to track revenue in various ways , such as by sale , purchaser , type of timber , or fund . blm developed a separate system for recording revenue from timber sales conducted under stewardship contracting authority , the stewardship contracting information database ( scid ) . each region ( see fig . 1 ) encompasses a broad geographic area , headed by a regional forester who reports directly to the chief of the forest service and provides leadership for , and coordinates the activities of , the various forests within the region . each forest , headed by a supervisor , allocates the budget and coordinates activities among the various ranger districts within the forest . each ranger district , headed by a district ranger , conducts or oversees “on the ground” activities such as construction and maintenance of trails ; operation of campgrounds ; management of wildlife habitat ; and the sale and harvest of forest products , including timber . the districts vary in size from 50,000 acres to more than 1 million acres . instead , ffis aggregates data at the program level . currently , neither ffis nor any other automated system tracks obligations and actual expenditures at the project level . beginning in fiscal year 2006 , as a cost - saving measure , the service removed from ffis the codes that had previously associated program obligations and expenditures with individual ranger districts . to compensate for the lack of detailed information , field managers have spent considerable time and effort to develop and maintain a variety of “cuff records,” such as spreadsheets , that contain the data they need to manage their projects , including timber sales . through ffis , the forest service tracks , at the program and forest levels , timber sales - related obligations from the national forest fund as well as from the k - v , brush disposal , salvage sale , pipeline , and stewardship funds . these obligations include costs for personnel , vehicles , and supplies and equipment . personnel costs related to timber sales include time spent preparing for a sale ( eg , identifying the sale area and completing related environmental analyses ) , administering the sale contract , monitoring the harvest , and conducting or overseeing the postharvest reforestation and restoration activities . since its transition to ffis , the service has aggregated data on obligations at the program level rather than at the project level . staff charge their time to a job code that represents the program most applicable to the activities they conducted — for example , to the job code associated with the forest products program or the vegetation and watershed management program . by comparing obligations and expenditures with the on - the - ground progress of individual projects , this manager can determine whether project spending is on schedule and whether funds need to be reallocated toward ( or away from ) individual projects to ensure that forest priorities are accomplished .