circulars no . a - 11 both include guidelines to agencies when determining the amount of user charges to assess . the cfo act of 1990 requires an agency's cfo to review , on a biennial basis , the fees , royalties , rents , and other charges for services and things of value and make recommendations on revising those charges to reflect costs incurred . while the cfo act generally is applied to fees charged by government agencies to nongovernmental entities , the act's provision requiring biennial review provides a useful leading practice for intragovernmental fee review . when fps was a part of gsa , gsa did not charge customer agencies security fees to recover the full cost of physical security services . however , since fps transferred to dhs in 2003 , fps has been required to recover its full costs through security fees . fps's initial fee rates were established without a clear understanding of what fps's total costs had been and were likely to be . as a result , fps did not initially collect enough in fees to cover its actual costs . despite a number of security fee increases and cost - cutting efforts in the 7 years since transferring to dhs , fps has not conducted a fee review to develop an informed , deliberate fee design . fps officials said they are not required to report on fps's security fees as part of the dhs biennial fee review required by the cfo act because fps's fees are paid by government payers . however , the cfo act does not specify that fees from government payers are excluded from the biennial reporting requirement . fps officials said the annual budget formulation process and resulting budget justification serve as their fee review . further , although fps is required to annually certify that its collections will be sufficient to maintain a particular fte level , in 2008 and 2010 , the years fps certified its collections , it did not provide detail about the operations or activity costs . currently , fps sets its fee rates for a given year so that its estimated total collections match the agency's estimated total operating costs . to do this fps first estimates collections from the basic security fee and then adjusts the building - specific and swa administrative fees as needed to bridge any difference . specifically , ( 1 ) fps estimates the agency's total operating costs for the upcoming fiscal year , then ( 2 ) estimates how much it will likely collect in basic security fees . fps estimates the basic security fee collections by multiplying the current per - square foot basic security fee rate by the square footage it protected in the last quarter of the prior year . to set the building - specific and swa administrative fee rates , fps estimates the total cost of the contractor - provided countermeasures in the aggregate based on the prior year's cost . it then determines the percentage of the total estimated cost of the countermeasures likely to generate enough in collections to cover any difference between its estimated operating costs and its estimated basic fee collections .