this is the basis for our recommendation . finally , the commissioners stated that the report did not sufficiently acknowledge the significant policy and other changes made by the commission and that the previous leadership of the commission was responsible for many of the issues discussed in our report . we acknowledged throughout the report the current leadership's changes to the commission's reporting and state advisory committee policies . our findings and conclusions are based on the policies and operations of the current commission , including the new policies . comments from the three commissioners and our responses are contained in appendixes iii and iv . we incorporated clarifications and updates in the report as appropriate . for example , 43 percent of americans 18 or over are under 40 years old , whereas only 23 percent of advisory committee members are in this age range . this trend is consistent throughout most of the regions considered in this study . overall , most committee members fall into the 40-59 age range , while approximately a fifth of members are 60 or over , a proportion that closely parallels that of the general population . racial minorities constitute a large percentage of state advisory committee membership , with black members holding the most minority committee positions . while whites constitute 72 percent of the nation's population , white committee members hold only 35 percent of committee positions nationwide . black members are the second most populous demographic on the committees , constituting 29 percent of state advisory committees . hispanic members also play a prominent role ; 15 percent of committee members across the nation consider themselves hispanic , a proportion that is comparable to that of the general adult u.s. population . the midwest has the largest gap in terms of parity — for example , 32 percent of committee members are black , compared to 9 percent of the regional adult population for blacks . persons with disabilities are reasonably well represented on the committees . while 19 percent of citizens were identified in the census nationwide as disabled , these individuals constitute approximately 16 percent of committee members . however , there are wide disparities apparent among committees — for example , while one committee has no representatives with disabilities ; several committees have 5 or 6 disabled members . each committee had at least one republican and one democrat . however , committee membership tended to be more democratic than their respective states' populations ; 46 percent of members consider themselves democrats , in contrast to an estimated 31 percent nationwide . independent members also constitute a large share of the state advisory committee membership ( 27 percent ) , a trend that is most prominent in the northeast . religious affiliations also differ among regions and many committee members do not categorize themselves as catholic , protestant , or jewish . in fact , most committee members in the western and northeastern states do not identify with one of the three main religions , while committees in the midwest and south have mostly protestant members . state advisory committee members hold a variety of occupations , from homemaker to university president .