initiation phase . two of the four administrative records included a fasp plan that outlined the services needed and process for obtaining those services , but the other two did not . one of the four administrative records included documentation of the assistant commissioner's approval to designate a financial institution as a financial agent , but the other three did not . solicitation phase: three of the four administrative records included the solicitation announcing the fasp , but one did not . however , the one missing the solicitation covered a financial institution that was directly designated as a financial agent . according to the fasp guidance , a solicitation is not required under a direct designation . the three administrative records with solicitations also included documentation of the proposals submitted by the financial institutions and other correspondence between fiscal service and the financial institutions . finally , the three records included the criteria that fiscal service planned to use to evaluate and select the financial institutions as financial agents . selection phase: none of the four administrative records included acknowledgment forms signed by the financial institutions indicating that they would , if selected , accept the terms of the financial agency agreement . three of the four records contained ( 1 ) fiscal service's analyses of the financial institutions' proposals based on the selection criteria and ( 2 ) the selection decision memorandums that were signed by an assistant commissioner . the other record did not contain such documentation . finally , two of the four records included documentation of meetings between fiscal service and the financial institutions , but the other two did not . designation phase: all four of the administrative records included the financial agency agreements signed by fiscal service and the financial institutions . however , one included an amended agreement and not the original agreement . the missing administrative record and incompleteness of the other records highlight the lack of compliance with internal controls , which provide reasonable assurance that the agency achieves its objectives , and could undermine treasury's ability to defend itself against litigation . according to fiscal service officials , any legal protest likely would arise soon after a financial agent decision was made , so they could collect any needed documents from the program office . importantly , no assurances exist that program offices will be able to produce any missing documents . for example , consistent with our findings , a report issued by the treasury inspector general in 2015 disclosed instances where fiscal service was unable to produce requested documents concerning its use of financial agents . in response to the finding , the inspector general recommended that fiscal service ensure that the selection process for financial agents is documented and that the documentation is maintained through the life of the financial agency agreement . fiscal service agreed with the recommendation and noted that it was revising its fasp guidance and expected to complete the revisions by year - end 2015 . as discussed earlier , fiscal service issued its revised fasp guidance in november 2015 . although none of the administrative records that we reviewed were complete and one was missing , fiscal service's revised 2015 fasp guidance includes new procedures designed to address the deficiency .