blm bond reviews . blm regulations provide flexibility to increase bonds above minimums and require increases above minimum amounts if operators meet certain criteria . specifically , blm regulations require blm to increase the bond amount when an operator who applies for a new drilling permit had previously failed to reclaim a well in a timely manner . for such an operator , blm must require a bond in an amount equal to its cost estimate for reclaiming the new well if blm's cost estimate is higher than the regulatory minimum amount . blm regulations also authorize increases in the bond amount — not to exceed the estimated cost of reclamation and any royalties or penalties owed — whenever the authorized officer determines that the operator poses a risk due to factors such as that the expected reclamation costs exceed the present bond . in response to our previous recommendation in 2011 that blm develop a comprehensive strategy to revise its bond adequacy review policy to more clearly define terms and conditions that warrant a bond increase , blm issued a bond adequacy review policy in july 2013 , instruction memorandum 2013-151 . bonds collected from operator . blm regulations require operators to submit a bond to ensure compliance with all of the terms and conditions of the lease , including , but not limited to , paying royalties and reclaiming wells . blm regulations generally require operators to have one of the following types of bond coverage: individual lease bonds , which cover all of an operator's wells under one lease ; statewide bonds , which cover all of an operator's leases and operations in one state ; or nationwide bonds , which cover all of an operator's leases and operations nationwide . ( see figure 2. ) blm can accept two types of bonds: surety bonds and personal bonds . a surety bond is a third - party guarantee that an operator purchases from a private insurance company approved by the department of the treasury . the operator pays a premium to the surety company that can vary depending on various factors , including the amount of the bond and the assets and financial resources of the operator . if operators fail to reclaim their wells , the surety company is responsible for paying blm up to the amount of the bond to help offset reclamation costs .