to carry out its responsibilities , ins relies on it . for example , the integrated surveillance intelligence system ( isis ) is to provide “24 by 7” border coverage through ground - based sensors , fixed cameras , and computer - aided detection capabilities . also the student exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) is to manage information about nonimmigrant foreign students and exchange visitors from schools and exchange programs . each year ins invests , on average , about $300 million in it systems , infrastructure , and services . in particular , the development efforts were limited to a producing a bottom - up description of ins' current it environment ( eg , hardware and system software computing platforms , data structures and schemas , software applications ) and mapping the software applications to mission areas . while this was a reasonable start to describing the current architectural environment , important steps still needed to be accomplished , such as linking the systems environment description to a decomposed view of agency mission areas , including each area's component business functions , information needs , and information flows among functions . to do this , the agency should establish and implement processes and practices for analyzing the relative pros and cons of competing investment options and selecting a set of investments that agency leadership believes best meets mission - based and explicitly defined investment criteria . integral to an effective it investment management process is having a well - defined enterprise architecture or blueprint for guiding the content and characteristics of investments in new and existing it systems , infrastructure , and services . the goal is to help ensure that the new and modified it assets will , among other things , be designed and implemented to promote interoperability and avoid duplication , thereby optimizing agencywide performance and accountability . in more specific terms , an enterprise architecture is a comprehensive and systematically derived description of organization's operations , both in logical terms ( including business functions and applications , business rules , work locations , information needs and users , and the interrelation - ships among these variables ) and in technical terms ( including it hardware , software , data , communications , security , and performance characteristics and standards ) . if defined properly , enterprise architectures can clarify and help optimize the connections among an organization's interrelated and interdependent business operations and the underlying it supporting these operations . a complete enterprise architecture includes both the current architecture ( as it is now ) and the target architecture ( the goal ) , as well as a plan for moving between the two . to assist agencies in developing , maintaining , and implementing enterprise architectures , we collaborated with the chief information officers council to develop a practical guide for enterprise architecture management . in december 2000 we reported that while ins had some investment control elements , it nevertheless lacked the full set of foundational investment management processes and practices needed to effectively control its ongoing it projects and ensure that it was meeting cost , schedule , and performance commitments and contributing to measurable mission performance and accountability goals .