these descriptions varied in content . for example , when reviewing reaffirmation agreements , we observed agreements that included descriptive information about the type of contract involved in the transaction , such as a type of “retail installment contract” or “promissory note.” other agreements included more detail about the terms of the credit agreement , such as the number of payments , monthly payment amounts , and original amount of the loan . while not required information in all reaffirmation agreements , in a few reaffirmation agreements in the five districts , creditors or debtors included a description of changes to the credit agreement made as a part of the reaffirmation . how did the reaffirmed and original interest rates compare ? to answer these questions , we reviewed a representative sample of bankruptcy case files with reaffirmation agreements in each of five district bankruptcy courts: alabama northern ( al - n ) , california central ( ca - c ) , illinois northern ( il - n ) , texas northern ( tx - n ) , and west virginia southern ( wv - s ) . the districts were selected based on the following criteria: a range of filing volume , proportion of chapter 7 filings within the bankruptcy courts , whether cases were overseen by the u.s . trustee program or the bankruptcy administrator program , and courts in dispersed geographic locations . from january 1 , 2001 , to june 30 , 2006 , the average quarterly filing volume for the nation's 90 district bankruptcy courts was 385,424 . the five districts we selected collectively represented about 12 percent of those average quarterly filings . when determining which districts to include in our study , we selected the 2001 to 2006 time period to gather sufficient historical filing data to determine the average number of filings each district had over time . each sample of cases within these districts was selected from the universe of cases that were filed in the five districts between october 17 , 2005 , and october 17 , 2006 — the first year the reform act's reaffirmation provisions were in effect — and also contained at least one reaffirmation agreement . each universe of cases with at least one reaffirmation agreement was drawn from a database maintained by the bankruptcy courts . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable to develop the universe of cases for each of the five district bankruptcy courts from which we selected a representative sample of bankruptcy cases . to determine the reliability of the bankruptcy data we reviewed documentation about the system that maintained them and interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data to discuss the procedures they used in collecting and maintaining these data . on the basis of our samples of bankruptcy cases with at least one reaffirmation agreement from the five selected bankruptcy court districts , we generated estimates of percentages , means , and medians to generalize sample results to each district's bankruptcy court . all percentage estimates in this report have a margin of error of plus or minus 10 percent or less , unless otherwise noted . some percentage estimates we present have a margin of error greater than plus or minus 10 percent .