it also enables future growth of the system . furthermore , navy officials stated that the approach could make it possible for ngj components to be used and modified for application on significantly different platforms , including unmanned aerial vehicles . this approach is encouraged by dod guidance , including its better buying power initiative , as well as navy guidance . the ngj analysis of alternatives also examined integrating the ngj onto the f - 35 , which is being acquired by the air force , marine corp , and navy , but the option was found to be too risky and costly for a near - term solution . navy officials explained that , even with an open systems approach , integrating the ngj with any platform is difficult . dod has produced two reports in response to this requirement . in these reports , dod assessed duplication of airborne electronic attack systems , including ngj . the role of the ea - 6b has continued to expand over time . according to dod officials , when operation iraqi freedom began , ea - 6bs were used in irregular warfare environments along with another aircraft , the ec - 130h compass call , because they provided needed jamming capabilities and there were no other airborne electronic attack assets available for this role . these and other demands have strained dod's airborne electronic attack capacity and increased the stress on systems , such as the alq - 99 . like the alq - 99 , the ngj will be comprised of jamming pods that will fly on the navy's ea - 18g . its main purpose will be to counter integrated air defense systems in major combat operations . the ea - 18g with ngj is to primarily be based on aircraft carriers at sea where it is to be employed in u.s. navy carrier strike groups to counter both sea - and land - based weapon systems . dod also plans for it to support joint expeditionary warfare missions . the ea - 18g with ngj is currently planned to primarily serve in a modified escort role , in which it is expected to jam enemy radars while the aircraft is outside the range of known surface - to - air missiles . it is also expected to be capable of conducting stand - off jamming missions , in which the aircraft is located outside of defended airspace . in both cases , the idea is to protect or “hide” other systems from enemy radars . the ea - 18g with the ngj is also intended to be used for other purposes , such as communications jamming . figure 3 shows the ngj with other airborne electronic attack systems countering enemy air defense systems . in july 2013 , dod conducted a milestone a review for the ngj program , which is a planned major defense acquisition program , and authorized it to enter the technology development phase . subsequent to the milestone a review , the navy awarded a $279.4 million contract to raytheon for ngj technology development . however , we found weaknesses in the execution of some of these efforts .