participating divisions . further , census wcf managers could not provide any examples of fund - specific performance measures . although the commerce departmental and census wcfs are intended to achieve economies of scale by supporting services and projects that are performed more advantageously when centralized , both wcfs support similar m&a services that could potentially be supported by one wcf . officials at commerce and census were unable to clearly explain why each wcf provides the same or similar services , or why these services could not be consolidated . for example , both the commerce departmental and census wcfs support a range of space management , travel , and training services for staff , as well as other personnel - related activities . these are potential areas that could be consolidated . in addition , by establishing wcf - specific performance measures , fund managers could benchmark or compare fund performance , which would be useful in identifying improvement opportunities and deciding whether or not to consolidate services . in general , customers we interviewed said they had regular and ongoing interactions with fund managers or service providers . commerce departmental customers said they communicate regularly about the type and amount of services received and rates charged . census customer concerns about overhead costs initiated the recent census task force report previously described . as a result of the report findings , census made several rate changes . also in response to customer input , the census bureau recently decided to close six field offices . the commerce cfo council actively seeks wcf managers' involvement in setting customer priorities and addressing customer needs . the council meets to discuss individual bureau requests and recommends final allocations to commerce's cfo , including identifying any potential need to shift funds across programs . when prioritizing customer demand , commerce departmental wcf managers also have to incorporate the statutory cap that limits the amount noaa pays into the commerce departmental wcf . because fund managers strive to ensure self - sufficiency of the wcf and equitably distribute costs across customers , this cap limits the amount other bureaus pay into the commerce departmental wcf and thus the level of services that can be supported for all customers . as a result , commerce departmental wcf managers in the past have had to propose reductions to services to compensate for the noaa cap and still provide needed services . when the needs of customers exceed the capacity of the commerce departmental wcf , the department and the customer enter into a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , outside of the standard suite of services offered through the wcf . however , this additional process somewhat works against the efficiencies that wcfs are intended to provide as wcf managers must rely on a separate mechanism to provide the same type , but a higher level , of service to customers . although the commerce departmental wcf carries over some balances , the noaa cap's effective limit on revenues hinders the ability to build a reserve . during fiscal years 2001 through 2010 , the commerce departmental wcf carryover balance ranged from $3 million to $13 million . census uses its operating reserve to maintain price stability for customers throughout the decennial cycle .