ii ) . we selected these states or a specific community college in a state on the basis of expert recommendations or research studies that highlighted places known to be active in workforce development or to be engaged in innovative initiatives . we also considered other criteria , including recommendations from labor ; receipt of a high growth , wired , or community based grant ; receipt of a waiver from the eligible training provider list ( etpl ) — which is a list of training vendors approved by the state and local workforce boards ; colocation of the college and the one - stop ; state unemployment rates ; and geographical diversity . during these site visits , we conducted semistructured interviews with community college officials , state and local workforce officials , and representatives of community college statewide associations . in some cases , we also toured the one - stop facilities that partnered with our selected schools . we also conducted short web - based surveys of a nationally representative sample of 311 workforce investment boards ( wib ) — the governing entity of the one - stop system within a local area — and 334 one - stop centers that were associated with these wibs . the survey response rates were 82 percent and 73 percent , respectively . all estimates from the surveys have a margin of error of plus or minus 8 percent , unless otherwise noted in the report . ( see app . i for more detailed information about our scope and methodology. ) we conducted semistructured interviews with labor and education officials , as well as representatives of employers' associations , in addition to reviewing relevant research and agency regulations and guidance . we conducted this performance audit from april 2007 through may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to the american association of community colleges , the nation has about 1,200 community colleges — accredited institutions that primarily offer the associate , or 2-year degree , as the highest degree . community colleges offer a wide array of educational programs that encompass traditional academic coursework as well as career and technical training . ( see table 1. ) in addition , career and technical education programs are offered on both a for - credit basis and a noncredit basis . an advantage of noncredit courses is that colleges can add or delete them more quickly than for - credit courses , thereby allowing colleges to respond to local training needs in a more responsive way . community colleges also serve a diverse student body . with generally low tuition and unrestrictive admissions policies that emphasize open enrollment , these colleges serve individuals ranging from those earning their first educational credential to midcareer professionals seeking to upgrade their skills or reenter the workforce .