and these are only the reported attacks . the director , cert® centers , stated that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because the organization ( 1 ) was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated because there were no indications of penetration or attack or ( 2 ) was reluctant to report incidents . figure 1 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert cc from 1995 through 2002 . according to the national strategy for homeland security , terrorist groups are already exploiting new information technology and the internet to plan attacks , raise funds , spread propaganda , collect information , and communicate securely . the administration's draft national strategy to secure cyberspace states that cyber incidents are increasing in number , sophistication , severity , and cost . it further adds that cyber attacks on u.s. information networks occur regularly and can have serious consequences , such as disrupting critical operations , causing loss of revenue and intellectual property , and even causing loss of life . since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , warnings of the potential for terrorist cyber attacks against our critical infrastructures have increased . however , the financial services sector has not specified how the efforts will be implemented , by providing interim objectives , detailed tasks , timeframes , responsibilities , or processes for measuring progress . second , fs - isac was formed in october 1999 to , among other objectives , facilitate sharing of information and provide its members with early notification of computer vulnerabilities and attacks . third , several other industry groups representing the various segments of the financial services sector are taking steps to better coordinate industry efforts and to improve information security across the sector . industry representatives worked collaboratively on a treasury - sponsored working group to develop the sector's national strategy for critical infrastructure assurance , which identifies a framework for sector actions — including efforts necessary to identify , assess , and respond to sectorwide threats , including completing a sectorwide vulnerability assessment . in may 2002 , treasury's assistant secretary for financial institutions submitted the industry's strategy to the special advisor to the president for cyberspace security , with the understanding that it would provide an evolving baseline for the sector's efforts . the strategy presents a framework for planning and implementing sector action that includes analyzing the infrastructure's strengths , interdependencies , vulnerabilities , and abilities to resolve virtual and physical issues and concerns ; taking steps to strengthen the sector's capacity to prepare for , defend against , and recover financially and technologically from systemic attacks ; building and implementing strategies for detecting and responding to attacks on the information infrastructure of the financial services sector ; having the ability to recover and restore technological and financial services and functions to their normal state of operation ; and having the ability to financially withstand the impact of attacks .