b . we used the results of 2015 nursing home resident satisfaction surveys from two of our selected states that collect such information . specifically , we focused on the responses to whether the resident would recommend that nursing home to others as a measure of satisfaction . in one state , this measure was the actual percentage of residents that recommended the home and in the other state it was the ranking of the home based on residents' responses . for both states , we determined the correlation between each nursing home's resident response on the state survey and its overall five - star rating . the findings from this analysis cannot be generalized to other states . for all data used in these analyses , we interviewed knowledgeable officials and reviewed related documentation and based on these steps determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to explore the relationship between the overall rating and the component ratings , determine national rating distributions , assess consumer satisfaction information , and describe the age of the data . we held interviews with 30 nursing home stakeholders — eight national stakeholders and 22 state stakeholders from four states ( rhode island , georgia , kansas , and california ) we selected based on factors such as variation in geographic region and size ( number of nursing homes ) . these stakeholders represent a range of provider groups , consumer groups , government agencies , and technical experts . we selected organizations in each state and nationally that are relevant to nursing home consumers and providers . technical experts were identified by their prominence in the nursing home quality research field . in addition , some stakeholders we interviewed identified other groups that would be appropriate to interview . our interviews included a set of questions regarding consumer use of nursing home compare . responses to these questions cannot be generalized beyond the stakeholders we interviewed . we found that stakeholders generally could not quantify the number of consumers who use nursing home compare , but most speculated that consumers use the site “a little” to “somewhat” and a few stakeholders said that consumers use the website “a lot” . some stakeholders thought the number of people using nursing home compare was growing , and one stakeholder thought this was because people are generally trying to make more educated decisions about nursing home care . another stakeholder thought this increase could also be a result of people using the internet to look things up more frequently , nursing homes included . some stakeholders noted that use of nursing home compare probably differs depending on whether the patient is searching for care in an urban or a rural setting . specifically , they stated that they think nursing home compare is used more frequently in urban areas , where more nursing home options are available , compared to rural areas where there may be only one home in a town . see table 3 below for summary of stakeholder responses . some stakeholders stated that they believe the extent to which consumers use nursing home compare may depend on the amount of time that the consumer has to research and pick a nursing home .