not all agencies experienced the same workload . for example , doe , which was assigned the lead role in developing multiple chapters , had greater responsibilities , more meetings to attend , and larger efforts to coordinate than some other agencies , such as interior , that played more of an advisory role . frequent interaction also took place between agencies in developing the report chapters . more than 80 doe employees from eight departmental offices had direct input into the development of the national energy policy report , including science specialists and representatives with significant science expertise . doe's senior policy advisor to the secretary led the department's internal effort to develop information for an interim and final report , and to identify policy recommendations for the report . the official joined the acting director of the then office of policy in periodic meetings with the support group staff and other agency officials to discuss drafts of specific chapters . in addition , the official joined doe office of policy and program officials to relay comments from nepdg meetings and to coordinate writing activities within doe . the acting director of the office of policy , who was responsible for the day - to - day coordination and management of the process of producing doe's contributions to the nepdg effort , led a coordination team of senior managers from the department's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy , office of nuclear energy , office of fossil energy , office of policy , office of international affairs , energy information administration , and the bonneville power administration . the team was charged with coordinating the writing of chapters , and each office formed a similar group within their areas of expertise to write its respective chapters . the office of policy took the lead on chapter 1 ( taking stock ) , energy efficiency took the lead on chapter 4 ( using energy wisely ) and chapter 6 ( nature's power ) , and fossil energy took the lead on chapter 5 ( energy for a new century ) . in addition , doe contributed draft sections to chapters for which other agencies had been assigned the lead role . each office developed recommendations and , after internal discussions , forwarded them for high - level review within doe before they were released to the nepdg principals for review . doe staff researched historical information about energy and energy markets ; identified key energy issues ; examined and analyzed the current situation in energy markets ; discussed likely energy issues , such as energy production , conservation and energy efficiency , energy prices , renewable and alternative energy sources , and national energy security ; and prepared issue papers , memoranda , and talking points relating to these subjects . they also assisted with writing and reviewing drafts of report chapters , providing supporting statistical and other information , reviewing and responding to comments from other executive branch components , fact - checking , developing citations and graphics , and briefing the secretary on energy policy issues . interior was not assigned a lead role in writing any of the report chapters .