the regulators agreed to take steps to implement these recommendations . for our march 2013 report , on which this testimony is based , we analyzed consultants' sampling plans ; reviewed relevant documents from regulators , such as regulator - issued guidance to third - party consultants , law firms , and local examination teams , describing steps taken to foster consistency ; reviewed regulators' communication materials ; and interviewed five consultant teams , regulator staff , and consumer groups . we then compared this information and these parties' actions to criteria , such as the regulators' standard practices and policies , regulators' goals for the reviews , and our previous work . for those third - party consultants we did not interview , we obtained written information from them to address our objectives . we conducted the performance audit on which this statement is based from july 2012 through march 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in september 2010 , allegations surfaced that several servicers' documents accompanying judicial foreclosures may have been inappropriately signed or notarized . in response to this and other servicing issues , federal banking regulators conducted a coordinated on - site review of 14 of the largest mortgage servicers to evaluate the adequacy of the controls over servicers' foreclosure processes and assess servicers' policies and procedures for compliance with applicable federal and state laws . on the basis of their findings , the regulators issued the april 2011 consent orders against these servicers that required in the servicers to conduct the foreclosure review , among other things.january 2013 , occ and the federal reserve reached agreements with 11 of the 14 mortgage servicing companies subject to the april 2011 consent orders to discontinue the foreclosure reviews and to provide approximately $3.4 billion in direct payments to eligible borrowers . these agreements were formalized in amended consent orders that the regulators released in late february 2013 . according to occ staff , the state law references were fairly straightforward and they had confidence that the consultants and law firms would provide fairly consistent interpretations . however , according to third - party consultants and law firms we interviewed , compiling these references and using them to develop review questions was challenging and time consuming and , in some cases , required judgment or interpretation of the laws or guidelines . regulators did not release any additional guidance documents , nor did they publicly disclose consultants' test questions . to increase the transparency and credibility of the foreclosure review , consumer groups recommended that regulators release such information . according to consumer groups , without such information , the public would have questions and doubts about how the reviews were being executed . occ and the federal reserve staff said that they considered releasing additional guidance to the public , but both expressed concerns that releasing detailed information risked disclosure of confidential or proprietary information . moreover , test questions developed by consultants were numerous and complex , and federal reserve staff stated that review processes were too dissimilar to provide a comprehensive summary .