consequently , these events can increase or decrease price differentials . other oils are often priced with reference to one of these benchmark crude oils . the relationship between the prices of specific crude oils and a benchmark crude oil is commonly expressed as a price differential — calculated by subtracting the specific crude oil price from the benchmark price . nonetheless , all the crude oil price differentials between wti and the heavier crude oils we evaluated remain high by historical standards . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the objectives of this review were to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which crude oil price differentials in california have fluctuated over the past 20 years and ( 2 ) the factors that may explain the recent changes in the price differential between california's crude oil and others . as part of the second objective , in order to provide additional context to the issue of price differentials in california , we also evaluated the unusually high crude oil price differentials that occurred in the rocky mountain region in late 2005 . to determine the extent to which california crude oil price differentials have fluctuated over time , we obtained data on the spot prices of the north american benchmark crude oil , west texas intermediate ( wti ) , and three california crude oils: two heavy crude oils ( kern river and thums ) and an intermediate crude oil ( line 63 ) . we also obtained price data for two heavy crude oils that are imported into california in large volumes: arab heavy , a saudi arabian crude oil , and maya , a crude oil imported from mexico . these data included prices from december 1987 through august 2006 . while most of the data we obtained listed a monthly average price , some crude streams used daily or weekly averages . in these instances , we calculated the monthly average price in order to make appropriate comparisons . we used this data to calculate price differentials by subtracting the price for the subject crude oil from the price of the benchmark crude oil and analyzing these differentials for trends over time . we interviewed officials from the energy information administration ( eia ) , minerals management service ( mms ) , and the california energy commission ( cec ) to get background information on the major crude oils produced in california and imported into the region . to identify factors that may explain the recent changes in the california price differentials , we ( 1 ) interviewed key officials and experts , ( 2 ) reviewed studies on crude oil prices and price differentials , and ( 3 ) reviewed historical studies and interviewed agency officials about the history of crude oil price manipulation in california .