app . v provides additional information about federal activities related to climate change risks to public health . selected state and local health departments included in our review have used a cdc climate and health award that addresses the risks that climate change poses to public health , as well as other federal resources , to address and plan for the public health risks from climate change . sixteen state and two local health departments have used awards from cdc's climate ready states and cities initiative to address and plan for the risks that climate change poses to public health . why are children especially vulnerable to some health risks from climate change ? children are more vulnerable than adults to some health risks from environmental hazards — including hazards exacerbated by climate change — because of differences in their biology and behavior . children breathe more air relative to their body mass than adults do and their natural defenses are less developed , which makes them especially vulnerable to health impacts from decreased air quality . asthma is one of the most common serious chronic diseases among children , and can be aggravated by poor air quality . children also behave differently from adults , such as by spending more time outdoors and playing closer to the ground , which makes them especially vulnerable to mosquito and tick bites that can cause disease . age . a person's age also plays a role in determining his or her vulnerability to health impacts , including those related to climate change , according to usgcrp's third nca . for example , children suffer disproportionately from the effects of heat waves and other environmental hazards associated with climate change , according to usgcrp's third nca . one reason is that children playing outside during heat waves may not be aware that they need to drink more water as a preventative measure , according to epa . older adults are also vulnerable to some climate - related impacts , according to usgcrp's third nca . specifically , this assessment states that limited mobility among older adults can increase their flood - related health risks , and that older people are at much higher risk of dying during extreme heat events . adaptive capacity . the extent to which people and communities have the capacity to successfully adapt to adverse events also affects the health risks they face , and is influenced by characteristics such as disabilities and socioeconomic status . for example , according to usgcrp's third nca , limited economic resources for adapting to or escaping from health - sensitive situations will place the poor at higher risk of health impacts from climate change than higher - income groups . in contrast , communities that have access to early warning systems , such as for forecasting and alerting people about impending heavy precipitation events and flooding , may be better positioned to reduce health risks from such adverse events . state , local , territorial , and tribal governments have primary responsibility for managing public health risks within their jurisdiction . public health departments vary greatly in their size , responsibilities , and resource levels , among other factors .