we provide our final assessment in this review . dod did not concur with either of these recommendations . in a house report accompanying the department of defense fiscal year 2003 appropriation bill , you expressed concern that dod guidance and oversight of the srb program was limited and that “a reassessment of the program was warranted to ensure it is being managed efficiently.” the committee directed the secretary of defense to report back to the committee on five concerns and directed us to review and assess the dod report . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5559 . key staff members contributing to this report were jack e. edwards , kurt a. burgeson , nancy l. benco , and m. jane hunt . we also referred to our 2002 report and dod's comments on that report . the survey results showed that retention attitudes were particularly better for junior enlisted ( up 11 percent ) and junior officers ( up 13 percent ) . in addition , the 2002 air force - wide quality of life survey found that 66 percent of enlisted personnel reported they would make the air force a career , which is an increase from 58 percent , reported in 1997 . according to dod officials , the effects of more recent events such as extended deployments and other higher operations tempo issues could change servicemembers' attitudes toward remaining in the military . congressionally approved reforms in basic pay implemented during the last 3 years were intended in part to address retention problems , particularly with mid - grade enlisted personnel . in the 2002 quadrennial review of military compensation , dod attributed the increased use of srbs in the late 1990s to a growing pay discrepancy between civilians and the mid - career enlisted force . for that period , the review noted an increased use of bonuses for personnel with 10 to 14 years of service . dod noted that while bonuses are a very important compensation tool , their use is intended for specific purposes and for relatively short periods of time . according to that review , bonuses are appropriate for use within particular skill categories , not as a tool for resolving military and civilian pay differentials across an entire segment of the force . the report noted that widespread pay differentials should be remedied through pay table restructuring . pay table restructuring began in fiscal year 2001 , and additional military pay adjustments have been approved in subsequent budgets . dod's may 2003 report did not thoroughly address four of the five congressional concerns about effective and efficient management of the srb program . first , the report indirectly addressed srb program effectiveness and efficiency by discussing bonuses as a general military retention tool instead of the effectiveness and efficiency of the program in targeting bonuses to improve retention in selected critical occupations .