officials from the u.s . marshals service stated that establishing a governmentwide lessons - learned process would be problematic because every building has unique security requirements which limit the benefits of sharing information . conversely , bureau of diplomatic security officials said that the low number of incidents increases the need to share lessons from the incidents that occur . the officials said that people learn through experience and , due to the low number of incidents , the lessons learned by others may be the closest many federal security officials come to direct experience . for example , state department officials said that knowledge from the field is supported by the bureau of diplomatic security's institutional willingness and responsibility to learn from mistakes . state department officials said that they take efforts to use actual incident video , recordings , and interviews to make the lessons more compelling and as real as possible for those not actually involved . subcommittees and working groups . isc's subcommittees and working groups , which are comprised of volunteers from member agencies , help the agency capture and disseminate lessons learned and best practices . for example , the countermeasures subcommittee oversees the development of security criteria and associated countermeasures necessary to mitigate the undesirable events as identified in the design - basis threat report . guidelines and sharing of best practices . to accomplish this work , we identified a lessons - learned process that could be applied to the protection of federal facilities and public spaces . to accomplish this , we primarily used our previous work and a report from the center for army lessons learned . we selected the process descriptions in these two reports based on the following factors: gao and the center for army lessons learned developed their process descriptions based on the breadth of their collective research , interviews , and experience , as well as the experience of the organizations they reviewed . together gao and the center for army lessons learned included lessons - learned practices of the government and private sector . the gao and center for army lessons learned reports , although published 10 years apart , used consistent language in defining a lessons - learned process . the army and law enforcement and security agencies have common general responsibilities to protect employees and the public from violent threats and incidents . we reviewed these two process descriptions and combined them with information from our reviews of relevant literature and early interviews with agencies to identify eight individual practices for identifying and applying lessons learned . we combined and ordered these practices to develop an overall , eight - step , lessons - learned process — a systematic means for agencies to learn from an event and make decisions about when and how to use that knowledge to change behavior . to determine how law enforcement and security officials apply lessons - learned practices to the protection of federal facilities and public spaces , we interviewed officials knowledgeable of their agencies' policies and procedures for the physical security of the facilities they protect .