targeting . cbp uses law enforcement , intelligence , and other enforcement data to identify higher - risk individuals , vehicles , or cargo for additional scrutiny upon their arrival at a land poe . most cargo - carrying commercial vehicles must submit an electronic manifest ( e - manifest ) with information on the shipment to cbp at least 1 hour in advance of arrival at a land poe . cbp personnel at the poes are to use the e - manifest and cbp's automated targeting system to identify high - risk inbound cargo . to what extent does cbp monitor inspection activities at land poes ? to what extent does cbp have measures to assess its efforts to detect illegal activity of passengers , pedestrians , and commercial vehicles at land poes ? this report is a public version of a sensitive report that we issued in june 2019 . dhs deemed some of the information in our june report to be sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about the results of certain monitoring activities , planned actions to address deficiencies identified through these monitoring activities , and information on one performance measure . although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report addresses the same objectives as the sensitive report and uses the same methodology . to address all of the above questions , we focused on inbound inspection activities at land poes designed to identify and interdict contraband , such as narcotics , and determine the admissibility of travelers . we analyzed cbp policies , procedures , and reports on inbound inspections . we also visited a nonprobability sample of land poes to observe inspections and interview cbp poe officials on inspection processes , efforts to monitor the implementation of inspection activities , and use of performance measures . specifically , we conducted site visits to seven poes: nogales and douglas , az ; san ysidro and otay mesa , ca ; el paso and marcelino serna , tx , and buffalo - niagara falls , ny . we selected these land poes using a combination of the following factors: a range of traffic volume ; presence of crossings for passenger vehicles , pedestrians , and commercial vehicles ; a range of geographic locations ; proximity to other ports ; and presence of unique or new inspection processes or technology . the results of our site visits cannot be generalized more broadly to all land poes . however , they provide important context and insights into how cbp is conducting , monitoring , and assessing the effectiveness of inspections . during our site visits we also interviewed cbp field office officials responsible for overseeing land poe operations . further , we interviewed cbp headquarters officials responsible for overseeing inspection processes , policies , technology , efforts to monitor and assess compliance , and performance measurement at land poes . to determine the extent to which cbp has processes and policies in place for the inspection of passengers , pedestrians , and commercial vehicles at land poes , we also analyzed dhs and cbp directives , policy memoranda , standard operating procedures , and documentation on technology .