we discuss these limitations in the report , as appropriate . ยง 2330a ( f ) . we interviewed officials from p&r , at&l , and the comptroller's office , and acquisition , manpower , and budgeting officials at all three military departments . at the army and air force we also interviewed programming officials . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2014 to november 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on audit objectives . in part to improve the information available and management of dod's acquisition of services , in fiscal year 2002 congress enacted section 2330a of title 10 of the u.s. code , which required the secretary of defense to establish a data collection system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency . the information dod is to collect includes , among other things , the services purchased , the total dollar amount of the purchase , the form of contracting action used to make the purchase , and the extent of competition provided in making the purchase . in 2008 , congress amended section 2330a to add a requirement for the secretary of defense to submit an annual inventory of the activities performed pursuant to contracts for services on behalf of dod during the preceding fiscal year . the inventory is to include a number of specific data elements for each identified activity , including: the function and missions performed by the contractor ; the contracting organization , the component of dod administering the contract , and the organization whose requirements are being met through contractor performance of the function ; the funding source for the contract by appropriation and operating agency ; the fiscal year the activity first appeared on an inventory ; the number of contractor employees ( expressed as full ftes ) for direct labor , using direct labor hours and associated cost data collected from contractors ; a determination of whether the contract pursuant to which the activity is performed is a personal services contract ; and a summary of the information required by section 2330a ( a ) of title 10 of the u.s. code . within dod , at&l , p&r , and the comptroller have shared responsibility for issuing guidance for compiling and reviewing the inventory . p&r compiles the inventories prepared by the components , and at&l formally submits a consolidated dod inventory to congress no later than june 30 of each fiscal year , though some inventory submissions have been later . dod has submitted annual , department - wide inventories for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 , the most recent submitted on july 2 , 2014 ( see table 1 ) .