iii ) . these laws reportedly vary in their scope . unicef reports that some ban the practice only in medical facilities ; others ban the practice anywhere . in 1993 , the world conference on human rights in vienna recognized violence against women as a human rights violation , and the un general assembly included fgm / c in the definition of violence against women , stating that it violates women's right to be free from cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment . to identify state's efforts , we interviewed state officials in the office of global women's issues , and key bureaus including the bureaus of population , refugees , and migration ; democracy , human rights , and labor ; african affairs ; and near eastern affairs . we reviewed documents related to a state - funded fgm / c prevention program in guinea . we also reviewed a list of 54 projects addressing gender - based violence in refugee settings overseas that received state funding in fiscal year 2014 . we identified the 10 largest of these projects ( with state funding of $500,000 or more ) in countries where fgm / c is prevalent . for 9 of these projects , we contacted project implementers via e - mail to determine if the projects had any fgm / c - related components . we were unable to contact the project implementers for 1 of the 10 projects . we also met with officials from unfpa and unicef to discuss u.s. funding for these agencies and their joint program on fgm / c . in addition , we reviewed state's country reports for human rights to determine how they addressed fgm / c issues . to identify usaid's efforts , we interviewed usaid's senior coordinator for gender equality and women's empowerment and officials in key usaid bureaus including global health ; democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance ; africa ; and the middle east . we also collected information on projects with fgm / c components from usaid's overseas missions in countries where fgm / c is prevalent . to obtain this information , we worked with usaid staff in the office of the senior gender coordinator to ask relevant usaid missions via e - mail to identify any fgm / c - related programming that was active in calendar year 2014 . while 12 missions reported having programs with fgm / c components in 2014 , we only presented information on the 5 projects that we were able to independently confirm as having fgm / c - related components through searches on websites of usaid's missions or implementing partners . at the time of our request , indonesia had not been identified as a country where fgm / c was prevalent , and therefore , the usaid mission there was not included among those contacted . we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .