( app . i contains additional information on our scope and methodology. ) the mission of va is to serve america's veterans and their families with dignity and compassion and to be their principal advocate in ensuring that they receive medical care , benefits , social support , and lasting memorials . va is a cabinet - level agency with a budget of over $127 billion and is one of the world's largest health care , medical research , and insurance benefits organizations . in addition to a central office , va consists of three administrations that generally operate as distinct entities: the veterans health administration ( vha ) , the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , and the national cemetery administration ( nca ) . vha's facilities are organized into 21 regional networks , known as visns , that are structured to manage and allocate resources to va health care facilities across the united states . each visn is also responsible for coordination and oversight of all administrative and clinical activities within its specified region of the country . we reviewed the status of capital projects in 6 of va's 21 visns , as shown in figure 1 . to provide services to veterans , va's current real property portfolio consists of u.s. - owned buildings under va jurisdiction and control . va also generally has authority to enter into enhanced - use leases , 3-year outleases , and sharing agreements relating to its real property or space . the assets include , for example , hospitals , clinics , cemeteries , and office buildings where veterans access their many benefits and va administers its programs . vha is the largest administration and , in terms of the number of acres owned and square footage , includes the greatest portion of va's real property portfolio , as shown in figure 2 . in response to our 1999 recommendations for improving agency capital asset planning and budgeting , va initiated cares . cares was the first comprehensive , long - range assessment of va's health care capital asset priorities since 1981 and was designed to assess buildings and land ownership under va's jurisdiction and control in light of expected demand for va inpatient and outpatient health care services across a planning horizon through fiscal year 2022 . for example , va recognized that the shift in veterans' demand for services could be met at community based outpatient clinics that are more geographically accessible to veterans than its hospitals . the cares process validated gaps in va's infrastructure and health care services provided to veterans . the process also included a set of tools for annual capital and strategic planning to enable va to plan for real property needs to provide quality health care to veterans . va also modified its capital planning efforts in 2010 by developing a new process , called scip , which was used to inform its fiscal year 2012 budget submission to congress . va officials told us that scip builds on its existing capital planning processes , addresses leading practices , and further strengthens va's efforts in some areas .