spectrum sharing can be costly . fcc and ntia officials , as well as other agency officials and an industry stakeholder , told us that sharing federal spectrum can be costly for both the nonfederal and federal users seeking to share for the following reasons: users may find that mitigation of potential interference can be costly in terms of equipment design and operation . for example , according to officials from one agency , sharing spectrum outside a law enforcement environment would require cognitive radios , which could be costly . users applying to share federal frequencies may find that those frequencies are being used by more than one federal agency or program . as a result of needing to mitigate interference for multiple users , costs to share spectrum in that band could increase . federal users often use and rely on proven older technology that was designed to use spectrum to meet a specific mission and may be less efficient than more modern systems . limited budgets may also prevent users from being able to invest in newer technology that can facilitate easier sharing . for example , officials at one agency said they maintain and use systems until the end of the system's life cycle to assure continuity of operations and security . spectrum - sharing approval and enforcement processes can be lengthy and unpredictable . fcc and ntia processes can cause two main problems when nonfederal users seek to share federal spectrum , according to stakeholders: the spectrum - sharing approval process between fcc and ntia can be lengthy and unpredictable , and the risk associated with it can be costly for new entrants . not all spectrum has equal value . the spectrum most highly valued generally consists of frequencies between 225 and 3700 mhz , as these frequencies have properties well suited to many important wireless technologies , such as mobile devices , and radio and television broadcasting . according to ntia's office of spectrum management , federal agencies have exclusive use of about 18 percent of this highly valued spectrum , while nonfederal users have exclusive licenses to approximately 33 percent . the remainder of this spectrum is allocated to shared use . the types of and degree of sharing between governmental and nongovernmental users varies across the bands included within this shared spectrum . fees could help to free spectrum for new uses , since licensees that use spectrum inefficiently may reduce their holdings or pursue sharing opportunities once they bear the opportunity cost of letting their spectrum remain fallow or underused . fcc officials told us that they have proposed spectrum usage fees at various times including in fcc's most recent congressional budget submission and have requested , but have yet to receive , legislative authority to implement such a program . while noting the benefits of spectrum fees , the csmac incentives subcommittee report also notes specific concerns about the impact of spectrum fees on government users . for instance , some csmac members expressed concern that fees do not fit into the federal annual appropriations process and that new appropriations to cover fees are neither realistic nor warranted in the current budget environment .