public law no . 76-43 authorizes the navy to establish , develop , or increase naval aviation facilities on midway . march 1940 . construction of a naval air station begins . private contractors start constructing land runways on eastern island and other infrastructure on sand island in preparation for possible hostilities . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) provided a variety of opportunities for the public to visit midway atoll ( midway ) . given midway's remote location in the pacific ocean , providing public access to the wildlife refuge has been challenging . according to fws officials we interviewed , almost 20,000 people visited midway from 1996 through 2012 . this appendix provides additional information about three phases of public visitation to midway from 1996 to 2002 , from 2003 to 2006 , and from 2007 to 2012 . fws entered into a cooperative agreement with the midway phoenix corporation in august 1996 , amended in november 1997 , to support a public use program at midway . under the amended cooperative agreement , fws was responsible for establishing and enforcing national wildlife refuge policies , rules , and regulations and providing staff and expertise to assist in implementing and overseeing the public use program . the midway phoenix corporation , under the amended cooperative agreement , was responsible for implementing and supporting the public use program . the cooperative agreement also established that the midway phoenix corporation would provide the funding , staffing , supplies , equipment , logistics , and services to accomplish its responsibilities under the agreement . under the agreement , the midway phoenix corporation retained revenue derived from the goods and services it offered on midway , including lodging and recreational activities , such as boat and fishing trips . the agreement also required the midway phoenix corporation to provide the principal funding to develop , implement , and maintain a compatible public use program on the refuge and to contribute $200,000 per year to support fws's responsibilities under the agreement because fws would not be able to meet its responsibilities without those funds . under the cooperative agreement , the midway phoenix corporation completed several capital improvement projects and coordinated air transportation to and from midway . capital improvement projects included the refurbishment of two barracks for overnight lodging , construction of a new restaurant and bar ( see fig . 10 ) , and the installation of a cell phone tower . according to the former executives of the midway phoenix corporation , their initial capital investments on midway totaled $15 million . under the terms of the cooperative agreement , all newly constructed property was property of the united states and the midway phoenix corporation did not have any claims to improvements made to the government property . the midway phoenix corporation , using the henderson airfield runway , also coordinated air transportation from honolulu using phoenix air and aloha airlines . according to the former midway phoenix corporation executives we interviewed , air travel to midway was subsidized by the company . the midway phoenix corporation hired contractors to facilitate recreational activities and coordinated tours to midway with several tour providers .