it is a cost reimbursement contract . congress has incrementally expanded the use and scope of other transaction authority since first authorizing its use more than a decade ago . on the first question , the army makes a compelling case that something must be done to equip its future forces and that such equipment should be more responsive but as effective as current equipment . the answer to the second question is problematic . in 1989 , congress gave dod , acting through the defense advanced research projects agency , authority to temporarily use other transactions for basic , applied , and advanced research projects . in 1991 , congress made this authority permanent and extended it to the military departments . in 1993 , congress enacted section 845 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1994 , which provided darpa with authority to use , for a 3-year period , other transactions to carry out prototype projects directly relevant to weapons or weapon systems proposed to be acquired or developed by dod . subsequent amendments have extended this authority to the military departments and other defense agencies . these are fiscal year 2005 dollars . since this estimate , the army has released an updated research and development cost estimate of $30.3 billion in then - year dollars . an updated procurement estimate is not yet available . the army is continuing to refine these cost estimates . as estimated , the fcs will command a significant share of the army's acquisition budget , particularly that of ground combat vehicles , for the foreseeable future . in fiscal year 2006 , the fcs budget request of $3.4 billion accounts for 65 percent of the army's proposed spending on programs in system development and demonstration and 35 percent of that expected for all research , development , test and evaluation activities . as the fcs begins to command large budgets , it will compete with other major financial demands . current military operations , such as in afghanistan and iraq , require continued funding . since september 2001 , dod has needed over $240 billion in supplemental appropriations to support the global war on terrorism . current operations are also causing faster wear on existing weapons , which will need refurbishment or replacement sooner than planned . the equipment used by the current force , such as abrams tanks and bradley fighting vehicles , is expected to remain in the active inventory until at least 2030 . the cost to upgrade and maintain this equipment over that length of time has not been estimated but could be substantial . also , the cost of converting current forces to new modular , brigade - based units is expected to be at least $48 billion . further , fcs is part of a significant surge in the demand for new weapons . just 4 years ago , the top 5 weapon systems cost about $280 billion ; today , in the same base year dollars , the top 5 weapon systems cost about $521 billion . if megasystems like fcs are estimated and managed with traditional margins of error , the financial consequences are huge , especially in light of a constrained discretionary budget .