● recognizing resource requirements . smart card implementation costs can be high , particularly if significant infrastructure modifications are required , or other technologies , such as biometrics and pki , are being implemented in tandem with the cards . key implementation activities that can be costly include managing contractors and card suppliers , developing systems and interfaces with existing personnel or credentialing systems , installing equipment and systems to distribute the cards , and training personnel to issue and use smart cards . as a result , agency officials have found that obtaining adequate resources is critical to implementing a major government smart card system . ● integrating physical and logical security practices across organizations . the ability of smart card systems to address both physical and logical ( information systems ) security means that unprecedented levels of cooperation may be required among internal organizations that often had not previously collaborated , particularly physical security organizations and information technology organizations . in addition to the gap between physical and logical security organizations , the sheer number of separate and incompatible existing systems also adds to the challenge of establishing an integrated agencywide smart card system . ● achieving interoperability among smart card systems . interoperability is a key consideration in smart card deployment . the value of a smart card is greatly enhanced if it can be used with multiple systems at different agencies , and gsa has reported that virtually all agencies agree that interoperability at some level is critical to widespread adoption of smart cards across the government . however , achieving interoperability has been difficult because smart card products and systems developed in the past have generally been incompatible in all but very rudimentary ways . with varying products available from many vendors , there has been no obvious choice for an interoperability standard . gsa considered the achievement of interoperability across card systems to be one of its main priorities in developing its smart access common id card contract that i discussed earlier . ● maintaining security of smart card systems and privacy of personal information . although concerns about security are a key driver for the adoption of smart card technology in the federal government , the security of smart card systems themselves is not foolproof and must be addressed when agencies plan the implementation of a smart card system . although smart card systems are generally much more difficult to attack than traditional id cards and password - protected systems , they are not invulnerable . in order to obtain the improved security services that smart cards offer , care must be taken to ensure that the cards and their supporting systems do not pose unacceptable security risks . in addition , protecting the privacy of personal information is a growing concern and must be addressed with regard to the personal information contained on the smart cards . once in place , smart card - based systems designed simply to control access to facilities and systems could also be used to track the day - to - day activities of individuals , thus potentially compromising the individual's privacy .