ii ) . while the majority of phas with which we spoke said that hud provided clear , sufficient , and timely information , some phas noted that it also was challenging to adapt to evolving requirements . some phas noted that as hud identified problems in the early years of the program , it would change the guidance in response . for example , hud officials explained that it had clarified fair housing review requirements in response to pha concerns that the fair housing review occurred too late in the process and could affect successful conversion of projects . the most recent rad notice ( effective january 2017 ) is the third version since 2013 and revisions have involved substantial changes . for example , this notice provided phas with greater flexibilities on the funding sources they can use to raise initial contract rents and the ways they can demonstrate ownership and control of a converted property . in addition , hud introduced a notice in november 2016 to strengthen resident protections . some phas told us they found the pace or timing of the evolving requirements difficult to manage and also noted confusion about conversion instructions and guidance due to changing requirements . for example , one pha indicated that the agency had problems reporting information into a new rad data field in hud's voucher management system because there was no guidance at the time on how to complete this field . however , hud has since included additional instructions in the user's manual that became effective in april 2017 . the committee has included language to establish procedures that will ensure that public housing remains a public asset in the that event that the project experiences problems , such as default or foreclosure . in each rad conversion , hud and the property owner execute a use agreement , which specifies affordability and use restrictions for the property . the use agreement generally exists concurrently with the hap contract , which is executed to govern the provision of either the pbra or pbv subsidy for the unit . the use agreement must be recorded in a superior position to new or existing financing or other encumbrances on the converted property . under a section 8 hap contract , residents pay 30 percent of adjusted household income . in the absence of the hap contract , the use agreement is set up to control the amount paid: if the hap contract is removed due to breach , noncompliance , or insufficiency of appropriations , under the use agreement new households in all units previously covered under the hap contract must have incomes at or below 80 percent of the area median income for households of the size occupying an appropriately sized unit for their family size at the time of admission , and rents may not exceed 30 percent of 80 percent of area median income for the remainder of the term of the use agreement . for new residents at or below 80 percent of the area median income , under the use agreement the resident rent contribution without a hap contract generally would be higher than that paid under a hap contract , which is based on household income instead of the universally determined area median income .