iii. ) qualified nonmetropolitan counties . also , about 54 percent of nonmetropolitan counties ( excluding redesignated counties ) had a median housing value that was less than 80 percent of the state nonmetropolitan median housing value ; in contrast , about 32 percent of redesignated counties met these criteria . overall , difficult development areas appear to be less economically distressed than metropolitan census tracts and nonmetropolitan counties ( see fig . for example , 6 of 28 difficult development areas ( about 21 percent ) had poverty rates of 20 percent or more . in contrast , about 93 percent of metropolitan census tracts ( excluding redesignated areas ) and about 46 percent of nonmetropolitan counties ( excluding redesignated areas ) met this criterion . see appendix iii for additional details on the economic characteristics of indian country areas and additional analyses illustrating the economic diversity among qualified hubzone areas . in expanding the types of hubzone areas , the definition of economic distress has been broadened to include measures that were not in place in the initial statute . for example , one new type of hubzone area — difficult development areas — consists of areas with high construction , land , and utility costs relative to area income , and such areas could include neighborhoods not normally considered economically distressed . as a result , the expanded hubzone criteria now allow for hubzone areas that are less economically distressed than the areas that were initially designated . such an expansion could diffuse the benefits to be derived from steering businesses to economically distressed areas . the policies and procedures upon which sba relies to certify and monitor firms provide limited assurance that only eligible firms participate in the hubzone program . internal control standards for federal agencies state that agencies should document and verify information that they collect on their programs . however , sba obtains supporting documentation from firms in limited instances and rarely conducts site visits to verify the information that firms provide in their initial application and during periodic recertifications — a process through which sba can monitor firms' continued eligibility . in addition , sba does not follow its own policy of recertifying all firms every 3 years — which can lengthen the time a firm goes unmonitored and its eligibility is unreviewed — and has a backlog of more than 4,600 firms to recertify . furthermore , sba largely has not met its informal goal of 60 days for removing firms deemed ineligible from its list of certified firms . we found that of the more than 3,600 firms that were proposed for decertification in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , more than 1,400 were not processed within 60 days . as a result , there is an increased risk that ineligible firms may participate in the program and have opportunities to receive federal contracts based on hubzone certification . to certify and recertify hubzone firms , sba relies on data that firms enter in its online application system ; however , the agency largely does not verify the self - reported information . a hubzone - qualified indian reservation has the same meaning as the term indian country as defined in another federal statute , with some exceptions .