( see app . i on the trends in volumes and dollar values of dispositions from the notice phase for fiscal years 1999 to 2008. ) internal control is a major part of managing an organization . it comprises the plans , methods , and procedures used to meet missions , goals , and objectives and , in doing so , supports performance - based management . internal control also serves as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and in preventing and detecting errors and fraud . in short , internal control , which is synonymous with management control , helps government program managers achieve desired results through effective stewardship of public resources . internal control should provide reasonable assurance that the objectives of the agency are being achieved through , among other things , effective and efficient use of the agency's resources . federal law requires that we issue standards for internal control in government . the standards provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control and for identifying and addressing major performance and management challenges and areas at greatest risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . in 2001 , we issued internal control management and evaluation tool ( gao - 01-1008g , august 2001 ) based upon standards for internal control in the federal government ( gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 , november 1999 ) , to assist agencies in maintaining or implementing effective internal control . this tool is not an authoritative part of the standards for internal control , nor is it required to be used . for each of the five business rules , we interviewed these knowledgeable officials on how the rule operates — i.e. , how the rule determines the number and types of notices sent — and asked irs for documentation on how the rules operated . we asked for information and documentation on when the rule was established , the rationale or purpose for the rule to include supporting data that irs considered in establishing the rule , and any evaluations of the rule since its establishment . to answer both objectives , we used applicable internal control standards in our standards for internal control in the federal government ( gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 , november 1999 ) , internal control management and evaluation tool ( gao - 01-1008g , august 2001 ) , and the office of management and budget circular a - 123 , management's responsibility for internal control . to assess irs's objectives , measures , and performance review , we selected the applicable internal control standards based upon our report on irs's collection process in which we addressed the complexity , organization , and performance measures of the collection process . the irs information we relied on for our audit work was descriptive . the quantitative data in this report are from an irs collection activity report ( car ) and are for the purpose of providing background and context on the notice process . we interviewed irs officials with knowledge about car data about the steps taken to ensure data accuracy . we determined that the data we use in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .