tolling . we have previously reported that roadway tolling has the potential to provide new revenues , promote more effective and rational investment strategies , and better target spending for new and expanded capacity for surface transportation infrastructure . for example , the construction of toll projects is typically financed by bonds ; therefore , projects must pass the test of market viability and meet goals demanded by investors , although even with this test , there is no guarantee that projects will always be viable . tolling potentially can also leverage existing revenue sources by increasing private - sector participation and investment through such arrangements as public - private partnerships . however , securing public and political support for tolling can prove difficult when the public and political leaders perceive tolling ( 1 ) as a form of double taxation , ( 2 ) unreasonable because tolls do not usually cover the full costs of projects , or ( 3 ) unfair to certain groups . other challenges include obtaining sufficient statutory authority to toll , adequately addressing the traffic diversion that might result when motorists seek to avoid toll facilities , limitations on the types of roads that can be tolled , and coordinating with other states or jurisdictions on a tolling project . congestion pricing . as we have previously reported , congestion pricing , or road pricing , attempts to influence driver behavior by charging fees during peak hours to encourage users to shift to off - peak periods , use less congested routes , or use alternative modes . congestion pricing can also help guide capital investment decisions for new transportation infrastructure . in particular , as congestion increases , tolls also increase , and such increases ( sometimes referred to as “congestion surcharges” ) signal increased demand for physical capacity , indicating where capital investments to increase capacity would be most valuable . furthermore , these congestion surcharges can potentially enhance mobility by reducing congestion and the demand for roads when the surcharges vary according to congestion to maintain a predetermined level of service . the most common form of congestion pricing in the united states is high - occupancy - toll lanes , which are priced lanes that offer drivers of vehicles that do not meet the occupancy requirements the option of paying a toll to use lanes that are otherwise restricted for high - occupancy vehicles . in its faa reauthorization proposal , the administration proposed extending congestion pricing to the aviation sector as a means of managing air traffic congestion . specifically , the administration proposed that faa establish a fee based on time of day or day of the week for aircraft using the nation's most congested airports to discourage peak - period traffic . under such a fee , cargo carriers could pay lower fees by operating at night than they would pay by operating at peak periods of the day , creating an incentive for some cargo carriers to switch daytime operations to nighttime . like tolling , congestion pricing proposals often arouse political and public opposition , raise equity concerns , and face statutory restrictions .