we do not disagree . however , as our report notes , in accordance with the initiative's stated focus of site lockdown programs to protect vulnerable nuclear materials , activities such as mpc&a sustainability activities — such as support for the maintenance , repair , and logistical services and spare equipment for the improved security systems — is beyond the scope of the initiative's stated focus of site lockdown programs as well as this report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , energy , and state ; the chairman of the nrc ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or trimbled@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors are listed in appendix vii . this report: ( 1 ) assesses the extent to which the department of energy ( doe ) achieved its goals associated with the 2009 initiative's four key activities of removing , downblending , and upgrading the physical protection of highly enriched uranium ( heu ) and plutonium , and converting facilities that use heu , and ( 2 ) examines doe's goals since the end of the initiative associated with the four key activities and identifies and assesses challenges , if any , that may limit doe's ability to secure as much vulnerable nuclear material as possible . to conduct this work , we reviewed relevant documents and interviewed federal officials responsible for implementing the initiative . in particular , to assess the extent to which doe achieved its goals associated with the initiative's four key activities , we reviewed the national security council's ( nsc ) interagency strategy and the document it circulated to agencies in 2011 to identify the primary objectives of the initiative and how doe and participating federal agencies were expected to contribute in meeting these objectives . we also reviewed doe's 2009 classified plan and fiscal year 2010 budget request — released in may 2009 — to identify the goals that doe had established at the initiative's start for contributing to the initiative's four key activities . because the key activities associated with removing and securing heu and plutonium are primarily undertaken by doe , we focused on doe's contributions but also included information regarding the contributions of other federal agencies involved in the initiative , as appropriate . in particular , we relied on doe's performance metrics and goals for removing , downblending , and physically protecting nuclear materials , and converting reactors and production facilities from heu to low - enriched uranium ( leu ) as presented in its fiscal year 2010 budget request to assess progress toward achieving goals .