quality . va uses national , regional office , and individual - level data from its accuracy reviews to oversee the quality of rating claims decisions , including reevaluations . each regional office is to meet the national star issue - based target of 96 percent accuracy for the year . for reevaluations , vba reported both claim - based and issue - based accuracy of about 95 percent for fiscal year 2018 . according to vba officials , in response to a recommendation in the va oig's report on unwarranted reevaluations , in october 2018 vba updated the star national quality review checklist with additional questions on ( 1 ) the need for a reevaluation , and ( 2 ) the timeframe for future reevaluation . at the individual claims processor level , va measures accuracy using the results of individual quality reviews as part of claims processors' performance evaluations . for example , a rater is considered fully successful by achieving 92 to 96 percent accuracy on individual quality reviews for a month , depending on the rater's experience . in fiscal year 2018 , vba reported that for individual quality reviews , claims processors had a 98.4 percent accuracy rate for reevaluations . overall , few reevaluations are reviewed because reevaluations are a small proportion of va's claims workload . specifically , of about 102,000 reevaluations completed in fiscal year 2018 , about 1,500 were reviewed under star and about 10,000 were reviewed in individual quality reviews . in addition to using accuracy information to measure regional office and individual performance , vba holds regional offices and individual claims processors responsible for correcting their errors . according to vba officials , the agency uses information from its quality reviews to provide additional guidance and training to regional offices . vba discusses quality review information , including trends in claims processing errors , through newsletters and periodic conference calls with regional office managers and quality review teams . for example , vba officials noted that they discussed reevaluation policies and guidance with regional office staff on three occasions between may 2017 and may 2018 . officials at the four regional offices we visited indicated that they disseminated information on reevaluations to claims processors . for example , one office's quality review team provided additional training on reevaluations to members of the claims processing teams . quality review team officials in each of the regional offices we visited told us that they disseminate and reinforce guidance to claims processors through periodic meetings , newsletters , or other mechanisms . vba , however , has not fully used available information about quality to oversee and improve the reevaluation process . specifically , vba did not use the results of a study it conducted to further identify and correct gaps in raters' knowledge of reevaluation processing guidance . this may 2018 study — part of vba's quality assurance efforts that include periodic consistency reviews of specific claims processing issues — assessed how consistently raters across regional offices understood vba's policies on ordering reevaluations ( see table 2 ) . the study team recommended vba take two actions: 1 . consider having experienced quality review team staff at regional offices provide additional training on reevaluation guidance to raters .