specified purpose . yet current laws and guidance impose only modest requirements for describing the purposes for personal information and limiting how it is used . for example , agencies are not required to be specific in formulating purpose descriptions in their public notices . while purpose statements for certain law enforcement and antiterrorism systems might need to be phrased broadly enough so as not to reveal investigative techniques or the details of ongoing cases , very broadly defined purposes could allow for unnecessarily broad ranges of uses , thus calling into question whether meaningful limitations had been imposed . examples for alternatives for addressing these issues include setting specific limits on the use of information within agencies and requiring agencies to establish formal agreements with external government entities before sharing personally identifiable information . establishing effective mechanisms for informing the public about privacy protections . according to the openness principle , the public should be informed about privacy policies and practices , and the accountability principle calls for those who control the collection or use of personal information to be held accountable for taking steps to ensure privacy protection . public notices are a primary means for establishing accountability for privacy protections and giving individuals a measure of control over the use of their personal information . yet concerns have been raised that privacy act notices may not serve this function well . although the federal register is the government's official vehicle for issuing public notices , an expert panel convened for gao questioned whether system - of - records notices published in the federal register effectively inform the public about government uses of personal information . among others , options for addressing concerns about public notices could include setting requirements to ensure that purpose , collection , and use limitations are better addressed in the content of privacy notices and revising the privacy act to require that all notices be published on a standard website . addressing these three areas could provide a number of benefits . first , ensuring that privacy protections are applied consistently to all federal collection and use of information could help ensure that information not retrieved by identifier ( such as may occur in data - mining applications , for example ) is protected in the same way as information retrieved by identifier . further , limiting the use of personally identifiable information to a stated purpose could help ensure a proper balance between allowing government agencies to collect and use such information and limiting that collection and use to what is necessary and relevant . lastly , a clear and effective notice can provide individuals with critical information about what personal data are to be collected , how they are to be used , and the circumstances under which they may be shared . an effective notice can also provide individuals with information they need to determine whether to provide their personal information ( if voluntary ) , or who to contact to correct any errors that could result in an adverse determination about them . we noted that some of these issues — such as those dealing with limitations on use and mechanisms for informing the public — could be addressed by omb through revisions of or supplements to existing guidance .