we disagree . we do not agree with state's position that we overstate the nature and extent of its control breakdowns and ineffective oversight . state and other foreign affairs travelers charged almost $140 million on premium - class travel from april 2003 through september 2004 . on the basis of our statistical sample , 67 percent of premium - class travel was not properly authorized , justified , or both . this failure rate and the associated dollars spent on premium class travel shows that taxpayers lost tens of millions of dollars on improper travel . for example , state issued premium - class tickets to a family of four traveling from washington to moscow for a permanent change of duty station . although this trip was well under the required 14 hours to justify premium - class travel , state purchased the premium class accommodations for almost four times the cost of coach seats . in addition to the waste exemplified here and elsewhere in our report , taxpayers lost millions more because state failed to recover payments made to airlines for tickets issued but never used and failed to reconcile and dispute other charges properly . for example , state paid for a premium - class ticket for roundtrip travel between new mexico and ethiopia that was neither used nor refunded . these specific examples and our overall analysis clearly show how ineffective oversight — not just procedural problems — resulted in substantial waste of taxpayers' dollars . as our report clearly explains , we did not specifically question whether travel charged to state's centrally billed travel accounts were necessary . therefore , we purposely did not identify improper travel conducted for other than official government travel and thus our report makes no conclusions on this matter . state's position that our findings of improper travel are simply the result of “procedural problems” and that “only a few instances” of travel were conducted outside of the regulations are inconsistent with the facts . in this regard , over half of the transactions we tested — not just a few instances — were not simply the result of procedural problems ( eg , not properly authorized ) , they were unjustified because the travel was conducted outside of the regulations . over half of the travelers improperly flew premium - class on trips lasting shorter than 14 hours or flew business class and also took a rest stop , which is to be used in lieu of using premium - class accommodations to economize travel . for example , one state traveler flew premium - class between points in europe on a trip lasting well short of 14 hours and also took an unjustified rest stop , which further added lodging and subsistence expenses to the total cost of travel . another traveler flying short of 14 hours on a premium - class ticket enjoyed 3 nights of rest upon her return . these and other examples of unjustified travel underscore problems beyond what state says are simply “deficient procedural protocols” and demonstrate how state's ineffective oversight of premium - class travel resulted in substantial losses to taxpayers . finally , state takes exception with our characterization that it treated premium - class travel as an employee benefit .