providing subsidization . the fiscal years 2010 and 2011 appropriations for the clean and drinking water srf programs also continued the requirement to provide additional subsidies in the form of principal forgiveness , negative interest loans , or grants . the subsidy provisions reduced the funds available to use as a subsidy from a minimum of 50 percent of total recovery act funds to a minimum of 30 percent of base srf program funds . as with the recovery act , the appropriations in fiscal year 2010 and 2011 do not require this additional subsidy to be targeted to any types of projects or communities with economic need , and as the recent epa oig report notes , there are no requirements for epa or the states to track how these subsidies are used . the clean and drinking water srf programs were created to be a sustainable source of funding for communities' water and wastewater infrastructure through the continued repayment of loans to states . officials in four of the nine states we reviewed identified a potential challenge in continuing to provide a specific amount of subsidies while sustaining the clean and drinking srf programs as revolving funds . state officials pointed out that when monies are not repaid into the revolving fund , the reuse of funds is reduced and the purpose of the revolving srf program changes from primarily providing loans for investments in water infrastructure to providing grants . mr. chairman , ranking member , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee might have . green project requirement . three states listed green projects separately from other projects . for example , washington state officials told us that they established a green projects category because they had anticipated that energy and water efficiency projects ( green projects ) would not score well under their ranking system , which focuses on water quality protection and improvements . we found similar results in our may 2010 report , when officials in some of the 14 states we reviewed said that they gave preference to green projects for funding purposes , and sometimes ranked those projects above another project with higher public health benefits . in addition to competing priorities for funding , epa's oig found , in its february 2010 report , that a lack of clear guidance on the green requirement caused confusion and disagreements as to which projects were eligible for green funding . officials in two of the nine states we reviewed noted that the goal of supporting green projects was not difficult to achieve because they had already identified green projects , but officials in four other states said that achieving the 20-percent green project goal was difficult to achieve , leading one official to suggest that green projects be encouraged without setting a fixed percentage of program funds . for further information regarding this statement , please contact david c. trimble at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or trimbled@gao.gov .