usint staff is restricted to havana . usaid does not have staff in cuba , and cuba program office staff have been unable to obtain visas to visit the island since 2002 . additionally , the range of cuban partner organizations is significantly limited by u.s. law , which generally prohibits direct assistance to the cuban government and ngos with links to the government or the communist party . cuban law prohibits citizens from cooperating with u.s. democracy assistance activities authorized under the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act , punishable with prison terms of up to 20 years . tactics for suppressing dissent include surveillance , arbitrary arrests , detentions , travel restrictions , exile , criminal prosecutions , and loss of employment . we observed a training session organized by one usaid grantee for approximately 20 independent journalists . in addition to the training , the participants said that they had received other u.s. assistance , such as equipment , supplies , and help in publishing their stories outside cuba . usint also provides public access to about 20 computers with internet access , printers , and copiers . during our fieldwork , we observed that a number of cuban activists used these computers . the computers also appeared to be popular with the cuban public — reservations for using them were booked for a month in advance , according to usint employees managing this equipment . additionally , as part of usint's public diplomacy program , the public affairs office also compiles and selects daily news clippings and quotes to display on an electronic billboard news ticker located on usint's exterior . this billboard was installed in january 2006 to display information for people passing the building , which is located on a major havana street and pedestrian walkway . usaid's internal controls over both the awarding of cuba program grants and the oversight of grantees do not provide adequate assurance that the grant funds are being used properly or that grantees are in compliance with applicable laws and regulations . the guide to opportunities for improving grant accountability states that organizations that award grants need good internal control systems to provide adequate assurance that funds are properly used and achieve intended results . however , we found some weaknesses in internal control in the preaward , award , implementation , and closeout phases of cuba - program grants management . the agency's preaward reviews of grantees often were not completed prior to grant awards , and usaid auditors did not adequately follow up to correct deficiencies after grant awards . in addition , the standardized terms and conditions of grants and cooperative agreements lacked the detail necessary to support adequate accountability ; specifically , the grants and cooperative agreements did not include a requirement for an acceptable internal control framework , nor did they contain provisions for correcting deficiencies noted by preaward reviews . usaid's cuba program office also does not have adequate policies and procedures for assessing grantee risks in order to put in place proper procedures to reduce that risk .