mr . chairmen and members of the subcommittees: thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing to discuss information security over federal systems . information security is a critical consideration for any organization that depends on information systems and computer networks to carry out its mission or business . it is especially important for government agencies , where the public's trust is essential . the need for a vigilant approach to information security is demonstrated by the dramatic increase in reports of security incidents , the wide availability of hacking tools , and steady advances in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology . over the past few years , federal agencies have reported numerous security incidents in which sensitive information has been lost or stolen , including personally identifiable information , which has exposed millions of americans to a loss of privacy , identity theft , and other financial crimes . concerned by reports of significant weaknesses in federal computer systems , congress passed the federal information security management act ( fisma ) of 2002 , which permanently authorized and strengthened information security program , evaluation , and annual reporting requirements for federal agencies . however , five years after fisma was enacted , we continue to report that poor information security is a widespread problem with potentially devastating consequences . since 1997 , we have identified information security as a governmentwide high - risk issue in each of our biennial reports to the congress . in my testimony today , i will summarize ( 1 ) agencies' reported progress in performing key control activities , ( 2 ) the effectiveness of information security at federal agencies , including security incidents reported at federal agencies , and ( 3 ) opportunities to improve federal information security . in preparing for this testimony , we reviewed prior gao and agency inspector general ( ig ) reports on information security at federal agencies . we also examined fiscal year 2007 governmentwide information security performance information presented in the president's proposed fiscal year 2009 budget for information technology and information about federal security initiatives ; analyzed performance and accountability reports for 24 major federal agencies ; and reviewed the office of management and budget's ( omb ) fisma and information technology ( it ) security guidance and information on reported security incidents . we conducted our work , in support of this testimony , during february 2008 in the washington , d.c. area . the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . virtually all federal operations are supported by automated systems and electronic data , and agencies would find it difficult , if not impossible , to carry out their missions and account for their resources without these information assets . therefore , it is important for agencies to safeguard their systems against risks such as loss or theft of resources ( such as federal payments and collections ) , modification or destruction of data , and unauthorized uses of computer resources or to launch attacks on other computer systems .