not available . annual appropriations legislation . current authority is p. l. 108-447 , div . f , title 1 ( department of labor appropriations act , 2005 ) . children , parents , community leaders , government officials , and industry associations . the international child labor program generally provides technical assistance and funds international projects designed to eliminate the most hazardous and exploitive forms of child labor ; researches and reports information to inform u.s. foreign policy , trade policy , and development projects ; and raises awareness of the u.s. public to increase their understanding of the issues relating to international child labor and recent efforts to combat the problem . for example , the program works with foreign governments to improve their capacity to handle the issue of child labor and has provided funds to the international labor organization to address trafficking of children for labor exploitation . however , the program informed us that they consider their work with industry associations to be most relevant to global corporate social responsibility . this requires . appropriate legal frameworks in areas such as corporate governance , financial disclosure , bribery and corruption , environmental protection and labor rights. some respondents expressed a desire for more coordination among u.s. activities related to global csr and pointed out that other countries are more involved in csr than the u.s. government . some noted that federal efforts are not well coordinated , which can make it difficult for companies to participate in u.s. government activities , and called for increased coordination among u.s. government agencies for csr activities . several respondents also expressed a desire for a greater u.s. government role in csr , stating that the united states is absent from world leadership , especially the european union , on this issue . according to one company , many european countries are involved in csr activities ; and if the u.s. government does not play a role regarding u.s. companies' international csr activities , leadership will go elsewhere . similarly , another company wanted the u.s. government to participate in the global debate on csr and to continue its efforts to represent u.s. interests in the face of the european union's more regulatory approach to csr . the globalization of recent decades has increased the breadth and extent of u.s. corporations' operations in foreign markets , through both increased investment and trade . these globalization trends have led to increased pressure on u.s. multinational corporations to adopt more csr - related activities in their global operations , particularly for developing countries . the u.s. also participates in kimberley process multilateral working groups on monitoring and statistics . no specific budget . three ftes . to encourage public - private partnerships for development projects . foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p. l. 87- 195 ) , as amended . foundations , for - profit firms , civil society organizations , foreign governments . trains usaid staff on public - private alliances and conducts outreach to private sector and civil society partners . for fiscal years 2002-2004 , usaid leveraged over $3.7 billion in partner assets through $1.1 billion in agency funding . staff plus contractors and field support . executive order 13317 .