we disagree . we found that in some cases the state agencies' claims to medicaid were based on facilities' costs exceeding the agencies' actual payments to individual facilities . this situation resulted from the agencies' decision to base claims for payment on the facilities' estimated costs , rather than on the per diem rate they paid to these facilities . according to the state , one example described in the report of a medicaid claim that exceeded payments to the facility for all services , was an exceptional circumstance . the state also indicated that this inadvertent practice was ended for all facilities as of april 1 , 2004 . although we sought clarification from the state on its comments , the state did not address our finding that the underlying methods for setting medicaid payment rates was flawed . regarding supplemental payments , georgia asserted that it has historically administered its upper payment limit ( upl ) program in compliance with existing federal regulations and also stated that it has agreed with cms to change the financing of its upl programs beginning in state fiscal year 2006 . to what extent are states using consultants on a contingency - fee basis to develop projects to help them maximize federal medicaid reimbursements ? to what extent are the claims from projects developed by contingency - fee consultants to maximize federal medicaid reimbursements in selected states consistent with federal law and policy ? to what extent do selected states and cms oversee the claims from projects developed by contingency - fee consultants to maximize federal medicaid reimbursements ? to examine the extent to which states are using consultants on a contingency - fee basis to develop projects to maximize medicaid reimbursements , we obtained information from the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) , cms , and state officials . we also inventoried projects developed by the major contingency - fee consultants employed by two states , georgia and massachusetts . we selected these states in part on the basis of information provided by cms , which indicated that the states had employed contingency - fee consultants for multiple reimbursement - maximizing projects . to assess the extent to which claims from such projects were consistent with medicaid law and policy , we analyzed selected projects in georgia and massachusetts in five categories of medicaid claims ( see table 1 ) . we concentrated on projects in these five categories because — on the basis of factors such as nationwide growth in dollars claimed , the results of our past reviews , and work by hhs oig to assess the appropriateness of claims in these categories — we judged them to be of particularly high risk . because of the number and complexity of contingency - fee projects in georgia and massachusetts , we did not review all such projects in the two states . instead , we supplemented our present review with related work in other states , including our prior reviews and assessments by hhs oig , cms , and state auditors . where hhs oig had assessed states' claims — in particular , massachusetts's school - based claims — we did not perform a separate assessment .