the study will be conducted in two phases . phase 1 will be a review of the data collection methods and outcomes , as well as an analysis of the self - reported veteran experience data gathered in the registry . phase 2 will focus on the assessment of the effectiveness of the actions taken by the department of veterans affairs and dod and will provide recommendations for improving the methods enacted . according to officials , the expected release date of the report is late fall of 2016 . considering the results of this review as well as the methodology of the 2011 institute of medicine study as part of an examination of the relationship between direct , individual exposure to burn pit emissions and long - term health effects could better position dod to fully assess those health risks . for over three decades , dod has understood that disposing of waste in burn pits poses health hazards . in light of its experience in iraq and afghanistan , centcom has taken steps to reduce burn pit use in its area of responsibility through the use of alternative methods of waste disposal , such as incinerators . however , dod likely cannot completely eliminate the need for burn pits in future contingency operations . although centcom has specific policies and procedures for burn pit operations in its area of responsibility , other geographic commands do not , potentially leaving them ill - prepared to plan for and to safely and effectively manage burn pits in the event of contingency operations in their respective geographic regions . moreover , although dod and the department of veterans affairs have commissioned studies to enhance their understanding of airborne hazards during deployments , given that dod may have to use burn pits in future contingency operations , as allowed under current policies , ensuring that research efforts specifically examine the relationship between direct , individual exposure to burn pit emissions and long - term health issues could help improve the understanding and potentially minimize risks related to such exposure . to better position combatant commanders to implement the requirements of dod instruction 4715.19 if burn pits become necessary and to assist in planning for waste disposal in future military operations , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the combatant commanders of u.s. africa command , u.s. european command , u.s. pacific command , and u.s. southern command to establish implementation policies and procedures for waste management . such policies and procedures should include , as applicable , specific organizations within each combatant command with responsibility for ensuring compliance with relevant policies and procedures , including burn pit notification , and , when appropriate , monitoring and reporting on the use of burn pits . to better understand the long - term health effects of exposure to the disposal of covered waste in burn pits , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to take the following two actions: take steps to ensure centcom and other geographic combatant commands , as appropriate , establish processes to consistently monitor burn pit emissions for unacceptable exposures .