magazine inspection . storage magazines must be inspected at least every 7 days . this inspection need not be an inventory , but it must be sufficient to determine if there has been an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into the magazines , or unauthorized removal of the magazine contents . magazine inventory . within the magazine , containers of explosive materials are to be stored so that marks are visible . stocks of explosive materials are to be stored so they can be easily counted and checked . notwithstanding the security requirements described above , atf storage regulations do not require explosives storage facilities to have any of the following physical security features — fences , restricted property access , exterior lighting , alarm systems , or electronic surveillance . also , while atf licensing regulations require explosives licensees to conduct a physical inventory at least annually , there is no similar inventory requirement in the storage regulations applicable to other persons who store explosives . according to atf data , the number of reported state and local government thefts is relatively small when compared with the total number of thefts that have occurred nationwide . during a recent 3-year period ( january 2002 — february 2005 ) , atf received reports of 205 explosives thefts from all sources nationwide . by comparison , during this same period , only 9 thefts were reported that involved state and local government storage facilities — 5 involving state and local law enforcement agencies , 3 involving state government entities ( all universities ) , and 1 involving a county highway department . the amounts of explosives reported stolen or missing from state and local government facilities are relatively small when compared with the total amounts of stolen and missing explosives nationwide . during a recent 10-month period for which data were available ( march 2003 through december 2003 ) , there were a total of 76 theft incidents nationwide reported to atf , amounting to a loss of about 3,600 pounds of high explosives , 3,100 pounds of blasting agents , 1,400 detonators , and 2,400 feet of detonating cord and safety fuse . by comparison , over an entire 10-year period ( january 1995 through december 2004 ) , atf received only 14 reports of theft from state and local law enforcement storage magazines . reported losses in these cases were about 1,000 pounds of explosive materials , and in 10 of the incidents less than 50 pounds of explosives was reported stolen or missing . while the atf theft data indicate that thefts from state and local facilities make up only a small part of the overall thefts nationwide , these reports could be understated by an unknown amount . although the term “person” as defined in law and regulation does not specifically include state and local government agencies , atf has historically interpreted this requirement as applying to nonlicensed state and local government explosives storage facilities . however , atf officials acknowledged that some state and local government entities could be unsure as to their coverage under the theft reporting requirements and , as a result , may not know they are required to report such incidents to atf .