mexico appealed this ruling . the wto appellate body agreed with the compliance panel's conclusions and recommended that mexico comply with its obligations under the wto antidumping agreement . while mexico revoked its antidumping duties on hfcs in april 2002 , in january of that year the mexican congress imposed a 20 percent tax on soft drinks and other beverages that use any sweetener other than cane sugar , which effectively shut out u.s. hfcs from the mexican market . the fox administration acted to suspend the beverage tax from march 6 through september 2002 . mexico's supreme court , however , ruled the suspension to be unconstitutional and reinstated the tax effective july 16 , 2002 . the united states argues the hfcs beverage tax is inconsistent with mexico's obligations under the wto , which calls for treating imported products no less favorably than comparable domestic products . the united states considers that the beverage tax is inconsistent because it applies to beverages sweetened with imported hfcs , but not to products sweetened with mexican cane sugar . in june 2004 , the united states challenged mexico's beverage tax in the wto . the dispute over mexico's beverage tax is pending before a wto panel . the sugar industry would like to negotiate a resolution to the sweetener dispute . at this time , private meetings have taken place between sugar producer groups in the united states and mexico , and the industries are working to reach a resolution before 2008 . prior to 1994 , mexico levied a duty of 20 percent on u.s. pork , but under nafta , mexico agreed to establish trqs to be phased out over a 9-year period that ended on january 1 , 2003 . for several categories of pork products , u.s. pork exports to mexico greatly exceed the quantitative limits of the trqs , and mexico generally allowed the additional product to enter without applying the over - quota tariff . additionally , nafta permitted mexico to establish a special agricultural safeguard tariff rate quota for certain cuts of pork , under which mexico can apply higher tariffs if imports of that product exceed specified levels . however , scholars believe that the level of payment from procampo was not large enough to offset the risks of switching to more profitable crops , which is part of the goals of the marketing support program ( discussed below ) . marketing support and regional market development program ( programa de apoyos directos al productor por excedentes de comercialización para reconversión productiva , integración de cadenas agroalimentarias y atención a factores críticos , formerly programa de apoyos a la comercialización y desarrollo de mercados regionales ) budget: the marketing support program is the second largest agricultural program . marketing support and regional market development program accounts for about 16 percent of sagarpa's budget . for 2003 , the budget was around $580 million . goal: the program supports various aspects of agro - marketing and commerce . the agricultural marketing board ( aserca ) was created to substitute the traditional direct intervention that the government formerly made through a parastatal state trading enterprise for sorghum and wheat . the case is still pending resolution .