we disagree . as we discuss in our report , dod did account for the labor costs associated with federal civilian and service contractors by gathering labor cost data from several sources , but it did not include non - labor costs in its cost calculations . in order to account for the fully burdened costs of federal civilians and service contractors , as directed to do so by the preamble to the reporting elements , as well as the second reporting element , dod should have included all labor and non - labor costs in the cost calculations . dod also stated that our assessment incorrectly implies that to “account” for costs is equivalent to “calculating” costs as evidenced by the following quote from our draft report , "we acknowledge that dodi 7041.04 states that the cost elements can be modified , but by excluding non - labor costs in its cost comparisons , dod did not account for the full cost of federal civilians and service contractors as requested in the mandate. dod stated that although dod did not “calculate” some non - labor costs , they did “account” for them in accordance with dodi 7041.04 and as directed in the congressional mandate . dod asserted that in multiple places , dodi 7041.04 states that common costs "are excluded" and "may be excluded" from cost comparisons . dod provided facility costs as an example of non - labor costs accounted for but not calculated in its cost comparisons . dod stated that in its report , all of the civilian positions and contractor functions are performed at government - owned facilities . thus , facility costs are common costs and may be excluded . dod stated that their report accounted for facility costs by recognizing that such costs exist and are common costs , thus , dod properly excluded such costs in accordance with dodi 7041.04 , and their report satisfied the congressional mandate . we disagree . as mentioned above , the preamble to the mandated reporting elements and the second reporting element specifically directed that dod account for the fully - burdened cost of dod civilian and contractor personnel . because there are multiple costs associated with civilian and contractor personnel , calculations are necessary in order to account for the full cost of these workforces . dodi 7041.04 instructs that if a function is performed on government property , the costs of goods , services , and benefits that are common costs may be excluded provided the number of government and contactor personnel is equivalent . while there were some instances where it was the case that dod's cost estimates involved an equal number of civilian and contractor personnel performing functions on government property , there were many instances where the personnel numbers differed and common costs should not have been excluded . for example , in dod's comparisons of federal civilians and service contractors at fort belvoir community hospital , dod conducted comparisons of 19 functions where 2 functions had equal numbers of federal civilian and service contractors and 17 functions had differing numbers of federal civilian and service contractors . in one comparison , the number of contractors was over three times the number of civilians .