omb guidance . uniform administrative requirements , cost principles , and audit requirements for federal awards , 2 cfr part 200 ( uniform guidance ) , is meant to provide a government - wide framework for grants management and to reduce administrative burden for nonfederal entities receiving federal awards while reducing the risk of waste , fraud , and abuse . to comply with the uniform guidance , federal agencies are responsible for developing requirements for grant applicants and recipients of their program awards , with consultation with omb's office of information and regulatory affairs . under the uniform guidance , federal agencies must provide the projected total amount of funds available for programs providing federal financial assistance , and this amount is then made publically available . estimates based on the previous year's funding are acceptable if current appropriations are not yet available . in addition , federal agencies must publically announce specific funding opportunities . these announcements must include sufficient information to help an applicant make an informed decision about whether to apply , such as the total amount of funding the agency expects to award through the announcement . sba has adopted the uniform guidance , thereby giving regulatory effect to the guidance with respect to sba awards . preparation , submission , and execution of the budget , omb circular no . a - 11 , contains instructions and schedules for agency submission of budget requests and justification materials to omb . it provides agencies with an overview of applicable budgetary laws , policies for the preparation and submission of agency budgets , and information on financial management and budget data systems . statutory funding formula for sbdcs . the amount of an sbdc formula grant received by a state is determined by a statutory formula . the formula divides the annual amount made available for the entire sbdc program — for the fiscal year the grant begins — on a pro rata basis , based on the population of each state and subject to minimum funding levels specified in statute . the maximum grant amount for each recipient ( sbdc ) is the greater of the minimum statutory amount , or their pro rata share of all sbdc grants as determined by the statutory formula . in fiscal year 2016 , sba changed the methodology it used for the estimate in the sbdc funding opportunity announcement . before fiscal year 2016 , sba officials stated that the agency used the prior year's appropriated amount for the program as the funding estimate in the funding opportunity announcement . however , we found that this was not always the case . the funding estimates in fiscal years 2012 through 2014 ranged from $2 million to $10 million lower than the prior year's appropriation ( see fig . the officials were unable to provide information on the justification for the different pre - 2016 practices , stating that no officials involved in such determinations during those years remained at the agency . since fiscal year 2016 , sba has instructed sbdc grantees to submit their funding applications for the upcoming year based on the president's budget request .