we disagree . first , gprama does not require , nor did we recommend , that dod provide information on the quality of performance information for its agency priority goals in its agency strategic plan . second , gprama does require that this information be provided in agency performance plans and reports and on performance.gov . we continue to believe it is important for dod to fully address these gprama requirements because , as described in our report , two of dod's apgs address areas we have identified as high risk . also , dod is responsible for more than half of the federal government's discretionary spending . dod's written comments are reproduced in appendix v. the departments of agriculture ( usda ) and labor did not comment on the recommendations directed to them . however , they both discussed specific actions they plan to take to improve the quality of their publicly - reported performance information for their agency priority goals . in comments relayed to us in an august 14 , 2015 , e - mail from the associate director of usda's office of budget and program analysis , who is also the agency's performance improvement officer ( pio ) , he stated the agency would ensure that a description of the quality of performance information be added for each performance measure included in its apgs for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 . he also stated that usda will work with omb to put this information on performance.gov or in its annual performance plan and report with a reference to that information on performance.gov . he also stated a reference to this information would be provided in usda's annual performance plan . he also provided us with a technical clarification , which we incorporated . in its response , labor raised a concern about statements in our draft report regarding information on several of its programs that serve veterans , which were drawn from our prior work . labor stated that the report incorrectly asserts that it does not report on the number of veterans receiving intensive services relative to performance goals . rather , labor stated that it has used the veterans' employment and training services measure for the percent of veterans being served by the disabled veterans' outreach program as an apg for 4 years , and has included how results relate to performance goals . additionally , labor asserted that outcomes for the veterans workforce investment program have been included in the annual report to congress in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . we revised the report to reflect labor's updated actions as appropriate . labor's written comments are reproduced in appendix vi . in an august 26 , 2015 , e - mail from omb's liaison to gao , omb did not comment on the recommendations , but provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb and the heads of the agencies we reviewed as well as appropriate congressional committees and other interested parties . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .