we continue to hold this view . the fydp , as currently structured , does not contain a link to defense capabilities or the dimensions of the risk management framework , both important qdr initiatives , limiting the fydp's usefulness and congressional visibility of the initiatives' implementation . further , although dod is considering how to link resources to these initiatives , it does not have specific plans to make these linkages in the fydp . the major force programs , initially developed as the fundamental framework of the fydp , remain virtually unchanged and are not representative of dod's capabilities - based approach . furthermore , additional program aggregations that dod created in the fydp's structure do not capture information related to capabilities - based analysis or the risk management framework in part because these concepts have not been fully developed . dod has modified the fydp over time to create new categories of program elements ; however , it currently does not include categorizations that are intended to relate to the qdr's initiatives regarding defense capabilities and the risk management framework . major force programs , originally established to organize the fydp into the major dod missions , have remained virtually the same in the five decades since their introduction , do not reflect how dod combat forces and their missions have changed over time , and do not organize the fydp by major defense capabilities . table 1 summarizes these supplemental appropriations . in presentations related to the 2005 president's budget submitted to congress in early february 2004 , dod officials reported that the budget does not include funding for ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan , and they expect another supplemental will be needed in january 2005 to finance incremental costs for these operations . senior dod officials indicated that operations in iraq and afghanistan will continue into fiscal year 2005 , but the requirements and costs of these continued operations are difficult to estimate because of uncertainties surrounding the political situations in these regions . however , they noted that funding estimates will likely become clearer over the course of the year . for example , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) stated that by july 2004 , the operations in iraq and afghanistan may be better defined and that having time to analyze expenditures will help in making more realistic projections . appendix ii provides a more detailed table . compared to the 2003 fydp , funding in the operation and maintenance appropriation category in the 2004 fydp was reduced by at least $9 billion per year from 2004 through 2007 for a total of $42 billion over that period . about $41 billion of that decrease is accounted for by the elimination of the defense emergency response fund , which had projected over $10 billion in funding each year for 2004 through 2007 in the 2003 fydp , but had no funding in the 2004 fydp for those years . over those same years , the “other dod accounts” category increased by a total of $19 billion . for example , in the former yugoslavia , dod funded operations begun in fiscal year 1996 through a combination of transfers between dod accounts , absorbing costs within accounts , and supplemental appropriations .