, a loan ) . a publicly available chase document indicated that “only a $375 million net loan from flagstaff was outstanding at the end of day one.” the amounts involved in this transaction are key to understanding how enron could reduce its canadian taxes , which like u.s. taxes may be reduced by interest payments but not by loan principal repayments . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member of the permanent subcommittee on investigations , senate committee on governmental affairs ; the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on governmental affairs ; and the chairman and ranking minority member of the house committee on energy and commerce . we are also sending copies of this report to the chairman of the federal reserve , the chairman of the sec , the u.s. attorney general , the comptroller of the currency , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no cost on gao's internet homepage at http: / / www.gao.gov . this report was prepared under the direction of barbara i. keller , assistant director . please contact her or us at ( 202 ) 512-8678 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this work . key contributors are acknowledged in appendix iii . to determine the role investment banks played with enron corporation ( enron ) in designing and executing structured finance transactions , we reviewed public reports and congressional testimony , interviewed private and public sector officials , and searched the internet for relevant information . we selected five transactions involving primarily three investment banks for our analysis . the transactions do not cover all of the transactions these investment banks participated in with enron , nor do they represent transactions with all of the investment banks with which enron had relationships . they do , however , exemplify a variety of relationships enron had with a number of different investment banks . the five transactions were discussed at hearings held by the senate committee on governmental affairs , permanent subcommittee on investigations ( psi ) ,in july and december 2002 . these transactions are among those involving allegations that investment bankers assisted enron in manipulating its earnings but are not those included in enron's restatement of its financials for the period 1997 through the second quarter of 2001 . we did not have sufficient public information to determine the extent of investment bank involvement in the latter transactions . given the short time frame and the ongoing agency investigations , we did not do an independent investigation into the involvement of these investment banks in possibly aiding and abetting enron's alleged securities fraud arising from these latter transactions . moreover , the investment banks described themselves as passive investors , and we did not confirm or refute their assertions . we interviewed investment bank and federal financial regulatory officials to obtain their views on information ( facts and issues ) presented at congressional hearings regarding some of the above - mentioned transactions .