gao - 02-702t . washington , d.c.: may 1 , 2002 . surface infrastructure: costs , financing , and schedules for large - dollar transportation projects . gao / rced - 98-64 . washington , d.c.: february 12 , 1998 . establish a process for the federal approval of major projects . this option , which would require federal approval of a major project at the outset , including its cost estimate and finance plan , would be the most far - reaching and the most difficult option to implement . potential models for such a process include the full funding grant agreement process that the federal transit administration uses for major transit projects , and the dot task force's december 2000 recommendation calling for the establishment of a separate funding category for initial design work and a new decision point for advancing projects . establishing such a federal approval process could have the potential to improve the reliability of the initial baseline estimates and the cost performance of major projects over time . for further information on this statement , please contact jayetta z. hecker ( heckerj@gao.gov ) or steve cohen ( cohens@gao.gov ) . alternatively , they may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-2834 . transportation infrastructure: cost and oversight issues on major highway and bridge projects . congressional efforts to obtain such information have met with limited success . for example , in 2000 the former chairman of this subcommittee asked fhwa to provide information on how many major federal - aid highway projects had experienced large cost overruns . because fhwa lacked a management information system to track this information , officials manually reviewed records for over 1,500 projects authorized over a 4-year period . fhwa's information , however , measured only the increases in costs that occurred after the projects were fully designed . thus , cost increases that occurred during the design of a project — where we have reported that much of the cost growth occurs — were not reflected in fhwa's data . in contrast to the federal - aid highway program , the office of management and budget requires federal agencies , for acquisitions of major capital assets , to prepare baseline cost and schedule estimates and to track and report the acquisitions' cost performance . these requirements apply to programs managed by and acquisitions made by federal agencies , but they do not apply to the federal - aid highway program , a federally assisted state program . while many factors can cause costs to increase , we have found , on projects we have reviewed , that costs increased , in part , because initial cost estimates were not reliable predictors of the total costs or financing needs of projects . rather , these estimates were generally developed for the environmental review — whose purpose was to compare project alternatives , not to develop reliable cost estimates . in addition , each state used its own methods to develop its estimates , and the estimates included different types of costs , since fhwa had no standard requirements for preparing cost estimates . for example , one state we visited for our 1997 report included the costs of designing projects in its estimates , while two other states did not .