dod agrees with our revised recommendations . with respect to our recommendation that the secretary of defense monitor the obligation of gwot funds in the services' operation and maintenance accounts , including those transferred from the iraqi freedom fund , dod noted that when the supplemental funds are released to the components those funds become part of the appropriation and are not separately identified as gwot funds . dod further noted that it could not separately monitor gwot funds because they are not identified separately in the accounting systems . as a result , we revised our recommendation to state that the secretary of defense monitor the obligation of funds in the services' operation and maintenance accounts , including the gwot funds . dod did not agree with our recommendation that the secretary of defense prohibit further transfers until the services provide obligation reports showing that a large percentage of their current gwot appropriations , such as 90 percent , have been obligated . dod noted that our recommendation ignores the funding pipeline issues ; specifically that it takes time for the funds to be released , received by the services , and obligated . dod said that to arbitrarily suggest that 90 percent of an account must be obligated before additional funds could be transferred into the account would create an unnecessary burden on the services , lead to "stop - go" funding decisions , and have a negative impact on normal operating procedures . we did not cite a specific figure in our draft recommendation ; rather we suggested that a large percentage of the services' current gwot appropriations , such as 90 percent , be obligated before making further transfers . however , in light of dod's concerns we revised our recommendation to state that the secretary of defense closely review the executability of further funding transfers from the iraqi freedom fund to ensure the funds will be obligated as planned . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; and the director , office of management and budget . copies of this report will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please call me on ( 757 ) 552-8100 . principal contributors to this report were steve sternlieb , carole coffey , george duncan , matt ullengren , and james reynolds . to examine the adequacy of funding for the global war on terrorism ( gwot ) , we reviewed ( 1 ) the president's fiscal year 2003 budget request for supplemental appropriations , ( 2 ) applicable laws and accompanying reports appropriating funds for gwot , and ( 3 ) dod reports on the obligation of funds . we also obtained budget estimates from the services and their key elements involved in gwot operations . we also met with service officials to discuss world events that may have had an impact on their budget estimates and their obligation patterns . we compared the latest available obligation reports against total available appropriated funds .