we recommended that ssa take four actions . for example , we recommended that in updating the it strategic plan to support the agency's strategic plan , ssa include key elements — such as results - oriented goals , strategies , milestones , performance measures , and an analysis of interdependencies among projects and activities — and use the plan to guide and coordinate it modernization projects and activities . we also recommended that the agency establish an enterprise architecture plan that included key components called for by federal guidelines and gao's enterprise architecture management framework — such as the development of a service - oriented architecture road map — to effectively guide its modernization activities . the agency neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendations . however , it subsequently took action to address two of the four recommendations by ensuring that performance measures were defined for ongoing it modernization initiatives and updating its it strategic plan to support the agency's strategic plan . as of this testimony , we have not yet completed our evaluation of the agency's actions to address the other two recommendations related to establishing an enterprise architecture plan and developing and clearly documenting investment review guidance and procedures to ensure oversight reviews will be effective in evaluating and controlling investments . beyond the challenges identified in the aforementioned reports , our recent report on federal agencies' it legacy systems highlighted the increasing costs that agencies , including ssa , may be faced with as they continue to operate and maintain at - risk legacy systems . we identified ssa's investment in infrastructure operations and maintenance as being among the 10 largest expenditures of federal agencies in fiscal year 2015 . further , we pointed out that legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as agencies have to deal with issues , such as obsolete parts and unsupported hardware and software , and may pay a premium to hire staff or engage contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems . for example , ssa reported re - hiring retired employees to maintain its systems that include many programs written in common business oriented language ( cobol ) . our prior work further emphasized the importance of federal agencies using investment operational analyses — a key performance evaluation and oversight mechanism required by the office of management and budget — to ensure operations and maintenance investments continue to meet agency needs . we noted that ssa had not previously conducted this analysis for its investments . an analysis such as this is important because , among other things , it provides information to agency decision makers on whether an investment's actual annual operations and maintenance costs are as they were planned to be and whether there is a need to examine more cost - effective approaches to meeting agency mission objectives . we recommended that ssa perform such an analysis on its investment , and in january 2014 the agency did so . our prior work has shown that effectively managing it needs depends on federal departments and agencies , including ssa , having key processes in place . toward this end , we have identified and reported on a set of essential and complementary management disciplines that provide a sound foundation to support it modernization efforts .