meeting with facility staff . officials from all nine of the area offices that oversee federally operated ihs facilities told us that they monitor the quality of care provided by facilities through periodic meetings with facility staff — including governing board meetings and other meetings . however , according to area office officials , the frequency of these meetings varies widely by area . in general , these meetings are used to discuss a range of issues , such as quality of care , equipment problems , staff vacancies , and provider credentialing . these officials stated that this creates a lost opportunity to address the deficiency and improve , as well as to hold individuals accountable . officials from ihs headquarters reported that they plan to enhance this reporting system to encourage consistent use by facility staff , or replace it with a new system after january 2017 . monitoring compliance with facility certification and accreditation requirements . officials from all nine area offices in our review told us that they monitor the ongoing compliance with certification and accreditation requirements of the facilities in their area — such as through mock surveys and other interim monitoring — to help ensure that they maintain their certification by cms to participate in the medicare and medicaid programs , as well as their accreditation by accrediting bodies such as the joint commission and the accreditation association for ambulatory health care ( aaahc ) . for example , documentation of a mock survey of a facility in the phoenix area states that the facility emergency department was improperly storing contaminated medical instruments . in addition , documentation of a mock survey of a facility in the albuquerque area states that the surveyors found defective lead aprons , as well as a high - voltage power line sitting on the floor instead of behind a wall , and exposed electrical wiring blocking the door and wrapped around a door handle — which the surveyors concluded could be a serious hazard . these findings underscore the need for such surveys , but the frequency with which these mock surveys have been conducted varies by area . officials from one area office told us that they have conducted mock accreditation surveys of facilities in their area annually for the past 15 years . officials from other area offices stated that they have recently begun performing such mock surveys . ihs officials told us that in may 2016 , ihs began a system - wide mock survey initiative at all 26 federally operated hospitals to assess compliance with the cms conditions of participation and readiness for reaccreditation . surveys conducted by cms and accrediting bodies are relatively infrequent , however , and this infrequency highlights the importance of interim monitoring . for instance , area office staff told us that the joint commission conducts site visits every 3 years , and , while cms attempts to conduct site visits every 3 to 4 years , staff of one facility we visited stated that cms had not surveyed the facility in 10 years . appraising employee performance .