gao - 11-628 . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2011 . ( see app . ii for a comparison of definitional and instructional changes from the 2010 and 2011 telework data calls. ) the opm official designated with leading the itmg said 10 agency officials from 7 agencies were selected for the group because of their knowledge of federal telework programs . according to the opm official , the itmg provided expertise in telework program implementation , policy , and methodology development , work / life balance programs , and expertise in research methods , such as surveys . the itmg met on biweekly from january 2011 until july 2011 and resumed biweekly meetings in september 2011 with the goal of addressing three primary topics: definitions of key terms , such as telework , eligibility , and employee , to use in the 2011 data call . itmg interpreted some requirements of the act and developed additional instructions to encourage common reporting methodology across the agencies . for example , according to opm officials , itmg clarified the definition of eligibility in light of agencies' concerns that the act did not specifically define the categories of employees that should be eligible to participate in their agencies' telework programs , and therefore notified about their eligibility to telework . the group instructed respondents to ensure they excluded military and contract personnel as employees when reporting their telework data . the group also clarified that respondents should include full - time , part - time and intermittent employees when responding to questions about telework participation and frequency . revision and / or addition of data call questions . for example , opm officials stated that in collaboration with the itmg , they clarified the definition of telework to specifically state that telework includes what is generally referred to as remote work , but excludes mobile work and work done on official travel . opm officials added a new question to capture the number of mobile workers . this addressed a reliability problem from the previous data call when some agencies included mobile work in reporting telework . revision and development of data collection instruments , in addition to the data call , to collect telework information . for example , itmg worked to revise telework - related items in the federal employee viewpoint survey , an opm data collection instrument that gauges employees' perceptions of their agency . in the 2011 survey three out of 84 questions focused on telework . in the past , opm has found this survey to provide complementary employee views on telework . the itmg also assisted in developing focus groups of telework managing officers and telework coordinators to identify issues , challenges and strategies associated with implementing telework programs at the agency level , such as successful telework implementation strategies , as well as barriers to telework . according to an opm official , these revisions also included questions that may enable them to better understand the differences between telework programs across executive agencies , including differences in training on telework , use of technology , and how agencies responded to the requirements of the act . this official said such information will help inform the development of telework programs .