spia . hhs partially concurred with our recommendation and said that it would suspend the annual state program integrity assessments while taking steps to address the limitations that we had identified . hhs stated that the triennial comprehensive state program integrity reviews alone may not provide adequate data to inform cms oversight . although the department acknowledged the reporting overlap between the spia and comprehensive reviews , it stated that cms was now working to streamline the comprehensive review questionnaires to eliminate duplication . hhs also indicated that cms's forthcoming comprehensive medicaid integrity plan would outline plans to enhance the spia by refining the data collection tool , reducing the reporting time lag , and providing for data validation and correction by cms staff during the triennial comprehensive reviews . we believe that cms's efforts to address overlap by eliminating duplicative information collected though the comprehensive reviews does not take into account the considerable resources that states devote to filling out the comprehensive review questionnaires , which cms officials have the opportunity to discuss and verify during week - long site visits . in contrast , spia data are collected through a web - based survey , which is inconsistently completed and viewed as a burden by states . although cms believes the annual spia data are important to its program integrity mission and plans to reduce the current reporting time lag , it has not clearly articulated how it will or could use this information to inform its oversight . in addition , state recoveries and program integrity expenditures are reported to cms on a quarterly basis , which would provide a more reliable financial accounting of states' program integrity activities . as a result , we continue to believe that the spia should be permanently , not just temporarily , discontinued . hhs's comments are reproduced in appendix iii . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the acting administrator of cms , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at yocomc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were: water ochinko , assistant director ; leslie v. gordon ; drew long ; and jasleen modi . national medicaid audit program: cms should improve reporting and focus on audit collaboration with states . gao - 12-814t . ( washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2012 ) . national medicaid audit program: cms should improve reporting and focus on audit collaboration with states . gao - 12-627 .