v ) . we obtained oral comments from representatives of two organizations , ahip and amic , selected because they represent a broad array of stakeholders with specific involvement in the imaging industry . have you tried conservative management ? ” these questions are aimed at discouraging the use of advanced imaging at the condition's onset , unless certain other symptoms or conditions are present . the physician has the option of consulting with one of the rbm's board - certified radiologists or its medical director if there is disagreement with the initial decision to deny a request . if the physician still disagrees with the decision and proceeds with the request , the rbm will likely deny it . alternatively , if the physician's request for an mri of the lumbar spine with contrast is made for a patient with low back pain and the other specified symptoms or conditions , the rbm waives conservative management and approves the request . the plans in our study varied in their prior authorization policies . for example , officials we interviewed from almost all of the plans reported that they targeted prior authorization for technologically complex or high - cost imaging tests , but varied in what specific tests were included under their programs . in addition , to determine the appropriateness of a given diagnostic test or procedure , most plans relied on criteria developed by the american college of cardiology or the acr , but they also customized these criteria to their specifications . three of the plans used a variant of prior authorization , called prior notification , which requires the physician to contact the plan prior to sending a patient for an imaging scan . if the plan determines that another test is more appropriate , based on clinical guidelines or other criteria , the plan can make this suggestion to the physician , but the physician has ultimate discretion to choose among options . plan officials reported significant decreases in utilization after implementing a prior authorization program . for example , several of the plan officials we interviewed reported that annual growth rates were reduced to less than 5 percent after prior authorization ; these annual growth rates had ranged for these plans from 10 percent to more than 20 percent before prior authorization programs were implemented . the biggest utilization decreases occurred immediately after implementation . one plan's medical director said that prior authorization was the plan's most effective utilization control measure , because it requires physicians to attest to the value of ordering a particular service based on clinical need . plan officials noted that there were costs associated with implementing a prior authorization program . under a typical arrangement , plans paid a per - member per - month fee to an rbm to conduct prior authorization on their behalf . the plan and rbm officials we spoke with indicated that outright denial rates for requests to order imaging services were low , primarily because requesting physicians typically agree to a more clinically appropriate test or decide to forgo the test after they are shown countervailing evidence . these officials also contended that a spillover effect exists with respect to future ordering .