fees for these contracts were subject to negotiation between the reserve banks and vendors . for some of the large contracts that were awarded noncompetitively , frbny offered vendors a series of counterproposals and was able to negotiate lower fees than initially proposed . during the crisis , frbny took steps to manage conflicts of interest related to emergency programs for its employees , program vendors , and members of its board of directors , but opportunities exist to strengthen its conflicts policies . frbny implemented most of these emergency activities under authorization from the federal reserve board . in a few cases , the federal reserve board authorized frbny to lend to a limited liability corporation ( llc ) to finance the purchase of assets from a single institution . the llcs created to assist individual institutions were maiden lane , maiden lane ii , and maiden lane iii . in 2009 , frbny , at the direction of the fomc , began large - scale purchases of mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) issued by the housing government - sponsored enterprises , fannie mae and freddie mac , or guaranteed by ginnie mae . purchases of these agency mbs were intended to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets and to foster improved conditions in financial markets more generally . most of the federal reserve board's broad - based emergency programs closed on february 1 , 2010 . we evaluated the quality of this documentation against relevant auditing standards . to evaluate the reserve banks' policies and practices for the use , selection , and payment of vendors , we analyzed reserve banks' acquisition policies and guidance , vendor contracts , and vendor payment information . to evaluate the effectiveness of reserve bank polices and practices for managing conflicts of interest , we reviewed relevant reserve bank policies , including frbny's code of conduct , and relevant statutory prohibitions on conflicts of interest that apply to federal government and federal reserve system employees and federal government guidance for agencies' management of employee conflicts of interest . to assess the effectiveness of security and collateral policies in place to mitigate risk of losses , we reviewed relevant documentation to identify key features of security and collateral policies and determine how these policies were designed to mitigate risk of losses for each emergency program . we obtained and analyzed documentation of steps taken by the reserve banks to develop risk governance structures and practices needed to manage the risks associated with the emergency programs . to examine the extent to which program implementation resulted in consistent and equitable treatment of eligible participants , we reviewed and analyzed documentation of the basis for the federal reserve board's decisions about which types of institutions would be eligible to participate in the emergency programs . to determine the extent to which the reserve banks offered the same terms and conditions to all participants , which for some programs included financial institutions affiliated with reserve bank directors , we reviewed documentation of program terms and conditions and obtained and analyzed program transaction data .