ce . cstc - a currently lacks the military support and security personnel resources to expand fdd into the rest of afghanistan . senior cstc - a personnel informed us that defense has not provided cstc - a with dedicated personnel designated to serve as police mentors . as a result , cstc - a redirected to the police program personnel that would have been used to mentor afghan national army units . cstc - a staff informed us that they redirected the personnel because the police training program used prior to fdd was not succeeding at a time when the afghan army training program was making progress . cstc - a intends to retrain the uniformed police in all districts in afghanistan using fdd and other similar district - level reform programs . to do so , cstc - a estimates it would need a total of 399 police mentor teams — 365 district teams and 34 provincial level teams . cstc - a informed us that its preference is to complete fdd using a 3-year planning model that would have 250 police mentor teams fielded by the end of december 2009 and the remaining 149 teams fielded in districts by october 2010 . this schedule , however , would not allow defense to complete fdd training and mentoring in time to meet the afghanistan compact's goal of achieving a fully functional and professional afghan national police by the end of 2010 . defense has reported that it would need about 1,500 additional military personnel to expand fdd and similar police development programs . the fdd program faces the likely possibility of increasing competition for these personnel from cstc - a's program to fully train the afghan national army . in the past , fdd and other anp training programs have relied on u.s. military personnel that had been intended for use for afghan army training programs . however , the demand for personnel for use in afghan army training programs is likely to increase because afghanistan , the united states , and other international partners have agreed to increase the afghan army from 80,000 to 134,000 personnel . in november 2008 , cstc - a officials stated they may propose that defense use u.s. combat units , provincial reconstruction teams , and international forces to help address the shortage of personnel . the officials later informed us that six fdd police mentor teams had been staffed using personnel provided by international forces . however , according to defense officials in headquarters , defense has not altered its guidance to cstc - a for staffing the fdd program . moi and anp officers were screened by defense and state as part of a rank reform program intended to promote institutional and organizational reform , but state did not systematically compile records of background checks conducted as part of the screening effort . the screening effort included testing by cstc - a of moi and anp personnel on police practices . at least 55 percent of the almost 17,800 officers tested passed , according to data provided by cstc - a . the screening effort also included background checks based on information from state and unama .