parliament agreed . however , norway is testing accrual accounting at 10 agencies to achieve purposes similar to those cited by other countries — namely to provide better cost information ; to establish a baseline for benchmarking costs , both between government agencies and in relation to private organizations ; and to generate more complete information on the assets and liabilities of the government . any significant expansion in the use of accruals creates a number of transitional challenges , including how to develop accounting standards for the budget and deciding what assets to value and how to value them . beyond transitional issues however , there are several challenges inherent to accrual budgeting , as we noted in 2000 . these challenges illustrate the inherent complexity of using accrual - based numbers for managing a nation's resources and led to some modifications in countries' use of accrual reporting in the budget , such as reliance on more cash - based measures of the overall budget . developing accounting standards to use in the budget and deciding what public assets to value and how to value them were initial challenges for countries moving to accrual budgeting . what challenges and limitations have been discovered in the use of accrual budgeting and how have select oecd countries responded to them ? what do select oecd countries perceive the effect of accrual budgeting to have been on policy debates , program management , and the allocation of resources ? has accrual budgeting been used to increase awareness of long - term fiscal challenges and , if not , what is used instead ? what does this and other gao work tell us about where and how the increased use of accrual concepts in the budget would be useful and about ways to increase recognition of the long - term implications of today's policy decisions ? all countries in our study that have adopted accruals have parliamentary systems in which the government is formed by the political party , or coalition of parties , that have the support of a majority of parliament . we focused primarily on the six countries in our 2000 report: australia , canada , iceland , the united kingdom . we also did a limited review of two other nations — denmark and switzerland — that recently expanded the use of accrual budgeting and two countries — norway and sweden — that considered accrual budgeting but decided against it . any analysis of budget processes , measurements , and concepts in other nations must recognize that the role played by legislative bodies in a parliamentary system of government is quite different than the role played by the congress of the united states , especially in the process of resource allocation . many important decisions that are debated during the annual budget and appropriations process in the congress of the united states occur in case study countries before the budget is presented to parliament for approval . the parliaments in the countries we studied regularly enact the government's budget without amendment ; failure to do so may be viewed as a lack of confidence in the government .