forces korea . we also met with officials from the office of the asd ( hd&asa ) , the office of the asd for health affairs , and the joint staff . additionally , we met with officials at the department of state to discuss their pandemic influenza planning and preparedness efforts in relation to the cocoms' efforts abroad . finally , we compared cocoms' actions to date with best practices we have identified in prior work on risk management , influenza pandemics , emergency preparedness , and general management . we conducted our review from september 2006 through april 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . further details on our scope and methodology are in appendix ii . planning for an influenza pandemic is a difficult and daunting task , particularly because so much is currently unknown about a potential pandemic . while some scientists and public health experts believe that the next influenza pandemic could be spawned by the h5n1 avian influenza strain , it is unknown when an influenza pandemic will occur , where it will begin , or whether a variant of h5n1 or some other strain would be the cause . moreover , the severity of an influenza pandemic , as well as the groups of people most at risk for infection , cannot be accurately predicted . past pandemics have spread worldwide within months and a future pandemic is expected to spread even more quickly given modern travel patterns . the implication of such a rapid spread is that many , if not most , countries will have minimal time to implement preparations and responses once a pandemic virus begins to spread . however , as we have previously reported , despite all of these uncertainties , sound planning and preparedness could lessen the impact of any influenza pandemic . preparing for an influenza pandemic can be helpful not only to lessen a pandemic's impact , but also to help prepare for other disasters that may occur . as we have previously reported , the issues associated with preparation for and response to an influenza pandemic are similar to those for any other type of disaster: clear leadership roles and responsibilities , authority , and coordination ; risk management ; realistic planning , training , and exercises ; assessing and building the capacity needed to effectively respond and recover ; effective information sharing and communication ; and accountability for the effective use of resources . at the same time , a pandemic poses some unique challenges . rather than being localized in particular areas and occurring within a short period of time , as do disasters such as earthquakes , explosions , or terrorist incidents , an influenza pandemic is likely to affect wide areas of the world and continue for weeks or months . past pandemics have spread globally in two and sometimes three waves , according to who , and a pandemic is likely to come in waves lasting months , according to the national implementation plan . additionally , responding to an influenza pandemic would be more challenging than dealing with annual influenza . each year , annual influenza causes approximately 226,000 hospitalizations and 36,000 deaths in the united states .