program uncertainty . the president's fiscal year 2012 budget proposed to eliminate the taa for firms program . eda reported that the uncertainty regarding the program's future funding caused the taa centers to focus on existing clients instead of identifying new firms . in addition , eda's lack of centralized , comprehensive , and reliable data on participating firms limits its ability to improve program management and program outcomes . however , we found the program may have had positive outcomes that are not captured in eda's performance measures and data collection . our data analysis showed that participation in the program was positively associated with an increase in sales , and our survey respondents reported satisfaction with the assistance they received from the program . as tgaaa requires , eda currently collects data on 14 performance measures to include in its annual report on the taa for firms program , as well as two measures to include in commerce's annual performance and accountability report . however , we found that these measures are largely output measures rather than measures of program outcomes . we define performance measurement as the systematic ongoing monitoring and reporting of program accomplishments , particularly progress toward preestablished goals or standards . performance measures may address inputs: program staffing and resources ; outputs: the type or level of program activities conducted or the direct products or services delivered by a program ; or outcomes: the results of those products and services . outcome - oriented goals and performance measures assess the results of a program , compared with its intended purpose , and are important for ensuring accountability . we characterize most of eda's performance measures as output measures , since they measure goods and services delivered by a program — for example , the number of firms certified as eligible for the program or the number of business plans approved by eda . we characterize only three of the measures — measures 10 , 15 , and 16 — as outcome measures , as shown in table 2 . outcome measure 10 — sales , employment , and productivity of each firm on completion of the program and in each of the 2 years after completion — is closely tied to the program's intended purpose of helping firms adjust to international trade competition . however , in its 2011 annual report on the taa for firms program , the primary analysis that eda offers for its data on performance measures notes how the program's participants fared relative to the nationwide average for all manufacturing firms . specifically , employment for participating firms decreased less for taa for firms participants than for firms nationwide ( a 1.9 percent decrease for program participants , compared with a 4.5 percent decrease nationwide , according to bureau of labor statistics data ) . likewise , productivity for taa for firms participants increased by less than 1 percent , whereas average productivity increased by 10 percent nationwide since 2009 . however , comparing performance data for trade - impacted firms with data for the nationwide manufacturing industry is not sufficient for determining whether the program is effective in helping firms . taa for firms recipients are in distress , having already been certified as adversely impacted by international trade .