fencing . all but one airport had complete or partial perimeter fencing or was protected in part by a natural barrier , such as a body of water . tsa's guidelines suggest that fencing , natural barriers , or other physical barriers can be used to deter and delay the access of unauthorized persons onto sensitive areas of airports — such as terminal areas , aircraft storage , and maintenance areas — and also designed to be a visual and psychological deterrent as well as a physical barrier . one airport had no perimeter fencing in place . while we did not seek to systematically test the effectiveness of security measures in place at all the airports we visited , at this airport our investigators were able to freely drive onto the runway and bring their car next to a jet aircraft . they were not stopped or approached by any airport security , management , or personnel or other individuals while they approached and drove around near the aircraft . according to an official from this airport , it is one of many open field airports located in the united states . he added that pilot vigilance plays a key role in the airport's security , as pilots are responsible for maintaining awareness of suspicious individuals on airport grounds . figures 2 and 3 show our investigators driving their car onto the runway of this airport and approaching the jet aircraft mentioned above . although 12 of the 13 airports had full or partial perimeter fencing , or other barriers in place , the fencing at 6 airports was partially bordered by bushes or trees , partially obstructed from view , or located next to a parking lot . tsa's suggested guidelines caution that such factors may limit the effectiveness of perimeter fencing . for example , bushes or other growth can obstruct surveillance of the surrounding areas , and a parking lot may enable someone to use a vehicle to crash through the fence . according to tsa's suggested security guidelines , such incidents have occurred . figures 4 and 5 show perimeter fencing located next to trees or a parking lot . lighting . all 13 airports we visited had lighting around their hangars , and all but 3 airports had lighting at designated access points . ten of the airports we visited — the 10 airports that handle general aviation but not commercial aviation — did not have lighting along their outer perimeters . tsa's suggested guidelines note the effectiveness of lighting in deterring and detecting individuals seeking unauthorized access to airports , but caution that such lighting should not interfere with aircraft operations . the three airports we visited that did have perimeter lighting in place serve a combination of commercial and general aviation traffic . perimeter lighting provides both a real and psychological deterrent , and allows security personnel to maintain visual - assessment capability during darkness . at several airports we visited , airport managers or other officials stated that streetlights in the neighborhoods surrounding their airports — lights that are not operated or controlled by airport management — provided lighting of the perimeter . secured aircraft .