we did not examine or assess u.s. economic assistance to egypt . to evaluate how the united states assesses fmf assistance to egypt and its contribution to the advancement of u.s. foreign policy and security goals , we examined multiple u.s. and egyptian government documents , and interviewed u.s. and egyptian government officials and foreign policy specialists . specifically , we obtained and analyzed the state department's mission and bureau performance plans to understand u.s. foreign policy and security goals and priorities , and how the executive branch evaluates those goals . similarly , we obtained dod theater and country security cooperation plans and compared their goals and priorities to understand how dod would measure results against them . these commitments are expected to be paid for with future appropriations . if future appropriations are not available , egypt will be responsible under the loa to pay these commitments with other sources . dsca officials stated that , if there were a change in the anticipated appropriations , the united states would seek funding from egypt to satisfy the loas . if egypt is unable to pay for the loas with its own funds , the u.s. government would be liable for the payments due on the underlying contracts executed on egypt's behalf . to manage payment if expected funding is reduced , dsca officials stated that dod would consider a range of steps including reducing the scope of the existing contracts , and stopping new orders , among other things . additionally , defense articles and services that have not been delivered would not be provided to egypt , if payment had not been received . as a result , dod also may use fmf funds held in reserve to pay companies' costs associated with closing down their production lines and terminating the contracts . however , dsca officials stated that contract termination would be considered as a last resort . absent the availability of u.s. funds to pay the entire balance of existing contracts , important implications for the achievement of the program goals and u.s. relations with egypt may arise . for example , if the united states had to terminate multiple contracts on egypt's behalf because of a reduction in fmf program funding and egypt's inability to provide funding , the u.s. ability to achieve fmf goals such as military modernization would be affected . in addition , u.s. and egyptian officials stated that a shift in funding may affect some elements of the u.s. - egyptian relationship . state and dod have not conducted an assessment to identify the impacts of a potential reduction in fmf funding below the levels that are planned to be requested . according to applicable internal control standards for the federal government , an organization should identify risks — such as a reduction in funding — and decide upon the internal control activities required to mitigate those risks and achieve efficient and effective operations , reliable financial reporting , and compliance with laws and regulations.management should then plan a course of action for mitigating risks , developing mechanisms to anticipate , identify , and react to change .