it is not regulatory . by contrast , the far is a set of published regulations — a legal foundation that has the force and effect of law for the federal agencies that are required to follow it . furthermore , the far is more detailed and prescriptive in establishing contracting requirements and can require more administrative involvement . this fundamental difference between ams and the far may suggest to some that ams is more flexible . faa personnel can choose how to apply ams's provisions to a major acquisition . nonetheless , procurement officials under the far also have flexibility because the far encourages innovation consistent with its direction ( and other applicable legal requirements ) , provides a wide selection of contracting solutions , and permits contracting officials to choose the methods that they consider most suitable for a given situation . ams comprises six policy sections and five appendixes . the procurement policy section of ams covers a range of topics , including contract funding and administration , contracting with small and disadvantaged businesses , and compliance with labor laws . according to this section , competition is faa's preferred method of contracting , but single - source contracting is permitted when appropriate to fulfill the agency's mission . this policy section also describes the procurement of commercially available or nondevelopmental items . other sections of ams cover project management tools that the far does not address , such as investment analysis , configuration management , and integrated logistics support . ams also addresses areas that fall outside project management and procurement , including real property management — an area that becomes important when faa must lease or purchase real property so that it can install atc systems such as radars or antennas on property that it does not currently own . faa's policy directs faa staff to “conduct this business in a fair and equitable manner following best practices.” although the far includes requirements that address procurement planning and major systems acquisition , it does so only in the context of government procurement policy and procedure . agencies subject to the far find the broader program planning requirements , which appear in ams but not in the far , in documents such as the office of management and budget's circular a - 109 and in their own planning guidance . for example , dod has issued a series of directives and instructions on this subject . the contracting procedures set forth in section 3 of ams do not prescribe detailed contracting procedures for various categories of procurements , as do those detailed under the far . instead , ams provides two basic contracting models for obtaining products and services through faa's contracting process . the first model is called “complex and noncommercial source selection” and is used for complex , large - dollar , developmental , noncommercial items and services . this is the model that typically would be used for investments approved by the joint resources council . the second model is called the “commercial and simplified purchase method” and is typically used for commercial items that are less complex and less costly . procurements of such products or services may be routine in nature and are generally purchased on a fixed - price basis .