ambassadors . consular affairs may also contact a post when reviewing its consular package submission to obtain additional information regarding its resource requests , or seek the opinion of regional consular officers regarding workload and resource allocations given their broad perspective on such post issues . while the information gathered during these consultations is factored into resource allocation decisions , such consultations are not regularly conducted with all posts and therefore cannot be used to systematically evaluate post needs . consular affairs does not have adequate information to comprehensively monitor its provision of emergency services worldwide , largely due to the difficulty of developing meaningful measures , and the limitations associated with consular affairs' existing monitoring mechanisms , such as the acs system . as a result , the bureau does not know the global demand for its services or if it is allocating its resources effectively . the overall number of cases addressed by posts overseas does not provide a complete picture of the level of effort expended by posts , since the measure does not reflect the complexity of the cases . additionally , the number of hours spent on emergency service cases does not provide a sense of the types of emergencies posts address and whether or not the need for emergency services may be increasing . in addition to the difficulty of developing meaningful measures , mechanisms such as the acs system and consular package , as discussed earlier in this report , do not provide consular affairs with reliable and complete data to assess the global demand for emergency services . consular affairs officials informed us that the bureau has an initiative under way to see how it might use the data it collects to identify trends related to the provision of emergency and consular services globally . however , as this initiative is ongoing , we were not able to assess it . while state provides a wide range of emergency services to american citizens overseas , state's ability to comprehensively analyze the global demand for these services is hampered by limitations with its data systems . for example , reporting weaknesses and unclear guidance associated with the acs system prevent posts from monitoring and evaluating their workload or using the data to make management decisions . moreover , limitations associated with consular affairs' monitoring mechanisms , combined with the inherent difficulty of measuring emergency service activities , prevent consular affairs from having a clear understanding of the global demand for emergency services . although state shifts consular resources to meet emergency service demands , such as in the case of the mumbai bombings , resource allocation , training , and planning decisions may not be based on a clear understanding of global workload . absent current and reliable data on this worldwide demand for emergency services , consular affairs will continue to make resource allocation decisions based on incomplete and unreliable data . in addition , consular affairs views posts' web sites as its main outreach mechanism ; it is therefore imperative that american citizens are able to quickly find emergency services information on these web sites .