army regulation no . 600-8-104 , military personnel information management / records , establishes requirements for the army's official military personnel file . the army deployed iperms in 2007 , and certain milper ( military personnel ) messages and a department of the army memorandum indicate that iperms is intended to serve as the system of record for the official military personnel file . in addition , the army is in the process of developing the integrated personnel and pay system - army ( ipps - a ) , which is targeted for completion in 2017 . the army could not readily identify a complete population of army payroll accounts for fiscal year 2010 , given existing procedures and systems . the army and the defense finance and accounting service in indianapolis ( dfas - in ) did not have an effective , repeatable process for identifying the population of active duty payroll accounts . in addition , the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) did not have an effective process for comparing military pay account files to military personnel files to identify a valid population of military payroll transactions . for example , it took 3 months and repeated attempts before dfas - in could provide a population of service members who received active duty army military pay in fiscal year 2010 . at 1,400 worldwide locations . computer support for the dod center in monterey bay is provided by the dod center in monterey bay and the naval postgraduate school in monterey , california . other computer support offices are located in arlington , virginia , and auburn hills , michigan . payments of basic pay and allowances to service members are made via electronic funds transfer ( eft ) through djms - ac . at the local level , dmpos are required to review any substantial changes ( defined as + / - 150 percent ) in payroll data daily . the intent of this review is to identify data input errors . in addition , a day before payroll is processed , dfas - in conducts a pre - payroll review . this is a manual process , where the dfas - in military pay operations ( mil pay ops ) staff obtain a sample of leave and earnings statements from djms - ac and trace the information in the statements to the relevant table outside of djms - ac . the purpose of this review is to identify potential system problems with the pay information used to calculate the pay amount . after completing this review , dfas - in then sends the djms - ac totals to the certifying official for certification . the certification process checks the djms - ac totals against the disbursing file totals . the certifying official sends an authorization and voucher to the disbursing office requesting release of payment . the dfas - in disbursing office uses the army's disbursing system to send electronic payments to the federal reserve banks , which in turn distribute payments to each service member's bank account . dfas - in's accounting division performs a number of steps to transfer payroll transactions from djms - ac to the army's general ledger accounting system .