typically , the plan sponsor is a fiduciary . before making informed decisions about their 401 ( k ) plan investments , participants must first be made aware of the types of plan fees that they pay . for example , according to one nationwide survey , some participants do not even know that they pay plan fees . in 2006 , we reported that investment fees constitute the majority of fees in 401 ( k ) plans and are typically borne by participants . most industry professionals agree that information about investment fees — such as the expense ratio , a fund's operating fees as a percentage of its assets — is fundamental for plan participants . participants also need to be aware of other types of fees — such as record - keeping fees and redemption fees or surrender charges imposed for changing or selling investments — to gain a more complete understanding of all the fees that can affect their account balances . whether participants receive only basic expense ratio information or more detailed information on various fees , presenting the information in a clear , easily comparable format can help participants understand the content of the disclosure . currently , most participants are responsible for directing their investments among the choices offered by their 401 ( k ) plans , but may not be aware of the different fees that they pay . according to industry professionals , participants are often unaware that they pay any fees associated with their 401 ( k ) plan . in fact , studies have shown that 401 ( k ) participants often lack the most basic knowledge — that there are fees associated with their plan . when asked in a recent nationwide survey whether they pay any fees for the 401 ( k ) plan , as figure 1 shows , 65 percent of 401 ( k ) participants responded that they do not pay fees . seventeen percent said they do pay fees , and 18 percent stated that they do not know . when this same group was asked how much they pay in fees , as shown in figure 2 , 83 percent reported not knowing . although it is clear that participants require fee information to make informed decisions , it is not so clear what fee information is most relevant . in 2006 , we reported that investment fees constitute the majority of fees in 401 ( k ) plans and are typically borne by participants . investment fees are , for example , fees charged by companies that manage a mutual fund for all services related to operating the fund . these fees pay for selecting a mutual fund's portfolio of securities and managing the fund ; marketing the fund and compensating brokers who sell the fund ; and providing other shareholder services , such as distributing the fund prospectus . these fees are charged regardless of whether the mutual fund or other investment product , such as collective investment funds or group annuity contracts , is part of a 401 ( k ) plan or purchased by individual investors in the retail market .