aligning stakeholders . panel members and other industry representatives also noted the challenge of aligning stakeholders — some who are natural competitors — to work together . in our past work , we have reported that federal agencies engaged in collaborative efforts — such as the transition — need to create the means to monitor and evaluate their efforts to enable them to identify areas for improvement . reporting on these activities can help key decision makers within the agencies , as well as clients and stakeholders , to obtain feedback for improving both policy and operational effectiveness . in addition to highlighting potential challenges , the expert panelists identified the following key practices as important to planning a consumer education campaign that will motivate consumers to take the steps needed to avoid television viewing disruptions , as well as help to alleviate identified challenges along the way: while still too early to evaluate the coalition's consumer education efforts , the coalition has employed strategies consistent with the key practices identified by the expert panel . for example , the coalition has identified stakeholders and conducted focus groups to test and refine its consumer messages . however , at the time of our report , it remains unclear whether public - private sector interaction can ensure a consistent message to prevent confusion or unnecessary purchases on the part of consumers . moreover , the absence of comprehensive planning to assess and mitigate risks associated with the transition , including outreach efforts , may increase the potential for at risk populations not adequately preparing for the transition . ntia has made progress in implementing the converter box subsidy program , including soliciting stakeholder comments , meeting with industry participants , and selecting ibm in august 2007 to administer the program . the subsidy program's outcomes depend on the coordination and participation of ntia , ibm , converter box manufacturers , retailers , and consumers . manufacturers and retailers are voluntarily participating in the program , as ntia does not have the authority to require their participation . ibm will develop the technical solution for the program , which includes determining how consumers will request , receive , and redeem coupons , and how this will affect retailers' current point - of - sale systems . ntia and ibm will also be conducting consumer outreach specific to the program . figure 1 depicts the necessary , interrelated actions for the subsidy program . as shown in figure 2 , consumers can begin applying for converter box coupons starting january 1 , 2008 , with ntia requiring full distribution of coupons to begin by april 1 , 2008 . consequently , some consumers that request coupons in january might have to wait months to receive their coupons . complicating matters is uncertainty regarding retailer participation and readiness . at the time of our review , several retailers we contacted expressed concerns about the possibility of a redemption system that would affect their point - of - sale systems , noting that modifying these systems can be time - consuming , resource - intensive , and expensive , and can affect their other financial systems .