we incorporated these comments where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of the departments of commerce , homeland security , and transportation ; the attorney general of the united states ; the chairman of the federal communications commission ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or at wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . our objective was to determine the extent to which federal agencies coordinated with state and local governments regarding cybersecurity efforts at emergency operations centers , public safety answering points , and first responder agencies involved in handling emergency calls . the scope of our audit focused on identified federal agencies that have a role and responsibilities for coordinating cybersecurity efforts with state and local governments . we also included state and local governments and related public safety entities and key industry associations that are involved in handling emergency calls or work closely with or represent those in the emergency communications industry . to identify the roles of federal agencies and select the organizations responsible for coordinating cybersecurity efforts with state and local government for public safety entities , we reviewed relevant federal law , policy , regulation , and critical infrastructure protection - related strategies , including the following: homeland security act of 2002 ; middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ; implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ; 2009 national infrastructure protection plan ; 2010 emergency services sector - specific plan ; 2012 emergency services sector cyber risk assessment ; 2003 national strategy to secure cyberspace ; department of homeland security's information sharing strategy , presidential policy directive 21 — critical infrastructure security and resilience , february 12 , 2013 ; executive order 13618 — assignment of national security and emergency preparedness communications functions , july 6 , 2012 ; executive order 13636 — improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity , february 19 , 2013 ; and title 47 , code of federal regulations sections 4.5 , 4.9 , 12.3 , and part 400 . we analyzed these documents to identify federal agencies responsible for coordinating with state and local governments regarding cybersecurity - related activities , including partnering with state and local government emergency services organizations to fulfill planning and assessment efforts , providing technical assistance , and sharing relevant information about threat , vulnerabilities , and mitigation techniques . in addition , we analyzed these documents to determine other methods that could support the cybersecurity of emergency services to include administering grants related to improving 911 services or regulating essential functions such as communications .