frtib has developed individual policies for each fund . we contacted seven private pension plans , but only one agreed to speak with gao staff . these policies , which frtib reaffirms quarterly , provide the rationale for selecting the fund's investments . factors influencing the policies include the level of risk and return , low costs , and the legislative history of fersa . a consultant to frtib reported in january 2006 that the indexes that frtib selected were appropriate and changes to certain indexes would not be cost - effective . table 1 shows fersa requirements and frtib's policies for each fund . in the past , frtib has periodically conducted a major review of its investment policy and suggested additional funds for tsp to congress besides the initial g , f , and c funds . frtib's process for reviewing and suggesting additional funds has included investment analysis , consideration of industry practices , and communication with congress and the employee thrift advisory council , which represents participants . for example , in the early 1990s , frtib analyzed possible funds to add to the lineup of options for participants to invest in , based on factors like diversification , risk and return , cost , and administrative issues . it submitted a legislative proposal in 1995 to add funds for international stocks ( the i fund ) and for stocks in small and medium - sized u.s. companies ( the s fund ) , and congress amended fersa in 1996 accordingly . in 2005 , frtib introduced lifecycle funds without an amendment to fersa because it determined that the lifecycle funds are combinations of the five existing funds tailored to different time horizons for withdrawal . frtib developed these funds partly based on its analysis of inefficient participant behavior whereby participants were not periodically shifting , or rebalancing , their investment portfolio or diversifying their balances among the five funds , which the lifecycle funds would do automatically for the participant . in 2005 , given congressional interest in having frtib study the desirability of adding new funds , frtib hired an outside consultant to analyze the existing tsp options , who recommended in 2006 that frtib not add any additional funds to the plan . according to frtib , having relatively few tsp options based on broad - based indexes encourages participation and limits costs . private plans under erisa have considerable latitude in selecting investment options for their plans . according to dol , an important part of the fiduciary duties of acting prudently and solely in participants' interest involves selecting investment options . erisa requires plan fiduciaries to use prudence in selecting and monitoring funds for participants , and to offer diversified funds . within these parameters , private plans can offer a wide array of options for participants . unlike tsp , private plans can decide , among other things , the number and types of funds , whether to include funds that specialize in one sector , like telecommunications , or those that track a specific market index .