i would be happy to respond to any questions that you might have . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . for further information about this testimony , please contact anu k. mittal , director , natural resources and environment team , ( 202 ) 512-3841 or mittala@gao.gov . key contributors to this testimony were andrea wamstad brown and casey l. brown . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we are pleased to be here today to participate in this hearing on abandoned mines . as you know , the general mining act of 1872 encouraged the development of the west by allowing individuals to stake claims and obtain exclusive rights to the gold , silver , copper , and other valuable hardrock mineral deposits on land belonging to the united states . according to a september 2007 report by these two agencies , they had inventoried thousands of abandoned sites and , at many of them , had taken actions to cleanup hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards . blm and the forest service are also responsible for managing and overseeing current hardrock operations on their land , including the mining operators' reclamation of the land disturbed by hardrock mining . reclamation can vary by location , but it generally involves such activities as regrading and reshaping the disturbed land to conform with adjacent land forms and to minimize erosion , removing or stabilizing buildings and other structures to reduce safety risks , removing mining roads to prevent damage from future traffic , and establishing self - sustaining vegetation . one of the agencies' key responsibilities is to ensure that adequate financial assurances , based on sound reclamation plans and cost estimates , are in place to guarantee reclamation costs . if a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation , blm or the forest service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the reclamation . blm requires financial assurances for both notice - level hardrock mining operations — those disturbing 5 acres of land or less — and plan - level hardrock mining operations — those disturbing over 5 acres of land and those in certain designated areas , such as the national wild and scenic rivers system . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . historically , the mining of hardrock minerals , such as gold , lead , copper , silver , and uranium , was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the american west .