hospital participation in eab is voluntary . while ssa and state vital statistics agencies have strongly encouraged participation in the eab program , the extent of nationwide hospital participation is unknown . however , ssa officials believe that most hospitals participate in eab . under eab , parents in the hospitals we visited could request a ssn for their newborn child via the hospital's birth registration worksheet . this worksheet was typically a standardized state - issued form used to capture the demographic and medical information required for the child's birth certificate . for those parents choosing to participate in the program , ssa guidance states that hospital representatives should provide parents with a receipt as proof of their ssn request . of the nine medical facilities we visited , all provided parents with the opportunity to request ssns through eab . however , each had established its own unique policies , procedures , and internal controls for collecting , maintaining , and transmitting birth information , including the ssn request , in accordance with federal and state statutes . for example , one state required that its hospitals submit all birth information directly to the state vital statistics agency within 72 hours of the birth , while in another state , the law required that birth information be submitted to the local registrar within 10 days of the birth . while submission timeframes varied among the states we visited , generally all hospitals transmitted birth information both electronically and manually to their respective vital statistics agencies . birth registrars or clerks were typically responsible for entering the birth certificate information into an electronic birth registration computer system , which in some cases , was directly linked to the state vital statistics agency . though system software varied among states , it tended to capture the same information and was generally equipped with the same security features . for example , in almost every hospital we visited , each birth registrar or clerk had a personal identification password and sign - on to access the system . hospital personnel , in locations we visited that submitted data electronically , were required to make corrections to the electronic certificate prior to submitting it to their vital statistics office , because the computer system locked the record once the information was downloaded . this security feature prevented staff from making changes once the data were transmitted . however , if an error was discovered , hospital personnel could correct it with assistance from their respective vital statistics agency . for example , one state's vital records office issued a single - use pass code to the responsible birth registrar for re - entry into the electronic registration system . in all the states in which we conducted interviews , we also found that once the vital statistics agency received the birth information , state officials reviewed the birth data submitted . these vital statistics agencies reviewed the data to ensure that the demographic and medical information was complete . in addition , officials from one location told us that they had also implemented other quality assurance measures , such as cross - referencing birth and death records and validating births that occur outside the presence of a physician or midwife .