other health . u.s. spending on other health - related programs decreased from 2001 to 2003 . however , total spending for these programs during this period was more than three times greater than the total for hiv / aids - related foreign assistance programs . hapsat categorizes current art patients as those receiving first - or second - line arv drugs . in addition , hapsat considers the following cost categories: drug costs . hapsat categorizes drug costs as first - or second - line arv drugs . nondrug costs . hapsat categorizes nondrug costs as labor ( eg , doctor , nurse , lab technician salaries ) and laboratory costs . overhead . hapsat categorizes overhead as administrative costs , drug supply chain , monitoring and evaluation , and training , based on country data . overhead estimates are applied at both the facility and above - facility level . table 9 summarizes how hapsat categorizes numbers of patients and various unit costs to calculate the total cost of art . spectrum categorizes current art patients as adult or pediatric and receiving first - or second - line arv drugs . in addition , spectrum considers the following cost categories: drug costs . spectrum categorizes drugs costs as first - or second - line arv drugs . nondrug costs . spectrum categorizes nondrug costs as laboratory and service delivery ( i.e. , hospital and clinic stays ) . service delivery costs include inpatient hospital and outpatient clinic costs . table 10 summarizes how spectrum categorizes numbers of patients and various unit costs to calculate the total cost of art . in addition to the contact named above , audrey solis ( assistant director ) , todd m. anderson , diana blumenfeld , giulia cangiano , ming chen , david dornisch , lorraine ettaro , etana finkler , kendall helm , heather latta , reid lowe , grace lui , jeff miller , and mark needham made key contributions to this report . president's emergency plan for aids relief: efforts to align programs with partner countries' hiv / aids strategies and promote country ownership . gao - 10-836 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2010 . president's emergency plan for aids relief: partner selection and oversight follow accepted practices but would benefit from enhanced planning and accountability . gao - 09-666 . washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2009 . global hiv / aids: a more country - based approach could improve allocation of pepfar funding . gao - 08-480 . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2008 . global health: global fund to fight aids , tb and malaria has improved its documentation of funding decisions but needs standardized oversight expectations and assessments . gao - 07-627 . washington , d.c.: may 7 , 2007 . global health: spending requirement presents challenges for allocating prevention funding under the president's emergency plan for aids relief . gao - 06-395 . washington , d.c.: april 4,2006 . global health: the global fund to fight aids , tb and malaria is responding to challenges but needs better information and documentation for performance - based funding . gao - 05-639 . washington , d.c.: june 10 , 2005 . global hiv / aids epidemic: selection of antiretroviral medications provided under u.s .