the requirement is not complex ; and 3 . the contracting officer documents the file , in writing , as to why the appointment of a cor is unnecessary . based on preliminary observations from our ongoing work in iraq and afghanistan , we found that dod continues to be faced with five challenges related to providing management and oversight of contractors in ongoing operations . first , dod continues to be challenged in having an adequate number of personnel to provide oversight and management of contracts . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . while dod has acknowledged shortages of personnel and has made some efforts to address them , these efforts are in the early stages of implementation . second , training non - acquisition personnel such as cors and unit commanders to work with contractors continues to be a problem . for example , we found some instances in which a lack of training raised concerns over the potential risk of military commanders directing contractors to perform work outside the scope of the contract — something commanders lack the authority to do . third , dod continues to face badging and screening challenges , particularly of local national and third - country national contractor personnel . fourth , dod lacks reliable tracking data on contractor personnel in iraq and afghanistan . fifth , dod faces challenges in identifying its operational contract support requirements for ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan . for instance , officials from u.s. forces - afghanistan's logistics staff appeared to be unaware of their responsibility as defined by dod guidance to identify contractor requirements or develop the contract management and support plans required by guidance . as we noted in several of our previous reports , having the right people with the right skills to oversee contractor performance is crucial to ensuring that dod receives the best value for the billions of dollars spent on contractor - provided services supporting contingency operations . additionally , as our previous work has shown , poor contract oversight and the poor contractor performance that may result can negatively affect the military's mission . although we could find no dod guidelines regarding the appropriate number of personnel needed to oversee and manage dod contracts at a deployed location , several reviews by gao and dod organizations have consistently found significant deficiencies in dod's oversight of contractors due to having an inadequate number of personnel to carry out these duties . in 2004 , 2006 , and again in 2008 , we reported on dod's inability to provide an adequate number of oversight personnel in centcom's theater of operation , and our ongoing work in afghanistan and iraq demonstrates that this problem has not been resolved . in addition , the marine expeditionary force trained approximately 100 marines as cors prior to its deployment to afghanistan this spring .