gao - 11-318sp . gao , communications networks: outcome - based measures would assist dhs in assessing effectiveness of cybersecurity efforts , gao - 13-275 ( washington , d.c.: apr . our work over the last 20 years has identified difficulties agencies face in measuring performance across various program types , such as regulations and grants . some commonly reported difficulties that cut across the various program types include: accounting for factors that are both outside of an agency's control and impact the results of a program ; developing appropriate performance measures , especially for programs without a clearly defined purpose or that require a long time period to achieve intended results ; and obtaining complete , timely , and accurate performance information of the program . illustrative examples from our recent work that show how agencies have experienced difficulties in measuring program performance are provided in table 2 . in our 2013 annual report on fragmentation , overlap , and duplication , we identified the need for improving the measurement of performance and results — including program evaluation — as a theme that cuts across our suggested actions to address fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in federal agencies . while some agencies have faced difficulties in measuring program performance , some progress has been made in developing performance measures and using the resulting performance information to measure performance in the applicable program area . for example: hud has made progress in measuring grant program performance . as we reported in november 2011 , hud measured progress toward some green building goals by collecting energy consumption data for participating properties receiving grants or loans under its green retrofit program for multifamily housing before and after the properties are retrofitted and planned to use this data to calculate savings and evaluate effectiveness . see figure 13 . a fundamental element in an organization's efforts to manage for results is its ability to set meaningful goals for performance and to measure progress toward those goals . in our 1996 executive guide , we underscored the importance of taking a balanced approach to setting goals and measuring performance . if a balance across an organization's various priorities does not exist , the measures in place can overemphasize some goals and create skewed incentives . this need for agencies to have a balanced set of performance measures was reinforced in gprama , which calls for agencies to develop a variety of measures , such as output , outcome , customer service , and efficiency , across program areas . as we have previously reported , based on our government - wide federal managers surveys , federal managers reported a statistically significant increase in the presence of different types of performance measures for their programs to a great or very great extent following initial implementation of gpra . despite this early progress in establishing a variety of performance measures , since our 2003 federal managers survey , there generally has been no statistically significant increase in the reported presence of these measures to a great or very great extent . more recently , as illustrated in figure 14 , the only statistically significant increase between 2007 and 2013 is in the percentage of managers reporting the presence of quality measures .