pakistan . according to the fiscal year 2005 ata annual report , ata delivered 17 courses to 335 participants in pakistan that year . supporting tables in the same report listed 13 courses provided to 283 participants . further , a summary report provided to us from the ds / t / ata internal database produced a third set of numbers describing 13 courses provided to 250 course participants during fiscal year 2005 . ds / t / ata officials acknowledged this inconsistency , but they were unable to identify which set of figures was correct . ds / t / ata officials noted that similar inaccuracies could be presumed for prior years and for other partner nations . significantly , the officials indicated that inaccuracies and omissions in reports of the training participants and events were due to a lack of internal policies and procedures for recording and reporting program data . in the absence of documented policies and procedures , staff developed various individual processes for collecting the information that resulted in flawed data reporting . additionally , ds / t / ata officials told us that its inadequate information management system and a lack of consistent data collection procedures also contributed to inaccurate reporting . ds / t / ata's annual reports to congress on ata from fiscal year 1997 to 2005 did not contain systematic assessments of program results . further , the reports did not consistently include information on key aspects of the program , such as program activities , spending , and management initiatives that would be helpful to congress and state in evaluating ata . gpra , office of management and budget guidance , and our previous work provide a basis and rationale for the types of information that are useful in assessing program performance . according to this guidance , key elements of program reporting include clearly defined objectives and goals , comparisons of actual and projected performance that include at least 4 years of annual data , explanations and plans for addressing unmet goals , and reliable information on the program's activities and financial activity . we reviewed ata annual reports for fiscal years 1997 through 2005 , and found that the reports varied widely in terms of content , scope , and format . moreover , the annual reports did not contain systematic assessments of program performance or consistent information on program activity , such as number and type of courses delivered , types of equipment provided , and budget activity associated with program operations . in general , the reports contained varying levels of detail on program activity , and provided only anecdotal examples of program successes , from a variety of sources , including u.s. embassy officials , ata instructors , and partner nation officials . ( see app . i for a more complete description of our scope and methodology. ) congress authorized state's ata program in 1983 through the foreign assistance act .