the reason for this is unclear . what is clear , however , is that since the summer of 2006 , the ministry has experienced significant challenges in its warehousing and supply , and maintenance activities . because of these challenges , the ministry is dependent on coalition support for much of its logistics requirements . if left uncorrected , these challenges will likely prolong the ministry's dependence on coalition support into at least fiscal year 2008 . in december 2006 , dod reported that the moi warehouse system consists of five warehouses operated by the coalition , one that is planned for moi operation in late december 2006 , and several additional warehouses at the headquarters of both the ministry and its department of border enforcement . according to dod , each of the provincial directors of police offices is responsible for establishing its own warehouse . since the summer of 2006 , moi has depended on the coalition and contractors to run its warehouses and supply much of its forces . for example , in july 2006 , not only was the coalition procuring and distributing equipment , vehicles , and weapons for moi , it was also funding a contractor to run the supply distribution warehouses and provide the transportation assets needed to get the supplies from the warehouses to moi facilities . according to a coalition assessment , this state of affairs was necessary because moi's existing logistics capabilities were being overwhelmed by the force the coalition was developing for the moi . these challenges have continued , and moi remains dependent on the coalition to operate its warehouse system . although moi was supposed to assume responsibility for running these warehouses , this has not happened . in august 2006 , a coalition - funded contractor was operating six warehouses for moi , and plans called for all six to transition to moi control by february 2007 . however , according to an update we received from dod in december 2006 , only one of the six warehouses will be transitioned to iraqi control by february 2007 . the remaining five are to continue under coalition control until july 2007 . moreover , it seems that moi's dependence on coalition support of its logistics facilities will continue into fiscal year 2008 . dod states that moi requires approximately $175 million from the supplemental fiscal year 2007 security forces fund for the construction and sustainment of warehouses and maintenance depots . dod states that without this funding , the ministry will be unable to sustain its warehouses , and the coalition's significant investment in the moi vehicular fleet , comprising some 19,222 coalition - supplied vehicles , will be put at risk . in addition , dod is seeking funding for moi logistics projects in the fiscal year 2008 security forces fund request . maintenance is another area in which the moi continues to face challenges . as of december 2006 , the moi had at least two different vehicle maintenance concepts . the first , for provincial police forces , directs that vehicles be maintained at the provincial level .