gao - 01-255 . washington , d.c.: january 2001 . meanwhile , older claims were not being worked . while the tiger team is designed to resolve some of these older claims , regional offices will eventually have to handle this workload . vba attributes much of the increase to vcaa . according to vba , the most significant change resulting from the legislation is the requirement to fully develop claims even in the absence of evidence showing a current disability or a link to military service . as a result of the vcaa , vba undertook a review of about 98,000 veterans' disability claims that were previously denied under the cavc's morton decision . in addition , the vcaa has affected the processing of about 244,000 rating - related claims that were pending at the time the vcaa was enacted and all new compensation and pension claims received since the law's enactment . these claims must be developed and evaluated under the expanded procedures required by the vcaa . vba believes this will increase the time to process cases . other contributing factors included the recent addition of diabetes as a presumptive service - connected disability for veterans who served in vietnam ; the need to train many new claims processing employees ; and the implementation of new vba processing software . vba received about 56,500 diabetes claims through november 2001 and expects to receive an additional 76,000 claims during the remainder of fiscal year 2002 . the influx of new claims processing staff during fiscal year 2001 has also temporarily hampered the productivity of experienced staff . according to officials at some of the regional offices we visited , experienced rating specialists had less time to spend on rating work because they were helping train and mentor new rating specialists . although this may have reduced short - term production , it should enable vba to increase production in the long term by enhancing the proficiency of new staff . furthermore , regional office officials noted that the learning curve and implementation difficulties with vba's new automated rating preparation system ( rating board automation 2000 ) hampered their productivity . over the last 3 years , the average time vba takes to complete rating - related claims has increased from 166 to 181 days – which places it far from reaching its end of fiscal year 2003 goal of 100 days ( see fig . 1 ) .during the same period , the average age of pending claims increased from 144 to 182 days . in fiscal year 2001 , the average age of pending cases was actually greater than the average time to complete decisions . according to officials at some of the regional offices we visited , staff have recently been focusing on completing simpler and less time - consuming cases . officials told us that focusing on completing simpler cases might result in increases in production and short - term improvements in timeliness . at the same time , it may also result in the office's pending inventory getting even older . in addition to problems with timeliness of decisions , vba acknowledges that the accuracy of regional office decisions needs to be improved .