the corporation concurred with the recommendation . absent this comprehensive assessment of the role , the corporation has reduced assurance that it can effectively address the risks associated with a rapidly changing threat environment . fdic had not yet fully addressed several weaknesses that we previously identified in its information systems supporting financial processing . during 2015 , fdic had resolved 7 of the 16 previously - reported security weaknesses that were unresolved as of december 31 , 2014 . however , fdic had not fully resolved 9 previously - reported weaknesses including three relating to authorization , audit and monitoring , and configuration management , among others . fdic made improvements in developing and documenting many elements of its corporate information security program . however , security controls were not always consistently implemented . specifically , the corporation did not ( 1 ) fully document and implement procedures for performing system access requests , assignments , and removal or ( 2 ) have a policy for monitoring critical security file changes . given the role that information systems play in fdic's internal controls over financial reporting , it is important that the corporation address the remaining weaknesses in information security controls that we and the office of inspector general identified — both old and new — as part of its ongoing efforts to mitigate the risks from cyber attacks and to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its financial and sensitive information . although we do not consider these weaknesses individually or collectively to be either a material weakness or a significant deficiency for financial reporting purposes , the corporation will have limited assurance that its sensitive financial information and resources will be secure until these weaknesses have been mitigated . to help improve the corporation's implementation of its information security program , we recommend that the chairman of fdic direct the chief information officer to take the following actions: update and implement access control procedures to require that authorizations for the removal or modification of access rights are documented and that approved changes are acted on in a timely manner . develop and implement a policy that requires monitoring changes to critical files for the platforms identified during the audit . in a separate report with limited distribution , we are also making ten detailed recommendations consisting of actions to be taken to correct specific information security weaknesses related to access control and audit and monitoring . in a letter providing written comments ( reprinted in app . ii ) on a draft of this report , fdic's deputy to the chairman and chief financial officer stated fdic concurred with our two recommendations to improve fdic's implementation of its information security program and that corrective actions for the two new recommendations will be completed during 2016 . fdic also provided technical comments that we addressed in our report as appropriate . we are also sending copies of this report to interested congressional parties . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or dr. nabajyoti barkakati at ( 202 ) 512- 4499 . we can also be reached by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov and barkakatin@gao.gov .