omb agreed with our recommendation . when executive branch agencies carry out activities in a fragmented and uncoordinated way , the resulting patchwork of programs can waste scarce funds , confuse and frustrate program customers , and limit the overall effectiveness of the federal effort . our 2013 annual report includes several areas in which improved interagency coordination and collaboration could help agencies better leverage limited resources or identify opportunities to operate more efficiently . for example , the department of veterans affairs and dod operate two of the nation's largest health care systems , together providing health care to nearly 16 million veterans , service members , military retirees , and other beneficiaries at estimated costs for fiscal year 2013 of about $53 billion and $49 billion , respectively . as part of their health care efforts , the departments have established collaboration sites — locations where the two departments share health care resources through hundreds of agreements and projects — to deliver care jointly with the aim of improving access , quality , and cost - effectiveness of care . however , we found that the departments do not have a fully developed and formalized process for systematically identifying all opportunities for new or enhanced collaboration , potentially missing opportunities to improve health care access and quality , and reduce costs . the gpra modernization act requires omb to coordinate with executive branch agencies to establish crosscutting priority goals and to develop a federal government performance plan that defines the level of performance needed to achieve them . as we reported in may 2012 , the president's fiscal year 2013 budget submission included the first list of 14 interim crosscutting priority goals . for each of the interim goals , as required by the act , omb listed the agencies and programs that contribute to the goal in the federal government performance plan . however , based on our prior work , we identified additional agencies and programs that should be included . accordingly , we recommended that omb consider adding those additional contributors to the crosscutting priority goals . omb concurred with this recommendation , and in december 2012 omb updated information to the federal government performance plan , and added some of the additional agencies and programs we identified for select goals . the crosscutting approach required by the act will provide a much needed basis for more fully integrating a wide array of federal activities as well as a cohesive perspective on the long - term goals of the federal government that is focused on priority policy areas . it could also be a valuable tool for governmentwide reexamination of existing programs and for considering proposals for new programs . the act also requires agencies to describe how they are working with each other to achieve their strategic and performance goals , as well as any relevant crosscutting priority goals . moreover , for each of its performance and priority goals , each agency must identify the organizations , programs , and other activities — both within and external to the agency — that contribute to the goal . these new requirements provide additional opportunities for collaboration across executive branch agencies .