response 13a . school fairs 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 13b . how do selected schools recruit veterans ? what are the school search and recruiting experiences of student veterans ? what actions has va taken to help veterans make informed education decisions and to identify inappropriate school recruiting ? to address the first question , we conducted phone interviews with officials from nine schools ( three schools in each sector — public , for - profit , and nonprofit ) to gather information on the extent and ways they reach out to veterans and military servicemembers . we also reviewed the websites of an additional 30 schools ( 10 per sector ) to review basic information on how schools' websites are used to engage interested students and to provide information aimed at prospective veteran or military students . we selected the schools for our interviews and website analysis for variation in sector , va funding levels , and level of degrees offered ( eg , bachelor's vs. associate's ) , among other criteria . all of our selected schools received at least $2 million in total post - 9 / 11 gi bill payments from fiscal years 2010 through 2011 , the most recent data available when we selected our schools . before deciding to attend your current or most recent school , do you recall seeing advertising from any of the following sources for either the school you are attending or any other schools you were considering ? ( check one response for current school and one response for other school ( s ) you considered. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) response 12f . social media ( such as facebook , twitter , etc. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) yes ( current school ) yes ( other schools ) if yes to 12k: what other type of advertising do you recall seeing either for the school you are attending or for any other school you considered ? how important , if at all , were each of the following factors in your decision to enroll in your current or most recent school ? ( check one response for each item ) . campus visits no basis to 13c . direct communications with school personnel 9.3 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 13f .