other facilities also faced problems . we found that water leaks caused by deteriorated piping and roofing elements , along with humidity and temperature problems in buildings with aging systems , posed perhaps the most pervasive threats to artifacts in the museums and storage facilities . for example , leaks have damaged two historic aircraft at the national air and space museum . additionally , smithsonian archives officials told us that they had had to address 19 “water emergencies” since june 2002 . these problems were indicative of a broad decline in the smithsonian's aging facilities and systems that posed a serious long - term threat to the collections . we also found that the smithsonian had taken steps to maximize the effectiveness of its resources for facilities . these changes resulted from an internal review and a 2001 report by the national academy of public administration , which recommended that the smithsonian centralize its then highly decentralized approach to facilities management and budgeting in order to promote uniform policies and procedures , improve accountability , and avoid duplication . the smithsonian created the office of facilities engineering and operations in 2003 to assume responsibility for all facilities - related programs and budgets . at the time of our 2005 review , this office was adopting a variety of recognized industry best practices for managing facilities projects , such as the use of benchmarking and metrics recommended by the construction industry institute and leading capital decision - making practices . preliminary results from our ongoing work show that as of march 30 , 2007 , the smithsonian estimates it will need about $2.5 billion for revitalization , construction , and maintenance projects identified from fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2013 , an increase of about $200 million from its 2005 estimate of about $2.3 billion for the same time period . smithsonian officials stated that to update this estimate , they identified changes that had occurred to project cost figures used in the 2005 estimate and then subtracted from the new total the appropriations the smithsonian had received for facilities revitalization , construction , and maintenance projects for fiscal years 2005-2007 . according to smithsonian officials , this estimate includes only costs for which the smithsonian expects to receive federal funds . projects that have been or are expected to be funded through the smithsonian's private trust funds were not included as part of the estimate , although the smithsonian has used these trust funds to support some facilities projects . for example , the steven f. udvar - hazy center was funded largely through trust funds . according to smithsonian officials , maintenance and capital repair projects are not generally funded through trust funds . at the time of our 2005 report , smithsonian officials told us that the smithsonian's estimate of about $2.3 billion could increase for a variety of reasons . for example , the estimate was largely based on preliminary assessments .