use of helicopters . several stakeholders raised concerns about the forest service stopping the use of helicopters to drop water on the fire after the rappellers were removed . according to interagency guidance and forest service officials , water drops are not as effective at containing a fire without crews on the ground ( to build firelines , for example ) , and they did not want to expose helicopter crews to unnecessary risk for actions that were unlikely to be effective . in addition , officials said that the water drops were causing burning logs and other debris to roll down the hill and create spot fires . interagency guidance discusses the importance of coordinating air and ground firefighting tactics , noting that the effectiveness of aircraft is dependent on the deployment of ground assets . use of indirect strategies . several stakeholders raised concerns about incident management teams not engaging the fire more directly in the first several weeks rather than constructing fireline miles away . some of these stakeholders described this indirect approach as a “watch and wait” or “let it burn” approach . in response , officials said that they looked for locations and opportunities to fight the fire directly , but the fire's remote location and rugged terrain made this difficult . one official estimated it would have taken firefighters 2 days to hike to the fire because of the distance and trail conditions . number of burnout operations . several officials raised concerns about the forest service not conducting burnout operations before the chetco effect winds arrived in mid - august . however , as previously noted , officials stated that there are risks in conducting such operations . limited use of chainsaws . some national forest officials raised concerns about limited use of chainsaws in the kalmiopsis wilderness , saying this prevented them from making quicker progress in constructing fireline . however , a forest service biologist said that vegetation near the river has regrown since the fire and there is no indication that the temperature of the river water has increased . the fire may provide some long - term benefits for salmon and other fish species . specifically , erosion following the fire is likely to increase the supply of downed trees and coarse gravel in streams and rivers , which provide places for fish to lay their eggs and hide , according to a study and a forest service biologist . some cultural resources — including archaeological sites , historic structures , and areas significant to contemporary native american tribes — were negatively affected by the chetco bar fire . the forest service reported that 130 known and recorded native american archaeological sites were located within the perimeter of the chetco bar fire , 49 of which the agency characterized as isolated sites containing one to three stone artifacts . the effect of the chetco bar fire on known and recorded sites — and on any cultural sites not previously identified — is not fully known . following the fire , as part of its baer report , the forest service assessed some of these sites , including a prehistoric native american village site and an area culturally important to native american tribes .