budgeting for evaluations . at our facilitated discussion , agency officials agreed that it can be challenging for some grantees to budget for evaluations because they want to dedicate as much funding as possible to serving their target populations . one agency official also noted that grantees may be unfamiliar with the resources needed to conduct rigorous evaluations , such as randomized controlled trials and quasi - experimental designs . we have previously reported that randomized controlled trial evaluations are often difficult to carry out because evaluators must be able to maintain a treatment and control group . similarly , officials from agencies we reviewed , and some grantees , also described challenges that were specific to conducting a randomized controlled trial evaluation . for example , some grantees from the programs in our review face the following challenges: recruiting sufficient numbers of participants for a treatment and control group . some grantees faced recruitment challenges because they needed to recruit twice the number of people they planned to serve to maintain a control group for a randomized controlled trial . one grantee said it is particularly challenging to recruit participants for a randomized controlled trial because participants must agree to participate in the programing knowing there is a chance they will not receive the new service and instead receive the traditional services offered . retaining participants for data collection . some grantees experienced challenges in retaining participants to collect data for the evaluation after the service delivery ended , particularly for the control group . education officials said that it can be challenging to recruit an adequate number of external reviewers to review applications against the selection criteria . to address this challenge , education's office that administers the investing in innovation fund coordinated with other education offices to ensure that the application review occurred at a different time from those for other education grant programs . the office also used academic journals and an electronic mailing list of education experts to recruit more qualified reviewers , according to education officials . contracting with evaluation providers to address federal capacity issues . as a result , the grantee's evaluation will not include unemployment data for the participants in the later cohorts . education officials also described challenges in conducting evaluations during the grant period for the investing in innovation fund and said the department has taken steps to address this challenge . in 2013 , education updated its education department general administrative regulations to allow grant periods for competitive grants to be extended beyond 5 years with funding for data collection and analysis . education approves extensions on a case - by - case basis when extending the project will result in better data and higher quality evaluation . for example , according to education officials , a 2010 investing in innovation fund grantee is implementing a service model in middle and high schools to increase high school graduation rates . education awarded an evaluation grant award to continue data collection and analysis for an additional four years beyond the original grant period to track students' high school completion and graduation rates . at our facilitated discussion , agency officials generally agreed that their agencies also faced challenges in overseeing and providing technical assistance to tiered evidence grant programs .