these are rare . more often we receive “less useful” mss's that only do the first part . treating sources are generally ok with just sending records or including a statement such as “the patient has severe rheumatoid arthritis , remains under my care , and can't return to work for the foreseeable future.” when we get such an mss , we either are left to refute it or return it to the ts for a better underlying analysis . this annoys them and usually does not come to a beneficial or happy result . dds officials and providers described various reasons why treating providers may be reluctant to submit medical source statements . treating providers may be concerned that submitting their medical opinion to the dds might interfere with the doctor - patient relationship , and they also typically focus on diagnosis and treatment rather than evaluation of functional ability . providers also may have limited knowledge of ssa standards or the physical or mental requirements for different types of work . ssa regulations and guidance specify the timing of dds requests for medical records but leave the methods of contact up to each dds . if it does not receive records after one request , the dds must make one follow - up request within 10 to 20 days unless the provider is known to take longer to respond . after that , the dds must generally give the provider an additional 10 days and then may send the claimant for a consultative exam if needed . requests by mail remain the most prevalent method for requesting medical records , used at least very often by 42 of the 51 ddss surveyed . all use fax to some extent , with slightly more ( 27 ) reporting they use fax at least often and 24 reporting using fax sometimes . during our site visits , 6 of the 28 dds examiners we interviewed told us that some providers raise concerns about privacy or compliance with hipaa , for example , by insisting on a hard copy of the claimant's signed authorization to release medical records . according to ssa , hard - copy , fax , or electronically transmitted versions of its official authorization form , signed and dated by the claimant , all comply with relevant state and federal laws and regulations , including hipaa . once records are received , the dds may need further contact with providers to clarify ambiguities or request additional information . ssa guidance require examiners to recontact a provider whose medical report contains ambiguities , conflicts either internally or with other evidence , is incomplete , or is not based on medically acceptable clinical and laboratory diagnostic techniques . in addition , ssa guidance directs the dds's examiners to recontact a treating provider if the report contains an opinion on an issue reserved for ssa , such as whether the claimant is disabled or has a condition that meets one of the medical listings , without identifying the basis for that opinion . if the initial recontact ssa requires is not successful , ddss report pursuing additional approaches to encourage providers to submit or clarify records .