laundering . kingdom , and the united states . according to the state , tfwg is made up of various agencies throughout the u.s. government and convened in october 2001 to develop and provide counter - terrorism finance training to countries deemed most vulnerable to terrorist financing . tfwg is co - chaired by state's office of the coordinator for counterterrorism and the bureau for international narcotics and law enforcement affairs and meets on a bi - weekly basis to receive intelligence briefings , schedule assessment trips , review assessment reports , and discuss the development and implementation of technical assistance and training programs . according to state the process is as follows: 1 . with input from the intelligence and law enforcement communities , state , treasury , and the department of justice ( justice ) , identify and prioritize countries needing the most assistance to deal with terrorist financing . evaluate priority countries' counter - terrorism finance and anti - money laundering regimes with financial systems assessment team ( fsat ) onsite visits or washington tabletop exercises . state - led fsat teams of 6-8 members include technical experts from state , treasury , justice , and other regulatory and law enforcement agencies . the fsat onsite visits take about one week and include in - depth meetings with host government financial regulatory agencies , the judiciary , law enforcement agencies , the private financial services sector , and non - governmental organizations . prepare a formal assessment report on vulnerabilities to terrorist financing and make recommendations for training and technical assistance to address these weaknesses . the formal report is shared with the host government to gauge its receptivity and to coordinate u.s. offers of assistance . develop counter - terrorism financing training implementation plan based on fsat recommendations . counter - terrorism financing assistance programs include financial investigative training to “follow the money,” financial regulatory training to detect and analyze suspicious transactions , judicial and prosecutorial training to build financial crime cases , financial intelligence unit development , and trade - based money laundering for over / under invoicing schemes for money laundering or terrorist financing . provide sequenced training and technical assistance to priority countries in - country , regionally , or in the united states . encourage burden sharing with our allies , international financial institutions ( eg , imf , world bank , regional development banks ) , and through international organizations such as the un , united nations , the un counterterrorism committee , fatf on money laundering , or the group of eight ( g - 8 ) to capitalize on and maximize international efforts to strengthen counter - terrorism finance regimes around the world . international law enforcement academies ( ileas ) . regional academies led by u.s. agencies partnering with foreign governments to provide law enforcement training including anti - money laundering and counter - terrorism financing . ileas in gaborone , botswana ; bangkok , thailand ; budapest , hungary ; and roswell , new mexico , train over 2,300 participants annually on topics such as criminal investigations , international banking and money laundering , drug - trafficking , human smuggling , and cyber - crime .