if not , the loan is charged off . in these cases , sba recognizes a loss on the loan and removes it from the receivable accounts . and if sba is in the process of working out a compromise with a borrower on a loan that is selected for sale , the impending sale prompts agency staff and borrowers to complete the compromise before the sale date . we compared these data with the applicable guidance . to assess sba's estimates of hold values for loans sold , we reviewed an external validation of the hold model used for sales one through three that was prepared by an sba contractor , who concluded that the calculations were accurate and reasonable . since sba changed to a more sophisticated hold model after sale three , we also reviewed the methodology and assumptions used in sba's revised model to estimate hold values for loans sold in sales four and five , and found the approach to be reasonable . however , we did not audit the data used to calculate the hold values for each sale and therefore did not conclude on the reasonableness of the hold values for any of the sales . we discussed sba's budgeting and accounting procedures for loan sales with the agency , with its independent auditor , and with omb officials . we reviewed sba's audited financial statements for fiscal years 1999 through 2001 and related audit workpapers for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 . all of our analyses were based on data from the first five sales , which occurred between august 1999 and january 2002 . the sixth sale , held on august 6 , 2002 , was not completed in time for us to include it in our analyses , because transferring servicing of the loans to the purchasers and completing accounting adjustments take several weeks after the sale date . we did not determine whether sba maximized loan sale proceeds . we also collected data on the types of loans sold and the proceeds that sba received from the sales , and we interviewed sba officials and contractors . our interviews with sba officials took place at headquarters and at several sba field offices that participate in the loan sales process , including two disaster home loan servicing centers , one commercial loan servicing center , and seven district offices . we selected a mix of large and small field offices around the country , based on the size of the loan portfolio and the number of loans sold . an additional consideration for three of the district offices we selected was their proximity to the finance center and the three servicing centers we visited . we performed our review from january 2002 through october 2002 in washington , d.c. ; birmingham , alabama ; little rock , arkansas ; los angeles and santa ana , california ; denver , colorado ; and philadelphia , pennsylvania , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . the president's fiscal year 1998 budget proposed that sba begin selling disaster and business loans that the agency was servicing and transition from the direct servicing of loans to overseeing private - sector servicers .