cids . the jroc considered trade - offs made by the military services before validating requirements for four of the seven proposed programs it reviewed in fiscal year 2010 , and provided input to the military services on the cost , schedule , and performance objectives for two of the seven programs . the jroc's requirements review was the final step in a long requirements vetting process , with most trade - offs being made by the military services earlier in the process . key stakeholders from the offices of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , usd at&l , director of cape , and the combatant commands were all satisfied with their opportunities to provide input to the jroc ; but they provided limited input on trade - offs among cost , schedule , and performance objectives , and used other means to influence trade - offs . perhaps most importantly , none of the jroc's requirements reviews align with the aoa , which is where the military services reported making the most significant trade - offs . as a result , a program can spend significant time in technology development before the jroc gets to formally weigh in on these trade - offs through the jcids process . the jroc also reviews mdap requirements after a program enters development and experiences substantial cost growth . dod and the jroc stated that requirements were not the primary causes of cost growth for the 15 programs reviewed for this purpose in fiscal year 2010 and the jroc did not change any kpps to mitigate the reported cost growth . the jroc considered trade - offs made by the military services before validating requirements for four of the seven proposed programs it reviewed in fiscal year 2010 . on three programs , the jroc did not receive information on the potential cost and schedule implications of each of the alternatives considered . table 1 summarizes the jroc's consideration of cost , schedule , and performance objectives for the seven proposed mdaps it reviewed in fiscal year 2010 . the jroc's review of the cdd for a proposed program is the final step in a long requirements vetting process , and dod officials reported that trade - offs typically occur earlier in the process . each military service conducts its own internal requirements reviews for its proposed programs , which are used to refine requirements documents before they are submitted into jcids . military service officials reported that they make significant trade - offs during these internal reviews , and that kpps and technical requirements rarely change after requirements documents are submitted into jcids because extensive analysis has already been conducted . for the seven proposed mdaps we reviewed , the military services generally submitted requirements to the jroc that would be fully funded , provide initial capability within 6 years , utilize critical technologies that were nearing maturity , and be acquired using an incremental approach . these characteristics are consistent with provisions in the weapon systems acquisition reform act ( wsara ) related to how the requirements process should be structured and aspects of gao's best practices for weapon system acquisitions .