i for more information ) . based on interviews with financial institution officials , we determined our institution - specific analyses were sufficiently reliable for the same limited purpose . we also analyzed results from dod's status of forces ( sof ) surveys , which include data on servicemember mortgages and financial well - being . finally , we interviewed dod officials ( including those of individual military services , staff responsible for the surveys , and staff that oversee a database of active duty status of servicemembers ) , military associations , and selected financial institutions to obtain available information or reports on the impact of scra protections . to examine views on the effectiveness of dod's partnerships , we reviewed documentation on partnerships with public and private entities that provide financial education and counseling to servicemembers , including efforts related to scra mortgage protections . we also interviewed dod officials ( including the individual services ) and selected dod partners to determine how such partnerships provide scra mortgage education and counseling and to gather views on and any assessments of the effectiveness of these partnerships . we conducted this performance audit from june 2013 to january 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a servicer may not report adverse credit information to a credit reporting agency solely because servicemembers exercise their scra rights , including requests to have their mortgage interest rates and fees capped at 6 percent . both servicemembers and servicers have responsibility for activating or applying scra protections . for example , to receive the interest - rate benefit , servicemembers must identify themselves as active duty military and provide a copy of their military orders to their financial institution . however , the responsibility of extending scra foreclosure protections to eligible servicemembers often falls to mortgage servicers . the burden is on the financial institution to ensure that borrowers are not active duty military before conducting foreclosure proceedings . eligible servicemembers are protected even if they do not tell their financial institution about their active duty status . one of the primary tools mortgage servicers use to comply with scra is a website operated by dod's defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) that allows mortgage servicers and others to query dmdc's database to determine the active duty status of a servicemember . under scra , the secretaries of each military service and the secretary of homeland security have the primary responsibility for ensuring that servicemembers receive information on their scra rights and protections . typically , legal assistance attorneys on military installations provide servicemembers with information on scra during routine briefings , in handouts , and during one - on - one sessions . additionally , dod has established public and private partnerships to assist in the financial education of servicemembers . the limited data we obtained from four financial institutions showed that a small fraction of their borrowers qualified for scra protections . our analysis suggests that scra - protected borrowers generally had higher rates of delinquency , although this pattern was not consistent across the institutions in our sample and cannot be generalized . however , scra protections may benefit some servicemembers .