these responses are summarized below .  the acting secretary for the department of commerce provided written comments . the department stated that the report provides a good overview and assessment of governmentwide critical factors and elements that led to the successful acquisition of it investments . the department also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .  an acquisition analyst from the department of defense cio acquisition directorate , writing on behalf of the department , provided an e - mail , which stated that the department had no comments on the draft report .  the director of the nnsa's office of internal controls , responding on behalf of the department of energy , provided an e - mail stating that they agreed with the report and had no further comments . they also noted that the department is committed to supporting omb's objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions , and that wide dissemination of the factors in our report could complement omb's efforts .  the director of dhs's departmental gao / office of inspector general liaison office provided written comments . in its comments , the department noted that it remains committed to continuing its work with omb to improve the oversight and management of it investments to help ensure that systems are acquired on time and within budget , and that they deliver the expected benefits and functionality . the department further stated that it will use this report to enhance and improve the factors critical to the successful acquisition of the department's investments , such as creating a structured training program to assist in obtaining certification in the program management career field , and conducting reviews to provide insight into the cost , schedule , and performance of it investments . the department also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .  the deputy director of audit relations within the department of transportation's office of the secretary provided an e - mail with technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .  a program analyst within the office of the chief information officer for the department of the treasury , writing on behalf of the department , provided an e - mail , which stated that the department had no comments on the draft report .  the department of veterans affairs chief of staff provided written technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .  a policy analyst from omb's office of e - government and information technology , speaking on behalf of omb , provided verbal technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the director of omb ; the secretaries and agency heads of the departments and agencies addressed in this report ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .