and these are only the reported attacks . the director of the cert centers has estimated that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents go unreported , in most cases because there were no indications of penetration or attack , the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated , or the organization was reluctant to report the attack . figure 2 shows the number of incidents reported to cert / cc from 1995 through 2003 . according to cert / cc , about 95 percent of all network intrusions could be avoided by keeping systems up to date with appropriate patches ; however , such patches are often not quickly or correctly applied . maintaining current patches is becoming more difficult , as the length of time between the awareness of a vulnerability and the introduction of an exploit is shrinking . for example , the recent witty worm was released only a day after the announcement of the vulnerability it attacked . as figure 3 illustrates , in the last 3 years , the time interval between the announcement of a particular vulnerability and the release of its associated worm has diminished dramatically . although the economic impact of a cyber attack is difficult to measure , a recent congressional research service study cites members of the computer security industry as estimating that worldwide , major virus attacks in 2003 cost $12.5 billion . they further project that economic damage from all forms of digital attacks in 2004 will exceed $250 billion . following are examples of significant damage caused by worms that could have been prevented had the available patches been effectively installed: ● on january 25 , 2003 , slammer reportedly triggered a global internet slowdown and caused considerable harm through network outages and other unforeseen consequences . as discussed in our april 2003 testimony on the security of federal systems and critical infrastructures , the worm reportedly shut down a 911 emergency call center , canceled airline flights , and caused automated teller machine failures . according to media reports , first usa inc. , an internet service provider , experienced network performance problems after an attack by the slammer worm , due to a failure to patch three of its systems . additionally , the nuclear regulatory commission reported that slammer also infected a nuclear power plant's network , resulting in the inability of its computers to communicate with each other , disrupting two important systems at the facility . in july 2002 , microsoft had released a patch for its software vulnerability that was exploited by slammer . nevertheless , according to media reports , slammer infected some of microsoft's own systems . reported cost estimates of slammer damage range between $1.05 billion and $1.25 billion . ● on august 11 , 2003 , the blaster worm was launched to exploit a vulnerability in a number of microsoft windows operating systems . when successfully executed , it caused the operating system to fail . although the security community had received advisories from cert / cc and other organizations to patch this critical vulnerability , blaster reportedly infected more than 120,000 unpatched computers in its first 36 hours .