outpatient setting . across the six selected vamcs , rates of compliance with the selected outpatient environment of care requirements varied . figure 1 shows how frequently each of the vamcs was in compliance with the applicable environment of care requirements in the outpatient areas we reviewed . when doors are closed , do staff knock and wait until they are invited to enter ? are female bedrooms located in a separate and secured area of the unit or located near main staff offices or nursing stations ? are sanitary napkin and tampon dispensers available in the women's public restrooms nearest to this clinic or unit ? are privacy curtains present in all rooms ( mental health units are exempt ) ? residential treatment programs . the only instances of noncompliance that we observed in residential treatment programs were the following: one out of the seven programs we visited did not have appropriate private space for women veterans to visit with children . while visiting one program , we observed a staff member entering a patient room without knocking . we found weaknesses in vha's oversight processes of the environment of care rounds and related policies . specifically , we identified the following weaknesses: environment of care rounds not always conducted in a thorough manner . vha requires all patient care areas in a medical facility to be inspected twice per fiscal year . according to an official at one facility , when environment of care rounds are conducted at a time of day when care is being provided , the rounds team will not inspect examination rooms and other areas that are being used . as a result , the environment of care rounds team may not inspect every room in a facility twice per fiscal year , as required . additionally , we found that the checklist — which was developed by an environment of care field advisory committee and is used across vamcs to conduct the environment of care rounds — lists only 22 requirements for the environment of care , while vha's women's health handbook contains 46 requirements . for example , the checklist does not require inspection teams to examine whether clinical procedure and testing areas have auditory privacy . in our review of the six selected vamcs , we found that all six exhibited noncompliance with women's health handbook requirements that are not included on the environment of care rounds checklist . responsibility for addressing noncompliance not always clear . at three of the selected vamcs we visited , facility staff were unable to identify the medical center department , such as engineering or building maintenance , responsible for correcting identified instances of noncompliance with certain environment of care policies . without clearly delineated roles and responsibilities , instances of noncompliance are not addressed in a timely manner . for example , at one selected vamc , we observed a privacy curtain missing from a primary care exam room . the provider who uses this room explained that she reported this noncompliance to the facility's maintenance department but was told that the replacement of the curtain was not the responsibility of the maintenance department .