sec . chair . the committee shall be chaired by the administrator , or the designee of the administrator . sec . working groups . the committee is authorized to establish interagency working groups to perform such tasks as may be directed by the committee . sec . consultation . the committee may consult with other parties , including the administrative office of the united states courts , to perform its responsibilities under this order , and , at the discretion of the committee , such other parties may participate in the working groups . sec . duties and responsibilities . ( a ) the committee shall: ( 1 ) establish policies for security in and protection of federal facilities ; ( 2 ) develop and evaluate security standards for federal facilities , develop a strategy for ensuring compliance with such standards , and oversee the implementation of appropriate security measures in federal facilities ; and ( 3 ) take such actions as may be necessary to enhance the quality and effectiveness of security and protection of federal facilities , including but not limited to: ( a ) encouraging agencies with security responsibilities to share security - related intelligence in a timely and cooperative manner ; ( b ) assessing technology and information systems as a means of providing cost - effective improvements to security in federal facilities ; ( c ) developing long - term construction standards for those locations with threat levels or missions that require blast resistant structures or other specialized security requirements ; ( d ) evaluating standards for the location of , and special security related to , day care centers in federal facilities ; and ( e ) assisting the administrator in developing and maintaining a centralized security database of all federal facilities . sec . agency support and cooperation . ( a ) administrative support . to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations , the administrator , acting by and through the assistant commissioner , shall provide the committee such administrative services , funds , facilities , staff and other support services as may be necessary for the performance of its functions under this order . ( b ) cooperation . each executive agency and department shall cooperate and comply with the policies and recommendations of the committee issued pursuant to this order , except where the director of central intelligence determines that compliance would jeopardize intelligence sources and methods . to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations , executive agencies and departments shall provide such support as may be necessary to enable the committee to perform its duties and responsibilities under this order . ( c ) compliance . the administrator , acting by and through the assistant commissioner , shall be responsible for monitoring federal agency compliance with the policies and recommendations of the committee . judicial review . this order is intended only to improve the internal management of the federal government , and is not intended , and should not be construed , to create any right or benefit , substantive or procedural , enforceable at law by a party against the united states , its agencies , its officers , or its employees .