other factors . ord officials said , for example , they set research priorities using vha data on the prevalence of health conditions among veterans and veterans benefits administration data on military deployment - related conditions . based on stakeholder input and other factors , ord established three types of national research priorities: strategic , cross - cutting clinical , and other priorities . ( figure 1 shows these research priorities for fiscal years 2019 and 2020. ) as of october 2019 , ord officials told us they were determining what these priorities will be for fiscal year 2021 . strategic priorities are broad long - term priorities that focus on va's research capability , resources , and operations , rather than on specific clinical conditions , according to ord officials . for example , one of va's strategic priorities is to “put va data to work for veterans.” as part of this priority , va aims to improve its ability to leverage the agency's medical data to improve veterans' care . a program office official told us that the addition of this requirement resulted from va research — led by a researcher clinician — that found that veterans with spinal cord injuries who received specialized vocational support services had the best chance of success for job placement and continued employment . in another example , ord officials told us that va researchers were serving as subject matter experts to the national program office developing the protocol and clinical guidelines for implementing intranasal ketamine as a new treatment for certain veterans with treatment - resistant depression . ord and program office officials described using both informal and formal approaches to coordinate on research priorities and translation . for example , program office officials told us about occasional participation of ord staff in their regular meetings and calls , as well as relationships between program office staff and individual researchers . ord officials from one service told us that their scientific portfolio managers serve as a sort of liaison between researchers and clinical program office partners . these officials told us that because va's research program is intramural , there is an ongoing discussion with researchers and others within va in setting research priorities . although va officials were mostly positive in describing coordination between the research program and program offices , some officials noted opportunities for improvement , as well . specifically , officials from the three national program offices we spoke with said it would be beneficial to have a more formal or systematic approach for coordination with ord . an official from one national program office said a more systematic process would be helpful , so that collaboration is not so dependent on individual relationships or personalities . officials from another national program office noted that they considered having one staff person as a dedicated resource to liaise with ord , but lacked resources to do so . given limited time and competing priorities for researchers and program office officials , ord officials told us that it would be best to focus on strategic coordination , and noted that some such efforts are underway .