link to strategic planning . to focus on both current and future needs and to provide leaders with a broader perspective , the royal canadian mounted police's succession planning and management initiative figures prominently in the agency's multiyear human capital plan and provides top leaders with an agencywide perspective when making decisions . identify talent from multiple organizational levels , early in their careers , or with critical skills . for example , the united kingdom's fast stream program targets high - potential individuals as well as recent college graduates , and aims to provide individuals with experiences and training linked to strengthening specific competencies required for admission to the senior civil service . emphasize developmental assignments in addition to formal training . initiatives emphasize developmental assignments in addition to formal training to strengthen high - potential employees' skills and broaden their experiences . for example , canada's accelerated executive development program temporarily assigns executives to work in unfamiliar roles or subject areas , and in different agencies . our past work has shown that demonstrated commitment of top leaders is perhaps the single most important element of successful management reform . we have reported that to demonstrate its support of succession planning and management efforts , top leadership actively participates in and regularly uses these initiatives to develop and promote individuals , and ensures that these programs receive sufficient resources . as a next step , federal agencies are to hold their senior executives accountable to address human capital issues , such as succession . we found that vha has assigned responsibility for succession planning and management initiatives to a dedicated subcommittee , while dol , the census bureau , and epa have councils or boards that are responsible for human capital more broadly , including succession efforts . vha has established a subcommittee and high - level positions that are directly responsible for succession planning and management . at that time , we will provide copies of this report to other interested congressional parties ; the secretaries of commerce , labor , and va ; the administrator of epa ; the director of census ; the acting director of opm ; and the chco council's leadership and succession planning subcommittee . we will also make this report available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-6806 or at larencee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . the succession and workforce development management subcommittee reports to the human resources committee of the national leadership board , as illustrated in figure 1 . vha's chief executive officer — the department of veterans affairs' undersecretary for health — chairs the board , which consists of visn directors , chief officers , and heads of offices .