treasury did not implement our recommendation . while we continue to believe that the agencies should have considered whether less duplicative reporting could have been implemented , we do recognize that fatca and fbar were enacted under two different statutes to serve different purposes . as mentioned above , according to irs , fatca improves visibility into taxable income from foreign sources and enhances the agency's ability to identify and pursue taxpayer noncompliance . in contrast , the information reported on the fbar is collected to identify money laundering and other financial crimes ; law enforcement agencies can use bsa information — including information collected from fbars — to aid regulatory and criminal investigations . additionally , data collected from form 8938 and fbar are used in different systems for use by different bureaus within treasury . fully addressing issues stemming from overlapping reporting requirements and the resulting collection of duplicative information — while at the same time ensuring that such information can be used for tax compliance and law enforcement purposes — can only be done by modifying the statutes governing the requirements . further , irs and fincen have varying degrees of access to foreign financial asset information collected from form 8938 and fbar to enforce tax compliance and financial crime laws . fatca was enacted , in part , to improve visibility into taxable income from foreign sources . however , information provided on forms 8938 is taxpayer return information protected by section 6103 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , which generally prohibits irs from disclosing information provided on forms 8938 . irs can share return information with other government agencies and others when it is allowed by statute . for example , under section 6103 , irs may disclose return information related to taxes imposed under the irc — such as self - employment income tax , social security and medicare tax and income tax withholding — to the social security administration ( ssa ) as needed to carry out its responsibilities under the social security act . however , according to fincen officials , fincen , law enforcement , and regulators often cannot access information submitted on forms 8938 . while section 6103 provides other exceptions to disclosure prohibitions — such as allowing irs to share return information with law enforcement agencies for investigation and prosecution of nontax criminal laws — such information is generally only accessible pursuant to a court order . as noted above , information reported on the fbar can be used by law enforcement agencies to aid regulatory and criminal investigations . this includes irs , which has been delegated responsibility from fincen to enforce compliance with fbar reporting requirements . irs has used fbar information in addressing taxpayer noncompliance with reporting and paying taxes on foreign assets and income . for example , taxpayers accepted into one of irs's offshore voluntary disclosure programs must have filed amended or late fbars as part of their program applications . investigators from irs's criminal investigation division generally reviewed applications to determine if the taxpayer has made a complete and truthful disclosure .