these two characteristics are discussed below . the goals , objectives , activities , and performance measures characteristic is only partially addressed in the national strategy , and the supporting plans also do not include information to address all elements of this characteristic , such as performance measures to gauge the progress made implementing the strategy and plans . this characteristic provides for a clear identification of priorities , milestones , and performance measures , without which implementing parties may find it difficult to achieve results in specific time frames . what is the reported implementation status of these plans ? to answer our first question , we analyzed the national strategy for maritime security to determine whether it contained the desirable characteristics for an effective national strategy . if a characteristic or an element of a characteristic was missing from the national strategy , then we reviewed the eight supporting implementation plans for evidence of the characteristic in a majority of these plans . we also reviewed the plans to determine if they provided more detail on the characteristics examined than could be found in the national strategy , for example , what component or agency will implement a specific recommendation . if a characteristic or an element of a characteristic was missing from the national strategy , our methodology required that the characteristic or element be present in at least five of the supporting plans for the characteristic to be considered “addressed.” an assessment of partially addressed meant that the characteristic or element be present in at least one of the supporting plans . to answer our second question , we relied on documents provided by the maritime security working group that detailed the status of actions taken to implement the supporting plans and the overall status of the implementation of the plans . we also interviewed officials from key agencies and the co - chair of the maritime security working group . we did not independently evaluate any of the actions monitored for the implementation of these plans . we conducted this performance audit from july 2007 to june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i includes more detailed information on our scope and methodology . since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , federal agencies have implemented numerous measures designed to improve maritime security . moreover , legislation has been enacted to provide a framework for protecting the nation's seaports and waterways from terrorist attack through a wide range of security requirements and programs . federal agency measures include , for example , the u.s. coast guard working with foreign countries to ensure that their seaports have adequate security measures in place . also , under the container security initiative , u.s. customs and border protection stations officers overseas to work with foreign officials to identify and inspect high - risk cargo en route to the united states .