from which school did you graduate ? air war college nonresident program ( percent ) army command and general staff college nonresident program ( percent ) army war college distance education program ( percent ) naval college of distance education ( percent ) ( percent ) q3 . in what month and year did you begin your pme program ? in what month and year did you begin your pme program ( if you graduated from more than one program , answer for the most recent one ) ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) q4 . what mode of instruction have you used most often in your nonresident professional military program ? what mode of instruction did you use most often in your nonresident professional military program ? ( percent ) ( percent ) q5 . in what month and year do you expect to complete your pme studies program ? current students ( percent ) ( percent ) q69 . what was your rank when you began your professional military education program ? ( percent ) ( percent ) 3 q71 . if you have any other comments related to your pme education , training , assignments , distance learning , or any other matters related to this questionnaire , please note them here . we observed three current adl applications at pme senior - and intermediate - level schools . these schools have geared their adl efforts to their nonresident programs . the programs vary from service to service in terms of enrollment , structure , duration , and credits received for graduation . in addition , we observed additional features of nonresident programs that affect the nature of their adl applications . the u.s. army war college ( usawc ) , the army's senior - level pme school , initiated its web - based nonresident education program in april 1999 . the program went online in an evolutionary process until the spring of 2002 , whereby students received both text and online versions . since the spring of 2002 , all nonresident students have received their education via a combination of adl technology and appropriate text . nonresident students are board selected to participate in the program . it is a 2-year web - based program that is the only delivery method offered to nonresident students . the program has a “blended” component , whereby 2 of its 12 courses are taken in residence at usawc . also , distance courses are presented to students as a group or cohort ; that is , students enroll at the beginning of the nonresident school year and must complete a sequenced load of 5 courses during the first year , followed by an additional 5 courses during the second year . the resident courses are of 2-week duration and are conducted at the end of each academic year . the nonresident program is designed to parallel the resident program , and graduates from both programs are awarded master's degrees in strategic studies . this nonresident course is closely aligned with the resident course , and graduates are allowed to obtain graduate hour credits .