june 2013 . figure 3 depicts the complex structure of u.s. involvement with aisg . according to usaid officials , usaid provided implementing partners in support of aisg an estimated total of about $1.3 million in assistance from 2010 to 2013 . table 1 shows the amount provided . opic's and usaid's processes for vetting pif , a pif - owned entity , or other entities and individuals in the amal , lgf , and aisg assistance programs rely on various information sources , including information provided by their implementing partners . our description of the vetting processes and information sources is based on opic and usaid vetting policies and procedures ; interviews with opic and usaid officials as well as officials of their implementing partners ; and information in each program's agreements . according to opic officials , opic's vetting of pif and other non - u.s. entities and key individuals involved in the amal and lgf programs is based primarily on the agency's character risk due diligence policies and procedures and the applicable program's agreements . the purpose of character risk due diligence is to uncover any derogatory information — including risks for terrorist financing and money laundering — about projects in which opic is involved , the project sponsors , investors , or key personnel . in performing due diligence , a project team is to make use of information sources that may include ( 1 ) opic's information center databases , ( 2 ) the fbi's terrorist screening center database and treasury's financial crimes enforcement network , ( 3 ) the u.s. embassy , any local counsel , and when required , outsourced foreign searches through the information center , ( 4 ) the state department bureau of intelligence and research , and ( 5 ) office of investment policy , with respect to derogatory information regarding social responsibility , corporate image , and environmental accountability . the banks , amal , and opic conduct vetting to help ensure that there is no unacceptable derogatory information regarding non - u.s. entities and individuals participating in the amal program that might prevent opic support , according to opic . under the amal agreements , when borrowers and guarantors request loans from the bank of palestine and cairo - amman bank , they are to provide specific information , such as their national identity card , passport , or similar identification to the banks , which are to conduct security and character vetting . using this information , the bank of palestine and cairo - amman bank are required to check borrowers and guarantors in accordance with specified internationally accepted know - your - customer check standards . specifically , the banks must verify at the time the mortgage loan is approved that each borrower and guarantor does not appear on the palestine monetary authority central bank blacklist , treasury's office of foreign asset control specially designated nationals and blocked persons list ( ofac's list ) , and the compendium of united nations security council sanctions lists . under the amal mortgage origination guidelines , the banks must certify completion of satisfactory vetting before a mortgage application can be approved for a loan under the amal program .