see , 46 u.s.c . this was particularly evident in the bulk shipping market . for instance , according to representatives of the puerto rico farm bureau , the rate difference between jones act carriers and foreign carriers has led farmers and ranchers on the island to more often source animal feed and crop fertilizers from foreign sources than from u.s. domestic sources , even though commodity prices were stated to be similar . puerto rico is subject to all jones act requirements . however , under statute , u.s. coastwise laws such as the jones act generally do not apply to cargo transported between the united states and certain other insular areas , including the u.s. virgin islands . in addition , under statute , vessels engaging in domestic trade between the united states and certain other insular areas , including guam , require only a registry endorsement ( i.e. however , data was not available to verify the extent to which changes in sourcing occurs because of higher transportation costs on jones act vessels . sourcing decisions in the market for petroleum products may also be affected by differences in freight rates between jones act vessels and foreign - flag vessels and the availability of qualified jones act vessels . as demand decreases relative to supply , carriers will adjust their services in response.company reduced its service to puerto rico with one less barge and one in this market for example , according to crowley , the less weekly sailing from jacksonville in 2009 , primarily in response to decreased demand . also , more recently in july 2011 , sea star discontinued its service from philadelphia , pennsylvania , because of a lack of demand . some shippers and business representatives we spoke with were concerned with the possibility that , given the weak demand in the market , some carriers may not be able to sustain the level of services they currently provide in the puerto rico market . in certain specific markets , however , demand for jones act transportation between puerto rico and the united states may be increasing . for example , according to one shipper , there may be increased demand for shipping refined petroleum and gas products . for natural gas , this appears likely because the expected increased use of this fuel for electricity generation , while in the case of refined petroleum products this may be occurring because of a closure of the refinery on st. croix , u.s. virgin islands that had previously provided petroleum products to puerto rico . however , several shippers in these markets told us that vessels are often not available to provide service . where the supply of ships is limited relative to demand there will be upward pressure on freight rates . typically in such a scenario , carriers and shipowners will respond to higher rates in the short term by repositioning existing capacity to serve that market , thus bringing supply and demand into balance . however , if qualified jones act vessels are not available , such adjustments may not occur since existing capacity operated by foreign - flag carriers cannot enter this market .