identification process . idea requires all states to have child find policies and procedures in place , and requires a practical method for determining which children with disabilities are currently receiving needed special education and related services , but does not specify the exact method to be used . in all four of the states we visited , school district officials we interviewed said that the schools in their respective districts were using the same type of approach as part of the child find identification process , but that some school districts were in different stages of implementation or that the approach was being used differently by schools within the same districts . officials in one school district in new york said that , as part of their approach , there was a concerted effort to use student data to make decisions about intervention levels and special education evaluation decisions , while a school district official in massachusetts said that the district had placed a greater emphasis on improving classroom instruction as a means to reduce the need for special education services rather than on intervention systems used for identifying and making decisions about potentially eligible children . officials of school districts in two of the states we visited told us that they are in the midst of revising their identification processes to increase accuracy and consistency across the schools in their districts . officials in one of those districts said that differences in the processes schools used resulted in variations in how the special education identification process worked in each of the schools . eligibility criteria . idea allows states some flexibility to establish their own definitions of developmental delay ( when a child does not reach developmental milestones for certain skills , such as motor or language skills , at the expected times ) , including the level or severity of the delay . for example , in maryland , a child must have at least a 25 percent delay in one or more developmental areas to be eligible for early intervention services , while in arizona , a child must demonstrate a 50 percent delay in one or more developmental areas to be eligible . in massachusetts , part c lead agency officials we interviewed said that the state had , as idea allows , tightened eligibility criteria in 2009 to reduce the number of children eligible for early intervention services by narrowing the definition of developmental delay . officials said that there were no current plans to change the eligibility criteria , but that they would consider tightening eligibility criteria again if the number of eligible children outpaces state fiscal resources for these services . part c of idea also allows but does not require states to provide part c services to at - risk infants and toddlers . states that choose to provide services to at - risk children may use idea risk factors to determine eligibility , such as low birth weight or history of abuse and neglect , or they may develop their own list of risk factors .