to describe how the u.s . postal service's ( the service ) fuel costs changed recently and what has been the impact of these cost changes on the service's financial and operating conditions , we first defined what would be included as fuels . for our analysis , we established the following two categories: 1 . transportation - related fuel , which included fuel used for highway , air , rail , and water transportation . the types of fuel included in this category were gasoline , diesel , jet fuel , biodiesel , ethanol , compressed natural gas , liquefied petroleum gas , and electricity . facility - related fuels , which included fuel used to heat and operate postal service facilities . the types of fuel included electricity , natural gas , heating oil , propane , steam , coal , and wood . in regards to including electricity as a type of fuel , we felt it was necessary because it was used both in transportation and facility heating and operations . we also analyzed trends in fuel prices from information available from the energy information administration's web site , as well as through other department of energy ( doe ) sources consistent with guidance from doe officials . we also collected data on the following areas: fuel cost data from the service regarding its various fuel types , purchasing methods , and transportation methods . due to data system issues from an organizational change in 2003 , the service was only able to provide this data for most areas for 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 . the service stated that it needed to estimate fuel costs for multiple purchasing methods because that data is not available to them . for example , the service had to estimate fuel costs for air transportation contracts . transportation and facility - fuel cost - saving initiatives . although the service has specific definitions for its strategies to reduce , avoid , or save costs ( which are explained in appendix iii ) , for the purposes of this review , we considered them all cost - saving initiatives . statistics from gsa's federal fleet report . specific information on its internal vehicle fleet from standardized vehicle operations reports as well as its shared energy savings projects from detailed presentations . other financial and operating data from various postal service financial reports including its audited year - end annual reports and comprehensive statements , monthly financial and operating statements , quarterly reports , and integrated financial plan . we assessed the reliability of the fuel cost and savings data provided by the service for inconsistencies and missing values . in those cases where we found discrepancies , we worked with the service to address the problems . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our review . we also reviewed the service's procedures for documenting , measuring , and reporting cost savings for its purchasing activities as well as the methodology for specific fuel - related initiatives . for the purposes of this engagement , the procedures and methodologies appeared to be reasonable and contain appropriate levels of review .