, industry associations and mailers . for example , a representative of a postal association told us that usps shared information and sought input about its informed delivery pilot during a quarterly meeting with industry groups . similarly , a mailer we interviewed told us that usps had shared information and sought input on the informed delivery pilot through direct outreach with the mailer . however , usps did not consistently employ strategies to communicate with some key external stakeholders among the innovations that we selected for review . specifically , usps did not design or implement strategies to obtain feedback from consumers on its pilots for same - day delivery , grocery delivery , or keyless parcel lockers , despite the fact that each of these innovations directly affected consumers . in contrast , as previously discussed , for its informed delivery pilot , usps planned and conducted a survey to obtain consumer feedback , the results of which helped usps project managers support the proposal to expand the service nationally . usps added that this planned training would cover best practices for pilot tests . usps was then responsible for sorting the totes and delivering them to customers . according to its proposal for this pilot , usps expected grocery delivery to provide a substantial revenue generation opportunity . at the pilot's conclusion , like same - day delivery , usps decided to continue offering grocery delivery with the participating mailer under a parcel select contract . informed delivery: from spring 2014 through july 2016 , usps piloted a notification service called informed delivery in northern virginia and new york . as of november 2018 , the pilot is still ongoing . usps's policies applicable to piloting key innovations fully reflect two of the five leading practices for pilot design and evaluation that we identified in prior gao work and relevant standards for internal control ( see table 1 ) . the second handbook includes requirements and procedures specifically for major operating expense investments . this handbook , among other things , establishes requirements and procedures meant to ensure that new and enhanced products and services consistently meet customer needs , generate new revenue , and strengthen usps as a business . this handbook further states that usps has a responsibility to subject new initiatives to rigorous financial analysis , testing , and measurement , to determine whether these initiatives will make a positive financial contribution to the organization and ensure that usps's leadership has appropriate information for effective decision - making . usps's office of product innovation generally has lead responsibility for piloting innovations . according to usps's policies , a project manager is responsible for establishing and coordinating a cross - functional team to design and evaluate the pilot . this team typically includes officials from a variety of usps departments , such as finance , general counsel , information technology , marketing , and operations . the project manager , with support from the cross - functional team , is responsible for preparing a proposal for the pilot that includes key information , such as the pilot's objectives and performance measures , and overseeing pilot implementation and communication with key stakeholders . in some cases , prc has a role in overseeing postal innovation pilots .