iv. ) cdc officials told us they used the human capital challenges identified in the plan to develop related strategies that directly addressed specific areas of concern . on the basis of our analysis of the cdc plan and additional documentation , we found that the cdc plan contains strategies that could help address the first five challenges we identified . in addition , we did not review whether such a repository would be needed for effective contractor oversight , because such work was outside the scope of this engagement . our concern is that cdc does not have a strategic human capital plan that encompasses strategies for the use of its contractors as complements to its federal employees so that the agency can most effectively manage these blended resources to achieve its mission and goals . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its date . at that time we will send copies to the secretary of hhs , the director of cdc , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . to determine whether the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) 2007 strategic human capital management plan ( cdc plan ) was designed to address the challenges cdc faces in sustaining a skilled workforce , we analyzed interviews we conducted with multiple entities from cdc , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the office of personnel management ( opm ) , and three policy research and professional associations . specifically , the interviews included officials from cdc's four coordinating centers and two coordinating offices , office of workforce and career development ( owcd ) , executive leadership board , management council , center leadership council , division directors council , and office of diversity . we also interviewed officials from the u.s. public health service commissioned corps who work at cdc and officials from hhs's office of global health affairs and atlanta human resources center ( ahrc ) . further , we interviewed policy research and professional association officials who work with cdc , including officials from the national academy of public administration , the association of state and territorial health officials , and the national association of county and city health officials . we corroborated testimonial evidence from our interviews with analysis of relevant documents , workforce statistics , and retirement eligibility data computed by cdc . we assessed the reliability of cdc's data by confirming that the data included the elements we requested and were consistent with cdc - provided documentation and information collected from interviews , including interviews with officials responsible for maintaining these databases .