pub . sequestration , such as cancelling or curtailing training for units not preparing to deploy , postponing some planned equipment maintenance at its depots , delaying repairs or renovation of facilities , reducing some weapon system quantities , and delaying system development and testing . at that time , dod officials explained that the impacts of the fiscal year 2013 sequestration would not be fully realized until fiscal year 2014 or later . in june 2014 , we reported on dod's implementation of an administrative civilian personnel furlough in response to the fiscal year 2013 sequestration reductions , finding that dod developed its initial estimated cost savings for the furlough without excluding pay for those excepted from the furlough and did not update its estimate throughout the furlough period . further , officials at selected sites we visited described effects of the furlough , such as decline in morale , mission delays , and inconsistencies and clarification issues with the furlough guidance . we recommended that dod update and utilize its furlough cost savings information as it becomes available in the event that dod decides to implement another administrative furlough in the future . dod partially concurred with the recommendation . in addition , in march 2014 we reported on how 23 federal agencies , including dod , prepared for and implemented sequestration in fiscal year 2013 . we found that sequestration reduced or delayed some public services and disrupted some operations , and that agencies faced planning challenges because they lacked sufficient information and institutional knowledge on how to apply sequestration reductions . we recommended that the office of management and budget publish criteria to clarify the application of sequestration reductions across certain accounts , and direct agencies to record their decisions and principles used to implement sequestration for potential future use . the office of management and budget agreed with our recommendations and has updated its budget guidance , circular no . a - 11 on the preparation , submission , and execution of the budget , to address them.related products is included at the end of this report . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 included a provision that we review dod's implementation and effects of the fiscal year 2013 sequestration . further , the house committee on armed services requested that we review the implementation and effects of 2013 sequestration on dod . this report examines ( 1 ) how dod , including the military services , allocated fiscal year 2013 sequestration reductions , ( 2 ) what effects , if any , dod has identified from the fiscal year 2013 sequestration on selected dod programs , services , and military readiness , and ( 3 ) the extent to which dod took actions to mitigate the effects of the fiscal year 2013 sequestration . the report provides an overview of our findings for each of these objectives . appendix i provides the results from our nongeneralizeable case studies of five types of expenses or investments we reviewed in detail — operational tempo and training ( which includes deployments ) , maintenance and weapon system support , base operating support , and a selection of weapon systems and military construction projects — to represent each type of nonexempt account .