that system is now complete . however , the federal highway program's financing and delivery mechanisms have not substantially changed , and the program's continued relevance in the 21st century is unclear . the federal role in surface transportation has also grown over the years , and the highway trust fund now funds a variety of highway , transit , and even some rail programs . we have previously reported that the effectiveness of any overall federal program design can be increased by incorporating strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability as well as by promoting and facilitating the use of the best tools and approaches to improve results and return on investment . importantly , given the projected growth in federal deficits , constrained state and local budgets , and looming social security and medicare spending commitments , the resources available for discretionary programs will be more limited — making it imperative to maximize the national public benefits of any federal investment through a rigorous examination of the use of such funds . the federal role in transportation funding must be reexamined to ensure that it is sustainable in this new fiscal reality . a sustainable surface transportation program will require targeted investment , with adequate return on investment , from not only the federal government , but also state and local governments , and the private sector . the user - pay concept — that is , users paying directly for the infrastructure they use — is a long - standing aspect of transportation policy and should , to the extent feasible and appropriate , remain an essential tenet as the nation moves toward the development of a fiscally sustainable transportation program . for example , a panel of experts recently convened by gao agreed that regardless of funding mechanisms pursued , investments need to seek to align fees and taxes with use and benefits . a number of specific tools and approaches can be used to improve results and return on investment including using economic analysis , such as benefit - cost analysis in project selection ; requiring grantees to conduct post - project evaluations ; creating incentives to better utilize existing infrastructure ; providing states and localities greater flexibility to use certain tools , such as tolling and congestion pricing ; and requiring maintenance of effort provisions in grants . the suitability of the tool and approach used varies depending on the level of federal involvement or control that policymakers desire for a given area of policy . using these tools and approaches could help surface transportation programs more directly address national transportation priorities and become more fiscally sustainable . the following illustrative questions can be used to determine the extent to which proposals to restructure the surface transportation program ensure fiscal sustainability and employ the best tools and approaches to improve results and return on investment . to what extent do the proposals reexamine current and future spending on surface transportation programs ? are the recommendations affordable and financially stable over the long - term ? to what extent are the recommendations placed in the context of federal deficits , constrained budgets , and other spending commitments and to what extent do they meet a rigorous examination of the use of federal funds ?