distribution . management and operating ( m&o ) contractors may differ in how they distribute indirect costs accumulated into indirect - cost pools to programs . because similar indirect costs can be allocated differently by different contractors and contractors may change the way they allocate indirect costs over time , it is difficult to compare contractor costs among sites . nnsa contractors also use different methods to track costs , according to nnsa officials . specifically , nnsa contractors use different work breakdown structures ( wbs ) for tracking costs . a wbs is a method of deconstructing a program's end product into successive levels ( of detail ) with smaller specific elements until the work is subdivided to a level suitable for management control . within wbss , cost elements capture discrete costs of a particular activity of work , such as labor , material , and fringe benefits . the use of different methods to track cost makes it difficult for nnsa and others to understand or compare costs for comparable activities across programs , contractors , and sites . for example , in 2011 we concluded that the cost savings that nnsa anticipated from the consolidation of the m&o contracts for two of its production sites were uncertain , in part , because historic cost data were not readily available for nnsa to use in its cost analysis . more specifically , we found that a key step in nnsa's process for estimating savings — developing a comparative baseline of historical site costs – – is a difficult and inexact process because doe and nnsa contractors use different methods for tracking costs , and doe's cost data are of limited use in comparing sites . to obtain more consistent information on costs , some program offices have developed customized contractor cost reporting requirements and designed various systems to collect the cost information needed to manage their programs . for example , nnsa's office of defense programs began developing a data system in 2007 — the enterprise portfolio analysis tool ( epat ) — to provide a consistent framework for managing the planning , programming , budgeting , and evaluation processes within defense programs . epat has evolved to incorporate a common wbs to allow managers to compare the budget estimates for analogous activities across the nuclear security enterprise regardless of which contractor or program is conducting them . however , nnsa officials told us that neither epat nor other customized , program - specific cost collection systems satisfy the section 3128 requirements for establishing an nnsa - wide approach to collecting cost information . according to nnsa officials , epat is not suitable because , among other reasons , it is not designed to reconcile with the doe's official accounting system . section 3128 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 requires nnsa to develop a plan for improving and integrating financial management of the nuclear security enterprise . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the act states that nnsa is to develop a plan for a common cost structure for activities at different sites with the purpose of comparing how efficiently different sites within the nnsa complex are carrying out similar activities .