detentions . ice is responsible for providing safe , secure , and humane confinement for detained aliens in the united states who may be subject to removal while they await the resolution of their immigration cases or who have been ordered removed from the united states . arrests . ero arrests aliens for civil violations of u.s. immigration laws . through the criminal alien program , ice identifies and arrests potentially removable aliens who are incarcerated within federal , state , and local prisons and jails . we analyzed individual - level arrest data from iids to determine the total number of ero arrests for each calendar year 2015 through 2018 . we examined multiple data fields from the individual - level arrest data , including alien file number , family name , given name , gender , country of citizenship , arrest date , area of responsibility , and criminality , among other variables . because aliens may have multiple arrests , we used alien number and arrest date to identify the unique number of arrests rather than the number of unique aliens who were arrested . we excluded from our analysis arrest records that had a missing alien number , an invalid alien number — i.e. , that included all zeroes or had duplicate alien number and arrest date combinations — or records that indicated test in the name fields . we analyzed these data to determine total numbers of arrests by gender , country of citizenship , criminality , arresting program , and area of responsibility . to determine the number of arrests by gender , we analyzed iids individual - level arrest data . we also analyzed these data to determine the number of arrests by criminality for each gender , using ice's determination of criminality for our analysis , as discussed below . to determine the number of arrests by country of citizenship , we analyzed iids individual - level arrest data . ice obtains country of citizenship data from arrest reports , which may be based on documentation or self - reported . to determine the number of arrests by criminality , we analyzed iids individual - level arrest data . for the purposes of this report and our presentation of ice data , we refer to potentially removable aliens without criminal convictions known to ice as “non - criminals” and aliens with criminal convictions known to ice as “convicted criminals.” according to ero officials , arrests of non - criminals include individuals who have been charged but not convicted of a crime as well as those with no prior criminal history . according to ice , ice officers electronically request and retrieve criminal history information about an alien from the fbi's national crime information center ( ncic ) database , which maintains a repository of federal and state criminal history information . ice officers are also able to manually enter criminal history information in ice's data system if they discover additional criminal history information that was not available in ncic . ice officers may also check for criminal convictions committed outside the united states , on a case - by - case basis .