claims . medicare part b also provides benefits for certain vaccines , such as influenza ; drugs administered in hospital outpatient settings , such as part of emergency department services ; and drugs administered using durable medical equipment . for the purposes of this report , when we discuss outpatient settings we are referring to drugs administered in physician offices incident to physician services . as medicare advantage — offers beneficiaries plans that provide inpatient and outpatient drug benefits ( part a and part b , respectively ) through a network of managed care organizations . in addition , some medicare advantage organizations offer plans with pharmacy benefits similar to those provided under part d. part d provides a voluntary pharmacy benefit for medicare beneficiaries . beneficiaries may choose part d plans from among those offered by private part d plan sponsors . part d beneficiaries may obtain drugs through retail and mail - order pharmacies . through va's pharmacy benefit , veterans may obtain prescription drugs through va medical center ( vamc ) pharmacies and va's mail - order pharmacy . in certain cases , they may also obtain drugs from retail pharmacies . in addition , through va's medical benefit , veterans may obtain drugs administered to patients in vamcs and associated outpatient clinics . in certain cases , they may also obtain drugs from non - va outpatient and inpatient providers in the non - va care program , which provides payment for veterans' health care services in non - va facilities in certain circumstances , such as in emergencies or if a vamc is unable to provide health care services to the veteran . in fiscal year 2013 , tricare paid for about 465,000 compounded drug prescriptions through its pharmacy benefit , representing 0.3 percent of all prescription drugs paid for through its pharmacy benefit in that year . over 395,000 , or 85 percent , of these compounded drug prescriptions were dispensed in retail pharmacies . ( see fig . retirees and their dependents were the most frequent users of compounded drugs , accounting for 68 percent , or about 317,000 , of the compounded drug prescriptions paid for through the pharmacy benefit . these beneficiaries obtained about 95 percent of their compounded drug prescriptions from retail pharmacies . ( see fig . among retirees and their dependents , those beneficiaries under age 65 accounted for about 61 percent of compounded drug prescriptions . dha officials attributed the higher use of compounded drugs by retirees and their dependents , among other reasons , to these individuals' tendencies to obtain care from civilian providers , whose prescribing practices dod does not control . compounded drug prescriptions paid for through tricare's pharmacy benefit cost about $259 million in fiscal year 2013 — representing about 3 percent of the total cost of prescription drugs paid for through its pharmacy benefit — up from about $5 million in fiscal year 2004 . compounded drug prescriptions containing at least 1 bulk drug substance accounted for about 98 percent of the $259 million cost .