open . as part of their data act implementation efforts , omb and treasury staff told us that they have identified authoritative sources for data and are developing validation rules for spending information to be reported under the data act . in addition , the inspector general community is working on standard audit methodologies to verify the accuracy and completeness of agency reporting . omb and treasury staff reiterated that the ultimate responsibility for the quality of data lies with the agencies . however , treasury's broker service will provide an additional set of validation rules to further improve the quality of data submitted to usaspending.gov . open . omb staff told us that identifying “programs” for the purposes of data act reporting would not be completed until after may 2017 . however , they said they have convened a working group to develop and vet a set of options to establish a government - wide definition for program that is meaningful across multiple communities and contexts ( such as budget , contracting , and grants ) . open . a treasury official told us that they are in the process of drafting recommendations for a data governance process that they expect to present to the data act executive steering committee with the goal of completing a process in june 2016 or as soon as practical . concerns are addressed as implementation efforts continue , the director of omb , in collaboration with the secretary of the treasury , should build on existing efforts and put in place policies and procedures to foster ongoing and effective two - way dialogue with stakeholders including timely and substantive responses to feedback received on the federal spending transparency github website . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . implementation status continuing engagement with federal and nonfederal stakeholders through presentations at conferences , roundtable discussions , monthly stakeholder calls , and other venues . they also noted that they have updated the website they use to solicit public comments to improve user access . we have requested documentation of the steps omb and treasury have taken to foster ongoing and effective two - way dialogue with stakeholders including timely and substantive responses to feedback . to capitalize on the opportunity created by the data act , the secretary of the treasury should reconsider whether certain assets — especially information and documentation such as memoranda of understanding ( mous ) that would help transfer the knowledge gained through the operation of the recovery operations center — could be worth transferring to the do not pay center business center to assist in its mission to reduce improper payments . a‐11 changes is severely inhibited . another competing priority some agencies reported is the data requirement set forth in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) . specifically , in october 2014 the far was amended to standardize the format of the procurement instrument identifier ( piid ) that must be in effect for new awards issued after october 2017 .