figure 1 depicts the changes . as part of asserting a larger management role in deepwater , the coast guard has taken additional steps , such as the following . integrated product teams — a key program management tool — are in the process of being restructured and re - chartered . in the past , the teams were led and managed by the contractor , while government team members acted as “customer” representatives . now , the teams are led by coast guard personnel . the teams are responsible for discussing options for problem solving relating to cost , schedule , and performance objectives . for example , one team oversees management of the national security cutter project . the coast guard has formally established a technical authority for engineering to oversee issues related to deepwater ; coast guard officials told us a similar authority for c4isr is pending . the role of the technical authority in program acquisition is to review , approve , and monitor technical standards and ensure that assets meet these standards , among other duties . previously the contractor had some decision making power and the coast guard held an advisory role . in some cases this led to bad outcomes . for example , coast guard officials told us their engineering experts had raised concerns during the national security cutter's design phase about its ability to meet service life requirements and recommended design changes , but they were ignored . if the recommendations had been heeded , changes to the ship's design could have been made earlier and some additional costs may have been avoided . coast guard project managers , who manage individual deepwater assets , now have increased responsibility and accountability for acquisition outcomes . previously , the project managers' role was less significant . the coast guard's transition to an asset - by - asset acquisition strategy is enabling increased government visibility and control over its acquisitions . cost and schedule information are now captured at the individual asset level rather than at the overall , system - of - systems program level . for example , while cost and schedule breaches in the past were to be reported at the deepwater system - of - systems level only , the coast guard is now reporting breaches by asset , as occurred recently with the cost increase on the c - 130j long range surveillance aircraft and the first national security cutter . in implementing this new acquisition approach , the coast guard also plans to start following the processes set forth in its major systems acquisition manual ( msam ) , which include acquisition milestones , documentation requirements , and cost estimates for individual assets . previously , the coast guard was authorized to deviate from the msam requirements for the deepwater program . reviews were required on a schedule - driven basis — planned quarterly or annually — as opposed to the more disciplined , event - driven process outlined in the msam . in addition , the coast guard scheduled key decision points only occasionally and focused primarily at the deepwater program as a whole , as opposed to at an individual asset level .