trustee . among the largest cost elements for both legacy airlines and low cost airlines are those associated with employee compensation and benefits . as part of the retirement benefits offered , legacy airlines have tended to offer “defined benefit plans” and supplemental defined contribution plans , whereas low cost airlines tend to provide only “defined contribution plans.” defined benefit plans typically provide participants with an annuity at retirement — a series of periodic payments over a specified period of time or for the life of the participant . as designed , defined benefit plan annuities are generally based on a participant's retirement age , number of years of employment , and salary . as of december 31 , 2004 , nine major airlines sponsored defined benefit plans for their employees: aloha , alaska , american , continental , delta , hawaii , northwest , us airways , and united . these airlines generally offered different pension plans for different groups of employees — pilots , machinists , and flight attendants , for example — with varying levels of promised benefits . defined contribution plans base pension benefits on the contributions to and investment returns on individual accounts . contributions may consist of pretax or after - tax employee contributions , employer matching contributions that require employee contributions , and other employer contributions that may be made independent of any participant contributions . in a defined contribution plan , the employee bears the investment risk and often controls how the individual account assets are invested . pbgc was established to encourage the continuation and maintenance of voluntary private pension plans and to insure the benefits of workers and retirees in defined benefit plans should plan sponsors fail to pay benefits . however , if a pension plan's assets are insufficient to pay accrued benefits , the plan can be terminated under certain conditions , and pbgc then assumes responsibility for paying retiree pensions . pbgc may pay only a portion of the benefits originally promised to employees and retirees . for 2005 , the maximum statutory limit of annual benefits guaranteed by pbgc is $45,613.68 per participant , for retirement at age 65 . the amount paid decreases at earlier retirement ages . bankruptcy filings are prevalent in the u.s. airline industry because of long - standing economic structural issues that have led to historically weak financial performance for the industry . structurally , the airline industry is characterized by high fixed costs , cyclical demand for its services , intense competition , and vulnerability to external shocks . as a result , airlines have been more prone to failure than many other businesses , and the sector's financial performance has continually been very weak . airlines frequently seek bankruptcy protection because of severe liquidity pressures , but while bankruptcy may provide some immediate protection from creditors , airlines in bankruptcy have not always been able to reduce their costs or avoid liquidation . owing to the long history of airline bankruptcies , the process is well developed , and the code includes provisions applicable just to airline bankruptcies .