see table 1 . consumers generally subscribe to broadband in two ways: fixed: in - home fixed internet plans are often sold as a monthly subscription by cable television or telephone companies . service from cable television companies is generally provided through the same coaxial cables that deliver television programming . service from telephone companies is generally provided through traditional copper telephone lines — commonly referred to as digital subscriber line ( dsl ) service — or fiber - optic lines , which convert electrical signals carrying data into light and send the light through glass fibers . these network technologies generally have higher speeds than mobile networks . consumers can connect a variety of devices to in - home fixed networks through a wired connection or wireless wi - fi connection ( see fig . consumers are increasingly using the internet to supplement or replace their use of traditional services , such as traditional telephone and cable tv service . mobile: traditionally , mobile providers sold access to the internet as an add - on to mobile telephone service plans that may or may not include a multiyear contract . mobile service is provided through cell tower coverage with data sharing through radio spectrum . a number of devices may connect to mobile broadband networks , such as smart phones , tablets , and mobile devices that enable laptops to connect to mobile networks ( see fig . the 2014 american customer satisfaction index ( acsi ) with respect to fixed broadband service , consumer satisfaction regarding data speeds and video streaming increased from 2013 to 2014 . however , acsi also found that during this time period , customer satisfaction related to service interruptions and outages , speed and service reliability , and peak evening - hour performance declined . with respect to mobile broadband providers , acsi reported that customer satisfaction related to speed for downloading data and streaming content increased from 2013 reported that to 2014 ; however , acsi also reported that the customer satisfaction scores indicated that improvements were still needed in speed and reliability . broadband performance problems can manifest in a number of ways , such as slow loading of content , lost connections , and pauses in streaming video and audio . fcc , isps , content providers , and researchers have noted that a variety of factors can affect broadband performance , such as accessing the internet during peak usage times , outdated equipment in the home , or multiple users in the same household accessing the internet simultaneously . in addition , mobile broadband performance will vary based on the location of the phone or device . running multiple applications at once or having multiple users in a household may require greater speeds . different types of internet applications use varying amounts of data and require different minimum speeds to operate properly ( see table 2 ) . for example , email and web - browsing use small amounts of data , while watching movies uses larger amounts of data . use of data - intensive broadband applications is projected to grow .