pub . § 342 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( 2010 ) . even though section 342 provides for the development of standards for the assessment of diversity policies and practices of regulated entities , it further provides that nothing in the requirement may be construed to require any specific action based on the findings of the assessment . understand industry views on developing standards for assessing diversity policies and practices . one omwi reported that industry representatives discussed options for evaluating diversity with respect to a regulated entity's size , complexity , and market area . omwi officials told us responding to the requirement was a challenge for several reasons . specifically , differences across regulated entities in terms of size , complexity , and market area made it challenging to develop a uniform standard . determining the process and format for developing standards was also a challenge . omwi officials also said they want to minimize adding a new regulatory burden to meet this provision . therefore , the agencies would like to leverage existing information sources — data that regulated entities already provide — in evaluating the diversity activities of regulated entities . for example , to find ways to avoid duplicating existing data - collection efforts , cfpb and ncua were working with eeoc for access to eeo - 1 data for regulated entities . occ officials said occ had also considered using eeo - 1 data , but some regulated entities had concerns about maintaining proprietary information , given the potential for freedom of information act requests . in addition to establishing an omwi , the act required federal financial agencies and reserve banks to report annually on their diversity practices , and nearly all of the agencies and all the reserve banks have begun reporting annually on their diversity practices . as discussed earlier , the act required each omwi to submit to congress an annual report on the actions taken pursuant to section 342 , including information on the percentage of amounts paid to minority - and women - owned contractors and successes and challenges in recruiting and hiring qualified minority and women employees , and other information as the omwi director determines appropriate . including more information on the outcomes and progress of their diversity practices could enhance the usefulness of these annual reports . seven of eight agencies and all reserve banks issued annual reports in 2011 . cfpb , which was created in july 2010 and assumed responsibility for certain consumer financial protection functions in july 2011 , issued an agencywide semiannual report for 2011 . its omwi planned to issue an annual report for 2012 at the same time as the other agencies , in march 2013 . in their 2011 annual omwi reports to congress , several agencies and reserve banks reported on efforts to measure outcomes and progress of various diversity practices , which provide examples of the types of outcomes and measures of progress that could be helpful for omwis to include in their annual reports .