solix staff perform these reviews . usac staff then follow up with an independent quality assurance review process for each of the other types of reviews . regular pia review: as part of the multilevel process , all applications undergo an initial review and a separate final review . the pia process is partially automated but involves a significant amount of manual review as well . issues that are identified as potential errors or violations of program rules , either in the automated system or by manual review , trigger exceptions that are addressed by the solix initial reviewer . ( 2 ) does the design of the e - rate program's internal control structure appropriately consider program risks ? to answer these questions , we reviewed previous reports and studies of the e - rate program , including gao reports and fcc inspector general reports . we also reviewed legislation , regulations , fcc orders , and guidance pertaining to the e - rate program . we reviewed documentation of the program's key internal controls and risk assessments , and related policies and procedures . specifically , we reviewed the design of the program's key internal controls for ( 1 ) processing applications and making funding commitment decisions , ( 2 ) processing invoices requesting reimbursement , and ( 3 ) monitoring the effectiveness of internal controls through audits of schools and libraries . we assessed the design of these internal controls against gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . we spoke with fcc , usac , and solix officials about program risks , the design and functioning of internal controls , and how internal controls are monitored and assessed . we also spoke with fcc and usac officials about their audit processes and about audits of schools and libraries performed from 2006 to 2010 . we obtained data from usac on the results of its application and invoice review processes and audits . we met with experts at usac and solix to update our prior assessments of the data systems and determined that the data obtained from usac were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . se e appendix i for additional information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 to september 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the e - rate program provides eligible schools , school districts , libraries , and consortia with discounts on telecommunications services , internet access , and data transmission wiring and components used for educational purposes . the program is funded through statutorily mandated payments into the universal service fund by companies that provide interstate and international telecommunications services . many ir of these companies , in turn , pass on their contribution costs to the subscribers through a line item on subscribers' telephone bills .