mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact orice m. williams at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov , or richard j. hillman at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or hillmanr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the distribution of enforcement actions by type of case generally has been consistent in recent years . enforcement management said that the division has met its goal that a single category of cases not account for more than 40 percent of all actions . we found that enforcement management , investigative attorneys , and others concurred that the 2006 and 2007 penalty policies , as applied , have delayed cases and produced fewer and smaller corporate penalties . on their face , the penalty policies are neutral , in that they neither encourage nor discourage corporate penalties . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . sec is an independent agency created to protect investors ; maintain fair , honest , and efficient securities markets ; and facilitate capital formation . sec's five - member commission oversees sec's operations and provides final approval of sec's interpretation of federal securities laws , proposals for new or amended rules to govern securities markets , and enforcement activities . enforcement staff located in headquarters and 11 regional offices conduct investigations through informal inquiries , interviews of witnesses , examination of brokerage records , reviews of trading data , and other methods . we undertook this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . at the request of enforcement staff , the commission may issue a formal order of investigation , which allows the division's staff to compel witnesses by subpoena to testify and produce books , records , and other documents . following an investigation , sec staff present their findings to the commission for its review , recommending commission action either in a federal court or before an administrative law judge . on finding that a defendant has violated securities laws , the court or the administrative law judge can issue a judgment ordering remedies , such as civil monetary penalties and disgorgement . in many cases , the commission and the party charged decide to settle a matter without trial . in these instances , enforcement staff negotiates settlements on behalf of the commission .