they generally concurred with our findings . the comments from most of the agencies were limited to technical comments and were incorporated , as appropriate , into the report . in addition to technical comments , ssa provided us with several general comments . in response to one of these comments , we included additional information about workers' eligibility for the work opportunity credit . ssa also commented that disability groups believe that the current structure of wotc may be causing a revolving door effect in which employers hire individuals for low - pay and unskilled work and retain them only as long as the employers receive the tax credit . however , in our discussions with a wide range of disability groups , none indicated that the program created a revolving door for wotc - eligible hires . moreover , a recent gao review of the credit found that employers did not appear to be dismissing employees to increase their tax credit . in addition , ssa's general comments indicated that more attention should be directed at measuring the employers' awareness and understanding of the three tax incentives , the results of which could , among other things , improve outreach and education . although further study may provide some additional information on changes to outreach that could increase the incentives' usage , existing data limitations would still preclude determining the effectiveness of these changes on the employment of people with disabilities . the full texts of ssa's and irs's comments are included as appendices iii and iv . we are sending copies of this report to the department of education , the department of justice , the department of labor , the internal revenue service within the department of the treasury , the equal employment opportunity commission , the social security administration , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report , please call me or carol dawn petersen , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix v . to obtain information on the usage of the two tax credits , we analyzed tax data from the internal revenue service's ( irs ) statistics of income programs for 1999 , the most recent year that data were available . statistics compiled for the statistics of income ( soi ) programs are generally based on stratified probability samples of income tax returns or other forms filed with the irs . the two soi programs used were the 1999 corporation income tax returns program and the 1999 individual income tax return program . the corporation program includes information on active , for - profit corporations , including information on s corporations . s corporations report items of income , deduction , loss , and credit on their corporate tax returns , but pass through such items to individual shareholders . throughout the report , we provided information on the number and characteristics of corporations reporting the credits .