issue oss policy . dod had not implemented the requirement to issue an oss policy . according to dod's cio , the department has existing acquisition policies applicable to oss , such as the 5000 series and a memorandum issued in october 2009 that clarifies oss . however , according to dod officials , these policies are outdated and do not comply with omb's memorandum . for example , while the department's policies indicated that programs must conduct an analysis of alternatives , trade studies , or a business case analysis prior to initiating any technology acquisition or custom code development , they did not require programs to consider the value of publishing custom code as oss and negotiate data rights reflective of its value . the department acknowledged that it does not have a policy that addresses the omb memorandum's requirement . according to the cio , the department had been slow to develop a policy because these types of changes require significant resources , coordination , and buy - in across the department that will take additional time to address . the cio also stated that the department plans to update its existing oss memorandum by the end of the 2019 calendar year and issue it as policy . in particular , dod intends to work with acquisition and program management officials to define approaches , processes , and best practices to expand software reuse . however , dod has not provided a milestone for when the requirements will be fully implemented and stated that achieving 100 percent compliance is not a realistic expectation . until dod fully implements the oss pilot program mandated in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 including the requirements of omb memorandum m - 16-21 , the department will likely miss opportunities to achieve related cost savings and efficiencies . further , the department will not be effectively positioned to ensure management oversight and implementation of the pilot program . dod officials representing 11 components reported that oss can potentially yield financial benefits and increase efficiency . officials provided the following examples of financial benefits: officials in the office of the navy chief information officer , the army communications - electronics command , the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment , and the office of the assistant secretary of the air force for acquisition , technology , and logistics stated that oss is generally less expensive than commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) leading to cost savings . an air force official we spoke with stated that the increased use of oss may potentially result in cost savings . further , the official noted general criteria used by the air force to identify software projects that may potentially be appropriate for the use of oss . dod had not developed such a measure due to a lack of consensus in the department about what data should be collected . according to the cio , if the measure is “lines of code,” then it unfairly discounts projects that invest a significant amount on research , but are small otherwise . if the measure is “project hours,” then it discounts those projects that came about from sparks of innovation that took little time to develop .