v ) . irs monitors acceptance rates for electronically transmitted returns , including the reasons for rejected returns , throughout the tax filing season and provides a “report card” to software companies at the end of each filing season . rejected returns are sent back to the taxpayer for correction and resubmission . irs's monitoring efforts allow the agency and software companies to identify and resolve problems with electronically filed returns . for example , in 2008 , irs asked tax software companies to hold returns with the alternative minimum tax until irs was able to process them . through its monitoring efforts , irs officials identified companies that were transmitting those types of returns which irs then rejected . irs sent notices to these companies , which reduced the number of rejected returns . irs has worked with the tax software industry on an ad hoc basis to clarify the guidance provided by tax software . for example , for 2009: irs is working with software companies to ensure their packages make users enter a “yes” or “no” response to questions about having a foreign bank account and signature authority . prior to this change , some companies' software defaulted to a “no” response . another example involving commercial software used by paid preparers rather than individual taxpayers shows that irs can work with the software companies to influence and improve guidance: irs's earned income tax credit ( eitc ) office worked with a group of tax software developers to ensure software used by paid preparers eliminated default answers where taxpayers' answers are critical to return eitc accuracy , and incorporated a “note” capability in the tax software enabling the preparer to record additional inquiries and taxpayer responses . irs officials , however , acknowledged that these efforts were not the result of a comprehensive and systematic approach to improving the guidance provided by software . irs does not have plans to review tax software to see if the guidance it provides to taxpayers is sufficient in helping them prepare accurate returns , in part because irs relies on the extensive scenario and other testing done by the industry as discussed in the next section . see appendix ii for more details . another change in 2009 is that irs and ffa have agreed to provide a fillable version of federal tax forms . these fillable tax forms , which taxpayers can complete online and file electronically , will provide a basic calculator function but will not provide the question - and - answer format similar to commercial tax software . the forms will be accessible for free to all taxpayers via irs's web site and are in addition to ffa's current free products for eligible taxpayers described in the background of this report . as part of the upcoming second phase of its advancing e - file study , irs plans further surveys to obtain taxpayers' views on electronic filing . however , it does not plan to include questions , for example , about the effect of 2009 pricing changes on taxpayers' willingness to file electronically . currently , irs has little such information .