it is not clear that it will be implemented . this situation illustrates that having an approved plan is not enough to ensure that critical satellite capabilities are obtained , and reiterates the need for an ongoing process that aligns interagency strategies with individual agencies' plans and annual budgets . ostp , noaa , and nasa also provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the secretary of defense , the administrator of nasa , the director of the office of science and technology policy , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . the report also will be available on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess plans to restore capabilities that were originally planned for , but then removed from , the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system ( npoess ) and geostationary operational environmental satellite - r series ( goes - r ) satellites ; ( 2 ) evaluate the adequacy of federal efforts to establish a strategy for the long - term provision of satellite - provided climate data ; and ( 3 ) evaluate the adequacy of federal efforts to establish a strategy for the long - term provision of satellite - provided space weather data . to assess plans for restoring capabilities from the npoess and goes - r programs , we compared the original program plans for sensors and products with current plans and identified gaps over time . we also observed monthly senior - level management review meetings , reviewed documentation from those meetings , and interviewed agency officials to obtain information on any changes in program plans . to evaluate the adequacy of federal efforts to establish a strategy for the long - term provision of satellite - provided climate data , we compared plans developed by the department of defense ( dod ) , national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and a draft strategy developed by the executive office of the president's office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) and the u.s. group on earth observations for the provision of climate data with recommendations made by the national research council and gao for the development of a long - term strategy . we identified the shortfalls of and challenges to those plans .