coordination with states . hhs cited statutory limitations for its state - administered tanf program , which prohibited it from requiring states to participate in developing an improper payment estimate for the program . despite these limitations , hhs reported that it had taken actions to assist states in reducing improper payments , such as working with states to analyze noncompliance findings from audits related to tanf and requiring more accurate information about the ways states used tanf block grants . this statute is commonly referred to as the finality rule , and according to usda , it affects the farm service agency's ability to recover overpayments . with outlays for major programs , such as medicare and medicaid , expected to increase over the next few years , it is critical that actions are taken to reduce improper payments . in addition to agencies' efforts , legislation , omb guidance , and auditor oversight of agency spending and related internal controls have been important factors in addressing improper payments . there is considerable opportunity here to achieve cost savings without reducing or detrimentally affecting the valuable programs that serve our citizens . for this reason , we will continue to focus attention on improper payments to assist congress in ensuring that taxpayer dollars are adequately safeguarded and used for their intended purposes . chairman enzi , ranking member sanders , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer questions . for further information on issues of fragmentation , overlap , duplication or cost savings , please contact orice williams brown , managing director , financial markets and community investment , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov ; or a. nicole clowers , director , financial markets and community investment , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao.gov . for information on improper payment issues , please contact beryl h. davis , director , financial management and assurance at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . improper payments: tricare measurement and reduction efforts could benefit from adopting medical record reviews . gao - 15-269 . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2015 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 15-290 . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2015 . medicaid: additional federal action needed to further improve third - party liability efforts . gao - 15-208 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2015 . identity and tax fraud: enhanced authentication could combat refund fraud , but irs lacks an estimate of costs , benefits and risks . gao - 15-119 . washington , d.c.: january 20 , 2015 . improper payments: doe's risk assessments should be strengthened . gao - 15-36 . washington , d.c.: december 23 , 2014 . improper payments: inspector general reporting of agency compliance under the improper payments elimination and recovery act . gao - 15-87r . washington , d.c.: december 9 , 2014 . federal data transparency: effective implementation of the data act would help address government - wide management challenges and improve oversight . gao - 15-241t .