( see fig . va has delegated responsibility for establishing a hepatitis c notification process to local facilities , including when veterans will be notified . va hepatitis c guidance suggests that providers schedule a return date for veterans to meet with them to discuss hepatitis c test results , but does not designate a time frame within which veterans should be notified of their hepatitis c test results . also , va does not specifically require facilities to monitor notification of veterans concerning their hepatitis c test results . in addition , most facilities do not provide guidance to their providers regarding notification time frames , responding to our survey that notification was left to provider discretion . however , when we asked facilities what would be a reasonable time frame for notifying veterans , 112 of 136 survey respondents ( about 80 percent ) reported that veterans should be notified in 30 days or less from the day the hepatitis c test results are available . ( see fig . facilities estimating longer notification times ( over 30 days ) generally relied on primary care providers to notify veterans at their next regularly scheduled appointments , often more than 30 days away and , in some cases , longer than 4 months away . at our case study facility — washington , d.c. — we analyzed medical records of veterans who tested positive for hepatitis c from october 1 , 2000 , through march 31 , 2001 . our analysis of 100 medical records showed that although many veterans were notified in 30 days or less , it took longer than 30 days to notify over half . thirty - two of these veterans had to wait over 90 days to be notified . we selected these facilities based on their responses to our survey . at each site we interviewed hepatitis c physician specialists and coordinators and reviewed their hepatitis c notification and disease management processes . to gain their perspectives on the timeliness and adequacy of va's hepatitis c notification and disease management processes , we conducted interviews with representatives from four veterans' advocacy groups: american legion , vietnam veterans of america , veterans aimed toward awareness , and disabled american veterans . we also interviewed a representative from the american liver foundation . our review was conducted from july 2001 through january 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the virus causes a chronic infection in 85 percent of cases . we selected our sample from a facility - provided list of 346 veterans who had a positive hepatitis c test during this period . to ensure that we examined an adequate number of veterans who had evidence of liver damage ( as measured by high levels of alanine aminotransferase ( alt ) ) , we separated the names into two groups — veterans with tests showing high alt levels ( n=149 ) and those with tests showing normal levels ( n=197 ) — and randomly selected names from each group resulting in a sample of 100 veterans: 53 with high alt levels and 47 with normal alt levels . in reviewing the medical records , we discovered that some of the veterans sampled had tested positive prior to october 1 , 2000 .