attorneys offices . the department of homeland security's bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) also investigates cases involving money laundering and terrorist activities . the federal financial regulators who oversee financial institutions and examine them for compliance with anti - money laundering laws and regulations include the federal banking regulators — the federal reserve , occ , ots , fdic , and ncua — and sec , which regulates the securities markets , and the cftc , which regulates commodity futures and options markets . because the u.s. securities and futures markets are regulated through a combination of self - regulation ( subject to federal oversight ) and direct federal regulation , the sros also oversee compliance with anti - money laundering laws and regulations . two of the sros — nasd and nyse — oversee registered broker - dealers . nfa oversees futures commission merchants and introducing brokers in commodities . in addition to nfa , a number of the futures commission merchants are overseen by futures exchanges , including the new york mercantile exchange , cme , and cbot . treasury and the federal financial regulators encountered numerous challenges as they developed regulations to implement sections 314 and 326 . key challenges related to implementing section 326 included developing regulations that could be applied consistently across a financial industry that has diverse business models , customer relationships , and financial products . in addition , many financial institutions have arrangements with other institutions to process customer transactions . these arrangements and the need to build in a risk - based approach to customer identification created concerns among the regulators and industry about reasonable levels of accountability for verifying the identity of customers . developing regulations for section 314 presented practical problems on how to develop a process for information sharing between law enforcement and industry and a process that allows financial institutions to share information with each other . treasury and the federal financial regulators had to resolve several issues through an interagency process when developing the regulations for cip , such as defining “customer” and “account” for the purposes of the regulations and determining how much flexibility to give firms in verifying the identity of customers . because the regulations for cip would apply to a diverse financial industry , fincen and the regulators formed a working group and gathered information from industry officials about their different business models and customer relationships . according to fincen officials , the interagency process employed to issue joint regulations was the first that included treasury and the seven federal financial regulators . specifically , treasury and the five banking regulators ( fdic , federal reserve , ncua , occ , and ots ) jointly adopted a cip rule covering banks , thrifts , and credit unions . treasury and sec jointly adopted separate rules for broker - dealers and mutual funds . treasury and cftc jointly adopted a rule for futures commission merchants and introducing brokers . as shown in figure 1 , the rulemaking process took over a year and a half to complete .