forces . further , we believe that the joint campaign plan is not a substitute for an updated strategic plan for iraq . as we stated in our report , a campaign plan is an operational , not a strategic , plan , according dod's doctrine for joint operation planning . a campaign plan must rely on strategic guidance from national authorities for its development . for example , the april 2006 mnf - i / u.s . embassy baghdad joint campaign plan relied on the nsc's prior strategic plan , the national strategy for victory in iraq , as a basis for the plan's development . the classified campaign plan does not provide congress or the american people with the administration's road map for achieving victory in iraq . according to dod , mnf - i and the u.s. embassy recently assessed the security line of operation and determined that the goals for the phase ending in summer 2008 have been met . we disagree with dod's statement that the security goals for this phase have been met . for example , the new way forward stated that the iraqi government would take responsibility for security in all 18 provinces by november 2007 , but only 8 of 18 provinces had transitioned to iraqi control at that time . as of june 18 , 2008 , only 9 of 18 provinces had transitioned . our classified report on the joint campaign plan provides more information on the goals of the security line of operation , the various phases of the campaign plan , and a recent assessment of the security line of operation . dod stated that it is misleading for our report to characterize the iraqi security forces capability by giving the percentage of units at operational readiness assessment ( ora ) level 1 , noting that as of late may 2008 , 70 percent of iraqi units were in the lead in counterinsurgency operations . we added information on iraqi units in the lead to our report . however , we believe that the report is not misleading by providing information on ora level 1 units because this was a benchmark established by congress and derived from benchmarks and commitments articulated by the iraqi government beginning in june 2006 . thus , the numbers of independent iraqi security forces as measured by ora level 1 continue to be an important measure of the capabilities of the iraqi security forces . further , as we discuss in the report , the term “in the lead” has evolved to include less capable iraqi security forces . specifically , according to testimony of the mnf - i commanding general , mnf - i counted only ora level 1 and ora level 2 units as “in the lead” in january 2007 . however , as of march 2008 , mnf - i was also counting some ora level 3 units — that is , units only “partially capable of conducting counterinsurgency operations” — as in the lead in counterinsurgency operations . this campaign plan is classified . to reflect changing u.s. goals and conditions in iraq , mnf - i and the u.s. embassy in baghdad revised their joint campaign plan in july 2007 .