nevada . some operations have been terminated by the state bond pool , operators have gone bankrupt , or operations have been abandoned and the operator cannot be found . blm state offices also reported that , as of july 2004 , some hardrock operations on blm land have no or outdated reclamation plans and / or reclamation cost estimates . specifically , blm state offices reported that some existing hardrock operations in 9 of the 12 states did not have reclamation plans and / or cost estimates . for example , blm state offices reported that in three states ( arizona , california , and utah ) both types of operations ( notice - and plan - level operations ) were missing some reclamation plans and cost estimates . in addition , according to blm state office officials , all hardrock operators on blm land in alaska currently participate in the alaska bond pool and do not develop cost estimates . all of the operations in two other states — new mexico and wyoming — had both reclamation plans and cost estimates , and the oregon blm office reported that in washington state all plan - level operations have reclamation plans and cost estimates , but it did not know the percentage of notice - level hardrock operations without plans and estimates . table 4 shows the percentage of blm's notice - and plan - level hardrock operations without reclamation plans and cost estimates , as of july 2004 . for the states in which blm state offices reported that less than 100 percent of their operations had reclamation plans and / or cost estimates , we asked blm to provide an explanation . all notice - and plan - level operations are required to have reclamation plans and cost estimates . the following explanations provided by blm state offices for the lack of reclamation plans and / or cost estimates suggest that some operators may not be complying with financial assurance requirements . arizona . some of the older plan - level operations may still have financial assurances that were calculated on the basis of $2,000 per acre , which was the policy under previous federal regulations , rather than all of the estimated costs of reclamation as the 2001 regulations now require . colorado . no reclamation plan was required when some of the notices were submitted . idaho . a record of a cost estimate for two plans could not be found . oregon . not all of the notice - level operations have a reclamation plan because of a general backlog in updating reclamation plans , and reclamation cost estimates are still being developed in a few cases . in addition , three state offices reported that some reclamation plans and cost estimates had not been updated . for example , the california blm state office reported that some of the older reclamation plans for operations in that state have not been updated because of a workload backlog and staff vacancies . consequently , these plans and estimates may not provide a sound basis for establishing financial assurances to cover all future reclamation costs .