we requested comments on a draft of this report from sec and cftc . agency staff estimate that it will not be fully complete until 2008 . in 2002 , we reported that weaknesses in sec's procedures for entering and updating data in dpts resulted in the system containing unreliable data . our 2002 review of a sample of 57 enforcement cases found that 18 cases , or approximately 32 percent , contained at least one error in the amount of disgorgement ordered , waived , or collected , or in the status of the case or of the individual violators . we found that the sources used as a basis for entering data into dpts did not always provide the most accurate information . for example , we reported that staff in sec's office of the secretary , who were responsible for entering data into dpts , relied heavily on sec litigation releases that , according to the staff , did not contain all the details of a disgorgement order . the staff also said that they did not independently verify the information in the litigation releases . in january 2003 , an independent accountant confirmed that information in dpts was not current and complete and reported that the system could not be relied upon for financial accounting and reporting purposes . as of october 2003 , sec discontinued its use of dpts . sec began using cats to capture the financial information that dtps had tracked . this change was part of larger modifications to cats made in response to a legislative requirement that sec prepare audited financial statements for submission to congress and the office of management and budget ( omb ) . sec modified cats by adding fields to capture the necessary financial data — such as the amount of cmps and disgorgement ordered , collected , and distributed — and established a policy of entering data on the amount of disgorgement and cmps only if valid supporting documentation was available . sec staff said they began collecting original source documents — copies of signed and stamped final judgments , administrative orders , and court dockets — from sec's headquarters , regional , and district offices . sec staff also told us that they entered financial data only for those cases with an open enforcement action as of october 1 , 2002 , the beginning of fiscal year 2003 . as of february 2005 , sec staff said that they had entered data on almost all of the approximately 4,500 enforcement cases , which involved over 12,000 defendants and respondents that met sec's criterion . we reviewed a sample of 45 cases tracked in cats and determined that sec had complied with its policy for improving data entry , which is consistent with our previous recommendation . specifically , we found supporting source documents for each of the 45 case files we reviewed and were able to compare information from the source documents with the data in cats ( as reflected in a march 2005 printout ) . however , our comparison identified one $300,000 discrepancy on the amount of disgorgement ordered and entered in cats .