tsa . while tsa does not conduct r&d for mass transit security , it does sponsor testing of commercially available security technologies for the mass transit environment . this testing can take place in both laboratory environments and in operational , real - world environments . have online collaboration tools been developed ? written guidance and agreements: if appropriate , have participating agencies documented their agreement regarding how they will be collaborating ? have they developed ways to continually update and monitor these agreements ? prevent terrorism sub - ipt on explosive screening . s&t and tsa collaborate on identifying surface transportation ( including mass transit ) capability gaps through the prevent terrorism's sub - ipt on explosive screening . at the federal level , we found that tsa and s&t's ongoing use of this mechanism met several leading collaboration practices , including bridging organizational cultures , leadership , clarity of roles and responsibilities , participants , and written guidance and agreements . specifically , the explosive screening sub - ipt has a formal structure that is outlined in the prevent terrorism ipt's charter . this written agreement establishes leadership and clarifies the roles and responsibilities of each of the participants . as key participants and voting members , s&t and tsa possess the necessary expertise to identify capability gaps for mass transit ( i.e. , s&t has expertise in technology research and development , and tsa has in - depth knowledge of the mass transit and other surface transportation sectors ) . moreover , by requiring s&t and tsa to work together to prioritize capability gaps , the process allows them to operate across agency boundaries ( i.e. , to bridge their respective organizational structures ) . in 2012 , s&t officials stated that they collaborated with tsa as members of the explosive screening sub - ipt to identify anomaly and explosive detection and high - throughput threat detection as the highest priority capability gaps for surface transportation . these gaps were the basis for s&t's stetd program . rdwg . we also found that the rdwg facilitates effective collaboration between s&t , tsa , and surface transportation stakeholders , including 30 mass transit operators . the rdwg generally follows leading collaboration practices related to bridging organizational cultures , leadership , clarity of roles and responsibilities , participants , resources , and written guidance and agreements . specifically , the rdwg is a working group with an established charter that brings together federal and surface transportation representatives to operate across agency and sector boundaries to identify surface transportation - related capability gaps , including those for mass transit . the rdwg charter clarifies the participant roles and responsibilities and establishes a framework for nominating new members to ensure all relevant participants are included . tsa , as the designated chair , funds the working group and ensures its continuation . in addition to identifying surface transportation security gaps , an s&t official told us that the members of the rdwg review the prior year's security capability gaps to determine whether they are still relevant and if there are commercially available technologies to address them .