we disagree . our draft report noted that undp's governing board has restricted undp from working through the regime . we further clarified our report by adding a sentence noting that the mandates of other un entities do not contain restrictions similar to those of undp . the unct commented that our draft report did not describe a significant opening of humanitarian space in burma . the unct's letter is not consistent with the information and assessments provided to us by unct members and ngo officials during our october 2006 fieldwork in burma . at the time , unct and ngo officials provided numerous examples of how burmese restrictions had impeded their activities ( including unhcr's recent efforts in the thai border region ) and a senior un official in burma informed us that the “humanitarian space” in burma was dwindling . unct members reconfirmed much of this information in february 2007 , when we asked them to review excerpts from our working draft report for accuracy and sensitivity . we then reflected many of their suggestions in our draft report , which we subsequently submitted to un entities for official review and comment . the unct comments do not take issue with our findings concerning the range and nature of the regime's restrictions ( with the exception of the recent agreement reached between the government and the ilo ) . moreover , they do not explain how those restrictions might have eased following our field work . the unct commented that our draft report did not address human rights activities by agencies other than ilo and icrc . in assessing the effect of the regime's restrictions on international human rights efforts , we focused on ilo and icrc because their missions in burma are primarily related to human rights . we did not focus on ancillary efforts by agencies whose primary mission is to address development and humanitarian concerns . the unct letter states that we did not include the examples of successes in burma that we requested in february 2007 . we reviewed the information the un organizations sent to us and believe we fairly summarized un achievements in burma . in addition to the person named above , cheryl goodman ( assistant director ) , pierre toureille , lyric clark , barbara shields , debbie chung , and ian hongola made key contributions to this report . martin de alteriis and mary moutsos provided technical assistance . who also lacks access to populations in certain areas . a representative of an international nongovernmental organization told us that the regime began strictly enforcing its ban on access to conflict areas after 2004 . officials of international organizations informed us that the regime has also impeded international food , development , and health programs . they stated that it has done so by restricting their ability to ( 1 ) move food and international personnel freely within burma and ( 2 ) gather data needed to understand the scope and nature of burma's problems . the regime's policies on travel have hindered international organizations' efforts to ship food to vulnerable populations within the country . for example , delays in obtaining transport permits for food commodities from the current regime have hindered wfp efforts to deliver food to vulnerable populations .