software estimating accuracy . to date , estimating accuracy has been hampered by changing requirements , immature architecture , and insufficient time to thoroughly analyze software subsystems sizing . the difficulties associated with accurate software estimating is an indication that complexity increases as the design is better understood and this serves to increase the level of effort . software supplier integration . the unprecedented nature , volatility , and close coupling of fcs suppliers' software will frequently require various combinations of suppliers to share information and rapidly negotiate changes in their products , interfaces , and schedules . as these suppliers are traditionally wary competitors that are used to performing to fixed specifications , there are significant risks of slow and inflexible adaptation to critical fcs sources of change . failure to do so will translate directly into missed delivery schedules , significantly reduced operational capabilities , and less dependable system performance . as it approaches the preliminary design review and the subsequent go / no - go milestone review , the army should have made additional progress in developing technologies and software as well as aligning the development of complementary programs with the fcs program . the challenges that will have to be overcome include demonstrating that all critical technologies are mature to at least the trl 6 level . this assessment should be reviewed and validated by an independent review team ; mitigating the recognized technical risks for the fcs critical technologies , including their successful integration with other fcs subsystems and systems ; clearly demonstrating that the risks inherent in the active protection system and the lightweight hull and vehicle armor have been reduced to low levels ; synchronizing the jtrs and win - t development schedules with fcs system integration and demonstration needs for both the spinouts and core program ; mitigating the cost , schedule , and performance risks in software development to acceptably low levels ; and establishing the set of complementary programs that are essential for fcs's success , ensuring that that are fully funded , and aligning theirs and the overall fcs program schedules . the fcs acquisition strategy and testing schedule have become more complex as plans have been made to spin out capabilities to current army forces . the strategy acquires knowledge later than called for by best practices and dod policy . in addition , knowledge deficits for requirements and technologies have created enormous challenges for devising an acquisition strategy that can demonstrate the maturity of design and production processes . even if requirements setting and technology maturity proceed without incident , fcs design and production maturity is not likely to be demonstrated until after the production decision is made . the critical design review will be held much later on fcs than other programs , and the army will not be building production - representative prototypes with all of their intended components to test before production . much of the testing up to the 2013 production decision will involve simulations , technology demonstrations , experiments , and single system testing . only after that point , however , will substantial testing of the complete brigade combat team and the fcs concept of operations occur .