internal communication . while va initially experienced some challenges in ensuring that all relevant internal stakeholders have been included in the pilot's implementation , according to officials , the agency has taken recent steps to address this concern and involve appropriate internal offices . for example , officials from the capital asset management office said they could have assisted orp in narrowing the list of potential projects in the rfis but were not consulted . later , after revising the marketing approach , orp reached out to the capital asset management office and other relevant offices for help in determining priority locations for additional chip - in projects , according to an orp official . officials from the capital asset management office told us that with improved engagement they were able to participate more actively in discussions about the pilot . in addition , initial plans for the chip - in steering committee did not include vha representation . however , in summer 2018 orp expanded the planned steering committee to include vha representatives , a plan that some other va offices told us is needed to ensure that the pilot addresses the agency's healthcare needs and that vha offices are informed about pilot efforts . based on the experience with the omaha project , the chip - in donation approach can result in potential cost and time savings — through the leveraging of private - sector funding , contracting , and construction practices — according to va officials and the omaha donor group . regarding cost savings , one va official stated that using donations makes va's appropriated funds available to cover other costs . in addition , based on the experience with the omaha project , other va officials told us that a chip - in project can potentially be completed for a lower cost because of practices resulting from private sector leadership . specifically , va estimated that the omaha ambulatory care center would cost about $120 million for va to build outside of a donation partnership — as a standard federal construction project . under the chip - in pilot , however , the total estimated cost of the omaha facility is $86 million — achieving a potential $34 million cost savings . external communication . va officials and representatives from the omaha donor group generally described excellent communication between their two parties . for example , donor group representatives told us that in - person meetings helped to establish a strong relationship that has been useful in negotiating the donation agreement and executing the project to date . further , va officials and donor group representatives said that all relevant stakeholders — such as the donor group's construction manager , general contractor , and architect , as well va's engineer , project manager , and medical center director — were included in key meetings once the omaha project began , and said that this practice has continued during the construction phase . although the omaha donor group reported overall effective relations and communications with va , donor group representatives noted that additional public relations support from va would have been helpful .