messrs . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittees may have at this time . if you should have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3317 or ben ritt , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6443 . we can also be reached by e - mail at daceyr@gao.gov and rittw@gao.gov , respectively . other individuals making key contributions to this testimony included william cook , joanne fiorino , michael gilmore , barbarol james , lori martinez , and kevin secrest . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . information sharing and analysis . discusses the processes for sharing information and the need to develop trust relationships among individual isac members and among the various isacs . as outlined in hspd - 7 and presented in table 1 , dhs and other federal agencies are designated as sector - specific agencies for the critical infrastructure sectors identified . in addition , dhs is responsible for coordinating the overall national effort to enhance the protection of the critical infrastructure and key resources of the united states and has established organizational structures to address its cip and information - sharing responsibilities . describes the various levels of capabilities that individual isacs may want to consider supporting , including cyber and physical analysis . policy and framework for the isac community . it superseded pdd 63 . hspd - 7 defines responsibilities for dhs , sector - specific agencies ( formerly referred to as lead agencies ) that are responsible for addressing specific critical infrastructure sectors , and other departments and agencies . it instructs federal departments and agencies to identify , prioritize , and coordinate the protection of critical infrastructure to prevent , deter , and mitigate the effects of attacks . the secretary of homeland security is assigned several responsibilities , including coordinating the national effort to enhance critical infrastructure identifying , prioritizing , and coordinating the protection of critical infrastructure , emphasizing protection against catastrophic health effects or mass casualties ; establishing uniform policies , approaches , guidelines , and methodologies for integrating federal infrastructure protection and risk management activities within and across sectors ; and serving as the focal point for cyberspace security activities , including analysis , warning , information sharing , vulnerability reduction , mitigation , and recovery efforts for critical infrastructure information systems . to ensure the coverage of critical sectors , hspd - 7 designated sector - specific agencies for the critical infrastructure sectors identified in the national strategy for homeland security ( see table 1 ) .