preclearance . preclearance locations operate at foreign airports and serve as u.s. ports of entry . preclearance operations began in 1952 in toronto to facilitate trade and travel between the united states and canada . as of march 2018 , cbp operated 15 air preclearance locations in six countries . through the preclearance program , uniformed cbp officers at a foreign airport exercise u.s. legal authorities to inspect travelers and luggage and make admissibility determinations prior to an individual boarding a plane to the united states . according to cbp officials , an inspection at a preclearance location is the same inspection as an individual would undergo at a domestic port of entry , and officers conducting preclearance inspections exercise the same authority as officers at domestic ports of entry to approve or deny admission into the united states . as a result , travelers arriving at domestic air ports of entry from preclearance locations do not have to be re - inspected upon entry . according to cbp data , in fiscal year 2015 , cbp officers at preclearance locations determined that 10,648 air travelers were inadmissible out of the approximately 16 million air travelers seeking admission to the united states through a preclearance location . in addition to requiring that all travelers undergo a primary inspection , cbp officers in these locations also referred almost 290,000 individuals for secondary inspection . immigration advisory program ( iap ) and joint security program ( jsp ) . iap and jsp operated at nine and two foreign airports , respectively , as of january 2017 . according to cbp officials , under this program , unarmed , plainclothes cbp officers posted at foreign airports partner with air carriers and host country government officials to help prevent terrorists and other high - risk individuals from boarding u.s. - bound flights by vetting and interviewing them before travel . according to cbp program documentation , cbp established iap in 2004 to prevent terrorists , high - risk travelers , and improperly documented travelers from boarding airlines destined to the united states . building on the iap concept , cbp established jsp in 2009 to partner with host country law enforcement officials to identify high - risk travelers . cbp officers at iap and jsp locations have the ability to question travelers and review their travel documents . they are to act in an advisory manner to the air carriers and host governments and do not have authority to deny boarding to individuals on u.s. - bound flights or fully inspect travelers or their belongings . iap and jsp officers are authorized by cbp to make recommendations to airlines as to whether to board or deny boarding ( known as a no - board recommendation ) to selected travelers based on their likely admissibility status upon arrival to the united states . the final decision to board travelers , however , lies with the carriers . according to cbp data , cbp officers at iap and jsp locations made 3,925 no - board recommendations in fiscal year 2015 for the approximately 29 million air travelers bound for the united states from such locations .