vi ) . he said that the report overstates the amount of underutilized space in gsa's inventory . he said that the current list of gsa properties in the report includes vacant space that was not available for assignment because it is already committed , such as space being renovated for a customer agency . he stated that revising our list of vacant and underutilized properties to recognize properties committed to being occupied would reduce the total number of properties by 43 — from 236 to 193 — and the square footage from 18.2 million to 10.3 million . in addition , he said that the number of vacant and underutilized properties is inflated by the inclusion of 37 small support properties that were unoccupiable , such as a pump house or a parking lot booth , but necessary to the functioning of occupiable space . the commissioner went on to say that support properties are small and have little impact on the square footage of underutilized space reported , but the inclusion of these properties does disproportionately affect the number of underutilized properties . he stated that as of march 2003 , the vacant assignable space in gsa's owned inventory , which he said was the commonly accepted private sector measure of vacancy , was 10 million square feet , which was only 5.5 percent of gsa's owned inventory . he also said that this percent is well below industry averages . he went on to say that as gsa implements its portfolio restructuring initiative , which is discussed earlier in this report , it will further improve the performance of its real property portfolio . for example , phasing out gsa's warehouses will reduce the current list of vacant and underutilized properties by 48 buildings . we did not change the total number of gsa's vacant and underutilized properties in the report . one of our objectives was to identify all vacant and underutilized properties in gsa's inventory as of october 1 , 2002 , so that we could provide an overview of these types of properties at a given point in time . according to gsa data , the 43 properties , which gsa said were committed to future use , and the 37 properties , which gsa said were support properties , met our criteria as vacant or underutilized properties as of october 1 , 2002 . table 3 shows the ranges of facility sizes . it should be noted that the three agencies have taken actions or have planned actions to improve the use of some of these facilities or dispose of them . for example , through its portfolio restructuring initiative , gsa has developed plans to do repair and alteration work at 46 buildings and use the space in these buildings to house other federal agencies . in addition , gsa anticipates that 44 other buildings will ultimately be candidates for disposal . by the end of 2003 , va expects that its cares process will result in a nationwide strategic plan that , among other things , will not only help va improve the use of space in its facilities but also identify those real property assets that are no longer needed . also , usps has ongoing efforts to sell unneeded properties .