jpdo has faced some organizational challenges , however . jpdo faces the challenge of determining the nature and scope of the research and technology development necessary to begin the transition to nextgen , as well as identifying the entities that can conduct that research and development . according to officials at faa and jpdo , they are currently studying these issues and trying to assess how much research and development faa can assume . an faa official recently testified that the agency proposes to increase its research and development funding by $280 million over the next 5 years . however , a draft report by an advisory committee to faa stated that faa would need at least $100 million annually in increased funding to assume nasa's research and development work , and establishing the necessary infrastructure within faa could delay the implementation of nextgen by 5 years . more work remains to completely assess the research and development needs of nextgen and the ability of faa and the other jpdo partner agencies to budget for and conduct the necessary initiatives . this information is critical as the timely completion of research and testing of proposed nextgen systems is necessary to keeping the nextgen initiative on schedule . addressing questions about how human factors issues will affect the move to some key nextgen capabilities is another challenge for jpdo . for example , the nextgen concept of operations envisions an increased reliance on automation , which raises questions about the role of the air traffic controllers in such an automated environment . similarly , the concept of operations envisions that pilots will take on a greater share of the responsibility for maintaining safe separation and other tasks currently performed by controllers . however , it will be important to monitor these changes to ensure that the participation of stakeholders is neither decreased nor adversely affected . maintaining communications within and among work groups could increase in importance if , as work group members focus on specific projects , they become less involved in the overall collaborative planning effort . finally , while the organizational structure of jpdo and the institute have been in place and largely unchanged for several years now , both of these entities have suffered from a lack of stable leadership . as jpdo begins its fourth year in operation , it is on its third director and operated during most of 2006 under the stewardship of an acting director . the institute pointed out in its recent annual report that jpdo's leadership turnover had made it a challenge for jpdo to move out more aggressively on many goals and objectives , as the office waited on a full - time director . the institute also stated that jpdo's leadership turnover had limited the ability of the imc executive committee to forge a stronger relationship with jpdo leadership and work jointly on strategic issues and challenges . however , the institute has also had issues with turnover and is currently functioning under an acting director due to the recent departure of its second director , who had been in the position less than two years .