postal service ( usps ) . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the postmaster general , the acting chairman of the prc , the usps office of inspector general , the chairman of the fcc , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at 202-512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . we also identified other studies cited in this report through our interviews with various stakeholders . all articles cited in this report were also subjected to an internal review to ensure that the methodology was sufficient for our purposes and that we characterized its findings appropriately . to assess the relationship between broadband use and the use of postal services , as well as how use of postal products differs in urban and rural areas , we conducted regression analyses using data from the usps's household diary survey ( hds ) . conducted annually , the hds obtains information from a nationally representative sample of over 5,200 households to provide a comprehensive and continuous description of the mail originating and destinating in american households . our analysis used hds data collected from 2007 to 2014 because data were collected for all our variables of interest for these years and because 2014 was the most recent year for which data were available for our analysis . the data were not available , and it was not our purpose , to assess the relationship between broadband use and the use of postal services in the early years of broadband , that is prior to 2007 . for our analysis , we created a pooled dataset that included household - level data collected as part of the hds from 2007 to 2014 , and we used weights , calculated by usps , designed to ensure that each yearly sample was representative of households nationwide . we used negative binomial regression analysis to model the hds data . negative binomial regression models are a type of count model that allow for overdispersion in zero counts in the dependent variable , which was appropriate given that not all households used all postal services we examined . based on the findings from the literature review described above , we included independent variables for age , education , and income , because those factors have been found to be associated with use of both postal and broadband services . we also included independent variables for household location , to assess whether the rurality of a household affects postal use , and both the census region and year , to control for any other regional or time effects . to examine the effect of internet use on postal use , we included an independent variable for broadband access .