report shortcomings . the usefulness of the rmi's quarterly performance reports has also been limited by incomplete and inaccurate information . for example , the rmi ministry of health's 2005 fourth - quarter report contained incorrect outpatient numbers for the first three quarters , according to a hospital administrator . additionally , we found several errors in basic statistics in the rmi quarterly reports for education and rmi ministry of education officials and officials in other sectors told us that they had not been given the opportunity to review the final performance reports compiled by the statistics office prior to submission . capacity constraints . staff and skill limitations have constrained the rmi's ability to provide day - to - day monitoring of sector grant operations . such lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public , private , and community leaders , which can inhibit grant performance and improvement of social and economic conditions . as administrator of the amended compact grants , oia monitored sector grant and fiscal performance , assessed rmi compliance with compact conditions , and took action to correct persistent shortcomings . for example , since 2004 , oia has provided technical advice and assistance to help the rmi improve the quality of its financial statements and develop controls to resolve audit findings and prevent recurrences . however , oia has been constrained in its oversight role owing to staffing challenges and time - consuming demands associated with early compact implementation challenges in the fsm . market volatility and choice of investment strategy could lead to a wide range of rmi trust fund balances in 2023 and potentially prevent trust fund disbursements in some years . although the rmi has supplemented its trust fund balance with additional contributions , other sources of income are uncertain or entail risks . furthermore , the rmi's trust fund committee has faced challenges in effectively managing the fund's investment . market volatility and investment strategy could have a considerable impact on projected trust fund balances in 2023 . our analysis indicates that , under various scenarios , the rmi's trust fund could fall short of the maximum allowed disbursement level — an amount equal to the inflation - adjusted compact grants in 2023 — after compact grants end , with the probability of shortfalls increasing over time ( see app . v ) . for example , under a moderate investment strategy , the fund's income is only around 10 percent likely to fall short of the maximum distribution by 2031 . however , this probability rises to almost 40 percent by 2050 . additionally , our analysis indicates a positive probability that the fund will yield no disbursement in some years ; under a moderate investment strategy the probability is around 10 percent by 2050 . despite the impact of market volatility and investment strategy , the trust fund committee's reports have not yet assessed the fund's potential adequacy for meeting the rmi's long - term economic goals . rmi trust fund income could be supplemented from several sources , although this potential is uncertain .