pih . a pih official told us that they periodically send an email to field offices requesting potential candidates for referrals to dec , and that the email cites factors that might warrant such referrals — such as potential violations of statute , regulation , or agreement . however , beyond that , there is no guidance to help field staff decide when to make a referral . in addition , pih does not provide direction to field offices on how to use the results of their quarterly risk assessment to identify high - risk phas for potential dec referrals . according to pih officials , pih has not issued more detailed guidance because it did not want to be too prescriptive in telling field office staff when to refer a public housing agency to dec , as a dec referral may not always be appropriate . cpd . an official from a cpd field office told us that they may refer a grantee to dec for an oversight review — for example , if they identify a complex financial issue requiring an in - depth financial investigation beyond the capacity of the field office . however , beyond that , neither dec nor cpd have developed guidance to help field offices determine when to refer a grantee to dec . in addition , cpd does not provide direction to field offices on how to use the results of their risk - based assessment of grantees to identify potential dec referrals . cpd officials told us that they do not provide guidance because they believe that their current approach where field offices make referrals to dec on a case - by - case basis is better and more effective . as shown in figure 3 , in recent years , the number of referrals has declined slightly for pih and varied for cpd . dec has agreed with pih and cpd on a target number of elective referrals they should aim to make to dec each fiscal year . however , neither program office met their targets for referrals to dec in fiscal years 2016 and 2017: pih made 25 and 12 referrals , respectively , but had an annual target of 40 , while cpd referred 6 each year but had a target of 10 . a number of factors may help explain the decline in referrals and failure to meet targets . for example , pih officials told us that a new requirement that pih field offices make every attempt to satisfy oversight review recommendations may have resulted in hesitation to make referrals among some field staff . however , the lack of formal guidance for field staff may also play a role in the number of referrals made . according to officials from two cpd field offices , many field offices do not understand the role of dec or the assistance it can provide , and officials from one field office told us that providing formal guidance would be helpful in this regard . our analysis found that half of the cpd field offices had not made a referral to dec during the previous two fiscal years and , according to pih officials , the number of pih referrals varied for reasons not related to noncompliance risks .