borders . as with programs to combat nuclear smuggling overseas , at dhs , the advanced spectroscopic portals / radiological portal monitors program had a acquisition , and deployment of these technologies to ports of entry . the securing the cities initiative , with a fiscal year 2007 budget of $8.47 million , is intended to enhance protection and response capabilities in a around the nation's highest risk urban areas . starting with new york city the department will work with state and local officials to develop urb an and regional deployment and operations strategies , identify appropriate detection equipment , establish the necessary support infrastructure , and develop incident management and response protocols . in addition , dhs budgeted $1.1 million for the west coast maritime radiation detection program , which is evaluating general radiation detection capabilities to be deployed aboard coast guard or other law enforcement vessels that participate in vessel - boarding activities . budget of $209 million to provide systems development , dod budgeted $1.6 million for domestic radiation detection programs with $1.1 million directed to its radiation program uses the best available detection technologies to prevent or mitigate the effects of radiation exposure on pentagon personnel and structures . the remaining funds were budgeted for the department's unconventional nuclear warfare defense , which installed radiologica nuclear sensors at camp lejeune . at doe , $846 million ( or 97 percent ) of the $871 million budgeted to combat nuclear smuggling went to s ecurity program , which is intended to protect doe's critical assets — nuclear weapons , nuclear weapons components , special nuclear mate classified information , and doe facilities from such threats as terrorist activity , theft , diversion , loss , or unauthorized access . the nuclear and radiological materials cross - cutting activities that simultaneously support multiple program dhs had nearly half of the $577 million budgeted for cr activities — about $271 million . by agency , key programs include the following: s. at dhs , the human portable radiation detection system had a budg $18.1 million to support the development of detection systems and the acquisition of advanced , hand - held radiation detectors . in addition , dhs budgeted about $11 million for the technical reachback program , which provides technical assistance to help personnel operating radiation detection equipment identify the source that triggered the alarm . finally , the joint analysis center had a budget of $1.75 million to collect and notify appropriate federal , state , and local agencies as early as possi ble of radiological and nuclear threats and coordinate technical support to federal , state , and local authorities . dod budgeted $94.5 million of the $137 million of its funds budgeted for cross - cutting programs to support it s weapons of mass destruction civil support teams . these 55 teams are deployed nationwide to support civil authorities during domestic chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and high - yield explosives incidents . in addition , the nuclear detection technologies division of dod's defense threat reduction agency was budgeted $28 million in fiscal year 2007 to develop technologies to detect , locate , and identify radiological and nuclear weapons and materials to support search and interdiction missions .