sffas no . 5 , accounting for liabilities of the federal government , effective beginning in fiscal year 1997 , defines a liability as a probable future outflow of resources due to a past government transaction or event . sffas no . 5 further states that recognition of a liability in the financial statements is required if it is both probable and measurable . sffas no . 6 , accounting for property , plant , and equipment , supplements the requirements of sffas no . 5 with regard to pp&e cleanup costs , most notably those associated with general pp&e ( eg , landfills ) . cleanup costs are defined as costs for removing , containing , and / or disposing of hazardous wastes or materials that , because of quantity , concentration , or physical or chemical characteristics , may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment . sffas no . 6 , effective beginning in fiscal year 1998 , requires that cleanup costs for general pp&e be allocated to operating periods in a “systematic and rational manner” based on use of the physical capacity of the associated pp&e ( eg , expected usable landfill area ) whenever possible . if physical capacity is not applicable or estimable , cleanup costs may be accrued over the useful life of the associated pp&e . regardless of allocation method , this accounting treatment should result in the accumulation of the total cleanup cost liability at the time when the pp&e ceases operation . the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) issues the fmr , which contains dod's financial management policies and procedures . dod fmr volume 4 , chapter 13 , accrued environmental and nonenvironmental disposal cost liabilities , prescribes the accounting policy for estimating and recognizing liabilities associated with the disposition of property , structures , equipment , munitions , and weapons . dod fmr volume 4 , chapter 14 , accrued environmental restoration ( cleanup ) liabilities , prescribes the accounting policy for estimating and recognizing liabilities associated with the containment , treatment , or removal of contamination . chapter 14 specifies that cost estimates reported by installations to dusd ( es ) for preparation of budgetary requests and the derp annual report to congress shall be used by dod components as the baseline for liability measurement for financial statement purposes . dod's financial statements should provide a comprehensive reporting of its environmental liabilities since , unlike the derp annual report to congress , the ultimate source of funding does not impact financial reporting requirements . dod reported approximately $63 billion in environmental liabilities in its fiscal year 2000 financial statements , which was comprised of cost estimates for: ( 1 ) cleanup of nontraining range sites — $23 billion , ( 2 ) chemical weapons disposal — $15 billion , ( 3 ) training range cleanup — $14 billion , and ( 4 ) disposal of nuclear - powered aircraft carriers / submarines — $11 billion . included in the $23 billion component were $18 billion for derp - funded cleanup , as well as $1.4 billion and $175 million disclosed separately by the army and air force , respectively , for non - derp cleanup on active installations .