lignite . north dakota and texas lignite , the fuel source for roughly 3 percent of boilers nationwide , have relatively high levels of elemental mercury — the most difficult form to capture . four long - term doe tests were conducted at coal units burning north dakota lignite using chemically treated sorbents . mercury emission reductions averaged 75 percent across the tests . the best result was achieved at a 450 megawatt boiler with a fabric filter and a dry scrubber — mercury reductions of 92 percent were achieved when chemically treated sorbents were used . in addition , two long - term tests were conducted at plants burning texas lignite with a 30 percent blend of subbituminous coal . oxidation catalysts . oxidation catalysts are powdered chemicals injected into either the boiler or the boiler's exhaust gas to help change elemental mercury into oxidized mercury — a form that is easier to capture in pollution control devices for sulfur dioxide and particulate matter . according to recent research , oxidation of elemental mercury , which is then collected in particulate matter control devices or absorbed across a wet scrubber system , has the potential to be a reliable and cost - effective mercury control strategy for some coal - fired power plants , especially those that must comply with sulfur dioxide emission requirements . according to doe , examples of oxidation catalysts tested at operating power plants include the following: urs corporation tested oxidation catalysts at a plant that fires a blend of texas lignite and subbituminous coals . tests completed in april 2005 showed that oxidation catalysts enabled the wet scrubber to achieve mercury reductions ranging from 76 percent to 87 percent , compared with only 36 percent reduction under baseline conditions . urs has also begun testing oxidation catalysts at a boiler firing low - sulfur eastern bituminous coal that is equipped with a cold - side electrostatic precipitator . according to doe , the project represents the next logical advancement of the catalytic oxidation technology , and it will answer technical questions such how much catalyst is required to achieve high mercury oxidation percentages , what is the catalyst life , and what is the efficiency of mercury capture in wet scrubber systems using oxidation catalysts . mercap™: developed by epri , mercap is a process in which metal plates laced with carbon sorbents are positioned in a boiler's exhaust gas stream to adsorb mercury . during two 6-month tests , mercap was used at a boiler equipped with a dry scrubber and a fabric filter and at another boiler equipped with a wet scrubber . after more than 250 days of continuous operation at one plant , mercury reduction averaged 30 percent to 35 percent across acid - treated mercap plates and 10 to 30 percent across the untreated plates . at the other plant , mercap achieved 15 percent mercury reduction when a water wash system for the plates was installed , which helped prevent limestone slurry from the wet scrubber system from inhibiting mercury reduction .