gao - 14-239 . washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2014 . courthouse in exchange for a property that was underutilized . hebspc representatives told us that the company was interested in acquiring the federal arsenal site to accommodate existing space needs and potential expansion of heb's corporate headquarters , near the site and expressed this interest to gsa . the representatives added that although the historic covenants on the property presented some potential challenges , the company had prior experience renovating and utilizing historic properties on heb's headquarters property . the representatives also told us that the company had a long - standing interest in acquiring the federal arsenal site prior to 2005 , but during that time , the property could not be sold because it was being partly used by gsa's fleet management . in 2005 , however , gsa told hebspc about the need for an additional parking for the hipolito garcia federal building and u.s . courthouse and , subsequently , proposed the swap - construct exchange to hebspc , which had experience building parking garages . an official from one of the tenant agencies in the federal building and courthouse told us that the increased availability of parking with the new garage ( 150 new spaces compared with 35 existing spaces ) was one of the reasons the agency decided to locate in the building . gsa officials told us that the availability of the new parking spaces is critical to further attracting tenants to the building , which is not fully occupied . hebspc representatives told us the company was pleased with the transaction and gsa's management of the transaction . however , they added that they would have preferred it to have been completed quicker than the 5-plus years between the proposal and exchange of properties , and noted that the time it took to complete the transaction may lead less motivated parties to avoid or withdraw from such exchanges . courthouse ( see fig . according to gsa , at the time of the exchange , the federal arsenal site was an underutilized asset because of historical covenants limiting the ability to redevelop the land and its buildings and because it was located on the periphery of the city away from other federal assets . although the property was partly utilized by gsa's fleet management and through a lease agreement with heb grocery company ( heb ) for parking spaces , gsa officials told us that there was no anticipated long - term government need for it . according to gsa officials , the swap - construct exchange was in the best interests of the federal government because the government received a new federal parking garage for the hipolito f. garcia federal building and u.s . according to gsa officials , the transaction took longer than anticipated because gsa did not have significant experience to use as a basis for completing the transaction and because of fluctuations in real estate values due to the economic recession that required additional property appraisals to be completed . after four property appraisals between 2007 and 2009 , gsa and hebspc ultimately valued the federal arsenal site at $5.6 million .