they are described in table 1 . the hipaa privacy and security rules define the circumstances under which personal health information may be disclosed by covered entities to other entities , such as providers , patients , health plans ( insurers ) , and public health authorities . the hipaa privacy rule places certain limitations on when and how covered entities may use and disclose personal health information . however , the privacy rule permits the use or disclosure of personal health information for treatment , payment , and other health care operations . to ensure that this information is reasonably protected from unauthorized access , the hipaa security rule specifies a series of administrative , technical , and physical security practices for providers and plans to implement to ensure the confidentiality of electronic health information . the hitech act includes a series of privacy and security provisions that expand certain provisions under hipaa . although final regulations for implementing these provisions remain under development , hitech requires certain entities that were not initially covered by hipaa , which may include health information exchanges , to meet the requirements defined in the hipaa privacy and security rules . the ways that hies are established and managed vary . some are established by state governments , while others are established by private organizations . they may be managed by public - private partnerships or other organizations that were created to promote collaboration among health care providers . efforts in the united states to establish organizations that facilitate the sharing of electronic health information among providers began in the early 1990's . these organizations , called community health information networks , evolved into regional health information organizations throughout the early to mid 2000s . since then , there has been a steady increase in the number of hies that are fully operational and actively facilitate the electronic sharing of patients' health information . in 2007 , the ehealth initiative reported that , in a nationwide survey , it had identified 32 operational hies . one year later , its survey identified 42 operational exchanges , representing a 31 percent increase . then , in 2009 , the survey identified 57 operational exchanges , a nearly 36 percent increase from 2008 . most of the nearly 150 exchanges that responded to the ehealth initiative's 2009 survey reported that they were not yet engaged in the electronic exchange of health information but were involved in activities such as defining a business plan , identifying participants' information requirements , and securing funding . others responded that they were in the process of defining and implementing technical , financial , and legal procedures . the 57 operational hies that responded to the survey reported that they support a variety of information - sharing services for their participating providers . the most common services included the delivery of laboratory and test results and clinical documentation , electronic health records , electronic prescribing , and alerts about critical conditions , such as adverse drug interactions . other services included data sharing for public health purposes , such as for tracking and managing childhood immunizations , and for reporting health care quality measures to participating providers .