iv. ) the agency noted that the apu program led to a dramatic increase in the number of hospitals that submitted data on the designated 10 quality measures , resulting in public reporting of quality data for about 3,600 hospitals on the agency's web site . in addition , cms described the steps it had taken to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the quality data submitted by hospitals for the apu program . the results are shared with hospitals . with respect to reducing the statistical uncertainty of its assessments of the accuracy of hospital quality data submissions , cms agreed that the quarterly accuracy assessments based on five patient charts can have considerable sampling error and stated that it would improve the stability of its accuracy assessments by using data from four calendar quarters when it assessed hospital eligibility for the fiscal year 2007 annual payment update . cms stated a concern with having sufficient time within the current data submission schedule to increase the number of patient records reabstracted . however , we recommended in the draft report that hospitals with statistically uncertain results in one or more previous quarters have an increased number of records reabstracted . the assessment of statistical uncertainty for a hospital and the reabstraction of additional records do not need to occur within the same quarter . we have modified slightly the wording of the recommendation to clarify the intended timing of these additional reabstractions . with respect to ensuring the completeness of quality data submitted by hospitals , cms agreed that it needs to improve its methods . cms noted that its comparison of hospital data quality submissions to the claims filed by those hospitals to be paid for treating medicare beneficiaries uncovered numerous discrepancies . the agency agreed with our recommendation to require hospitals to formally attest to the completeness of the quality data that they submit quarterly . in addition , cms stated that it would also require each hospital to report the total number of medicare and non - medicare patients who were eligible for quality assessment under the apu program . the process used for the fiscal year 2005 annual payment update compared hospital submissions to medicare claims data , but as cms has noted , this did not provide a comparable assessment of each hospital's data , even for medicare patients alone . moreover , in its comparison of hospital quality data submissions with medicare claims for the fiscal year 2006 update , cms identified more than 100 hospitals that had treated eligible patients in a given quarter but had not submitted data on a single case for that quarter to the clinical warehouse . yet cms has not asked hospitals to certify that the data they have submitted constitute all , or a representative sample , of the eligible patient population . the various methods used by other reporting systems to check the completeness of data illustrate the variety of approaches that are available . these include conducting on - site visits as part of their independent audit , comparing data submissions to data from another source maintained by the facility or external to it , and performing such checks annually or planned at specified intervals .