the circular no . a - 133 compliance supplement is issued annually to guide auditors on what program requirements should be tested for programs audited as part of the single audit . omb has stated that it will use its circular no . a - 133 compliance supplement to notify auditors of program requirements that should be tested for recovery act programs , and will issue interim updates as necessary . both the single audit act and omb circular no . a - 133 call for a “risk - based” approach to determine which programs will be audited for compliance with program requirements as part of a single audit . in general , the prescribed approach relies heavily on the amount of federal expenditures during a fiscal year and whether findings were reported in the previous period to determine whether detailed compliance testing is required for a given program that year . under the current approach for risk determination in accordance with circular no . a - 133 , certain risks unique to the recovery act programs may not receive full consideration . recovery act funding carries with it some unique challenges . the most significant of these challenges are associated with ( 1 ) new government programs , ( 2 ) the sudden increase in funds or programs that are new for the recipient entity , and ( 3 ) the expectation that some programs and projects will be delivered faster so as to inject funds into the economy . this makes timely and efficient evaluations in response to the recovery act's accountability requirements critical . specifically , new programs and recipients participating in a program for the first time may not have the management controls and accounting systems in place to help ensure that funds are distributed and used in accordance with program regulations and objectives ; recovery act funding that applies to programs already in operation may cause total funding to exceed the capacity of management controls and accounting systems that have been effective in past years ; the more extensive accountability and transparency requirements for recovery act funds will require the implementation of new controls and procedures ; and risk may be increased due to the pressures of spending funds quickly . in response to the risks associated with recovery act funding , the single audit process needs adjustment to put appropriate focus on recovery act programs and to provide the necessary level of accountability over these funds in a timely manner . the single audit process could be adjusted to require the auditor to perform procedures such as the following as part of the routine single audit: provide for review of the design and implementation of internal control over compliance and financial reporting for programs under the recovery act ; consider risks related to recovery act - related programs in determining which federal programs are major programs ; and specifically , test recovery act programs to determine whether the auditee complied with laws and regulations . the first two items above should preferably be accomplished during 2009 before significant expenditures of funds in 2010 so that the design of internal control can be strengthened prior to the majority of those expenditures . we further believe that omb circular no .