data were not available . state that did not respond to this survey . iowa only provided caseload data for centers . does the state conduct renewal visits ? most state licensing offices reported increases in budgets and the number of full - time equivalent ( fte ) staff since1999 , although an increase in one did not necessarily reflect an increase in the other . does the state conduct renewal visits ? not inspected on a regular basis at least twice a year at least twice a year at least twice a year at least twice a year less often than once every 2 years at least twice a year at least twice a year at least twice a year at least twice a year family day care is provided by an individual provider in a private residence other than the child's home . group homes provide care by two or more providers in a private residence other than the child's home . centers are nonresidential facilities that provide care for children and include full - and part - time group programs , such as nursery and preschool programs . maine did not respond to our survey . in addition to the person named above , margaret armen , amy buck , patricia bundy , kara kramer , jerry sandau , and jay smale also made major contributions to this report . child care: recent state policy changes affecting the availability of assistance for low - income families . gao - 03-588 , may 5 , 2003 . child care: states exercise flexibility in setting reimbursement rates and providing access for low - income children . gao - 02-894 , september 18 , 2002 . child care: states have undertaken a variety of quality improvement initiatives , but more evaluations of effectiveness are needed . gao - 02-897 , september 6 , 2002 . child care: states increased spending on low - income families . gao - 01-293 , february 2 , 2001 . child care: state requirements for background checks . gao / hehs - 00-66r , february 28 , 2000 . child care: state efforts to enforce safety and health requirements . gao / hehs - 00-28 , january 24 , 2000 . child care: how do military and civilian center costs compare ? gao / hehs - 00-7 , october 14 , 1999 . welfare reform: states' efforts to expand child care programs . gao / hehs - 98-27 , january 13 , 1998 . some states could not provide us with fte or budget information for particular years . cannot express as a percentage change because 1999 was zero . maine did not respond to the survey . does the state conduct renewal visits ? does the state conduct renewal visits ? does the state conduct renewal visits ? does the state conduct renewal visits ? see figure 4 . forty - five states reported using technology to assist them with many aspects of licensing and enforcement activities . states used technology for tracking and monitoring subsidy use , inspecting facilities , making and reconciling payments to providers , linking state and local agencies , maintaining statistics on providers , maintaining statistics on families , and preparing reports to meet federal and state mandates .