value modifier program . ppaca directed hhs to establish a value modifier to adjust medicare payments to some physicians in 2015 and to all physicians in 2017 on the basis of the quality and cost of care provided . to develop the value modifier , cms plans to use performance information on quality and cost metrics derived from medicare claims and data submitted under pqrs . because the value modifier program must be budget neutral , upward adjustments will depend on the total sum of negative adjustments in a given year . shared savings program . cms has finalized rules under which physicians , hospitals , and other health care providers may work together to better coordinate care for medicare beneficiaries through an aco . while individual physicians continue to be paid under the medicare fee schedule , the agency plans to develop a benchmark for each aco against which its performance is measured to assess whether it qualifies to receive shared savings or in some cases be held accountable for losses . comprehensive primary care initiative and multi - payer advanced primary care practice . this internet tool serves as a directory for beneficiaries , allowing them to search for a physician by specialty , location , hospital affiliation , and other factors . the profile pages also indicate if a physician satisfactorily participated in the pqrs . ppaca requires that cms make quality and patient experience measures publicly available on the website by january 1 , 2013 . publishing comparable performance results can encourage physicians to improve their performance in order to attract more beneficiaries . these legislated changes , along with market forces , have potential implications for the way many physicians practice . for example , emerging delivery models such as acos may lead physicians to join larger groups , more closely align with hospitals , and take on financial risk for managing patient care . although many physicians who serve medicare beneficiaries work in small practices , more are increasingly employed by hospitals and health care systems . as of 2008 , nearly one - third of u.s. physicians worked in solo or 2-physician practices , 15 percent worked in groups of 3 to 5 physicians , 19 percent worked in practices of 6 to 50 physicians , and 13 percent practiced in hospital settings . however , a 2011 study found that physicians are increasingly selling their practices or seeking employment directly with healthcare systems , and hospitals are aggressively acquiring physician practices to remain competitive . we identified several common themes among private entities with physician payment initiatives in our study . these included the importance of focusing on physician groups rather than individual physicians , the desire for a standardized performance measurement set , the use of absolute performance and improvement targets , the timely distribution of incentive payments , an emphasis on care coordination to improve quality and efficiency , and the use of other strategies to improve quality and efficiency . cms developed physician compare to make information on quality of care widely available so that beneficiaries can make informed decisions in their choice of physician , and to encourage physicians to improve their quality of care .