this was very important to them . it was much more helpful when the briefers provided the context and alerted them to any changes in the text or any areas of concern developing in the negotiations . several other committee staff , who were dissatisfied with the consultations , expressed a much more negative view about briefers' willingness to share information . these agreements to the united states ? ( 3 ) what is the nature of the consultation process for congress and how well has it worked in practice ? ( 4 ) what is the nature of the consultation process for private sector trade advisory committees and other stakeholders , and how well has it worked in practice ? as agreed , we will provide a second report in spring 2008 that will provide more information and analysis on the economic and commercial significance of ftas , as well as a review of progress made by fta partner countries in strengthening labor and environmental laws and enforcement . to answer these questions , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials responsible for international trade policy and negotiations at the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) ; the departments of agriculture , commerce , labor , state , and the treasury ; and the environmental protection agency , as well as officials of the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) . in addition , to determine what ftas have been pursued under tpa and why , we reviewed ustr documents and interagency memoranda discussing fta partner selection and updated our findings from prior gao work on fta partner selection . to determine the potential economic and commercial significance of these ftas , we analyzed official u.s. trade and investment data , as well as studies and analyses from ustr , commerce , itc , and trade experts . to determine the nature of the congressional consultation process and how well it has worked in practice , we reviewed consultation provisions from the trade act of 1974 up through the trade act of 2002 , analyzed ustr's congressional consultation logs , and interviewed current and former staff of ustr and the congressional committees that had participated in these consultation meetings . in our congressional interviews , we interviewed house and senate committees , including majority and minority staffs , of the trade , agriculture , and other committees of jurisdiction . to determine the nature of the consultation process for the trade advisory committees and how well it worked in practice , we reviewed relevant provisions in the trade act of 1974 , the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) , and tpa ; analyzed meeting records , charter information , and committee rosters ; and interviewed 16 of the relevant 27 trade advisory committee chairs , judgmentally selected from the policy and technical levels of the system , as well as select committee members referred to us by the chairs , and the agency officials responsible for overseeing these committees . we also updated findings from prior gao work on the trade advisory committees . we conducted our work from january 2007 through august 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .