that work is ongoing . we believe this recommendation has been implemented . since 2012 , financial literacy staff from cfpb and treasury have continued to hold regular meetings to discuss respective roles , and with the emergence of cfpb , treasury reorganized the structure of its own financial education efforts , incorporating them into the broader office of consumer policy . similarly , as of march 2013 , cfpb's office of servicemember affairs was meeting monthly with staff responsible for financial literacy at the department of defense , and the agencies developed two joint statements of principles to help delineate their roles and responsibilities . furthermore , cfpb's office of financial protection for older americans finalized a memorandum of understanding with the federal trade commission in january 2012 to help cooperation on consumer education efforts and promote consistent messages . cfpb's office of students developed a memorandum of understanding with the department of education designed , in part , to clarify respective areas of focus in providing education on student loans and financial aid . we suggested in 2011 that the commission and cfpb take steps to develop and disseminate a standard set of evaluation tools or benchmarks to help assess the outcomes and effectiveness of financial literacy programs.2012 , cfpb signed a contract with the corporation for enterprise development to develop a set of metrics and outcome measures for assessing the success of financial literacy programs . cfpb also contracted with the urban institute to evaluate financial education programs and increase understanding of which interventions can improve financial decision - making skills in consumers . an interim report was published in january 2014 and the final report is this suggestion has been addressed . in september expected around april 2015 , according to cfpb representatives.addition , the commission's 2012 study on research priorities sought ways of making the best use of limited dollars to address the most important questions facing the field of financial literacy . we continue to believe that further progress is needed in one area — helping to ensure that the most effective and efficient allocation of federal financial literacy resources occurs and avoids unneeded overlap . the commission's national strategy could serve as one mechanism for determining how federal resources might best be allocated among programs and agencies , but it does not yet do so . the commission issued its first national strategy in 2006 . we reported that it was a useful first step , but largely descriptive rather than strategic , and only partially included certain key characteristics such as a description of resources required to implement the strategy . in december 2010 , the commission issued its second and most recent national strategy . while it discussed the consumer education resources the federal government makes available to consumers , it still did not address the level and type of resources needed to implement the strategy , or review the budgetary resources available for financial literacy efforts and how they might best be allocated . in july 2012 , we recommended that the commission revise its national strategy to incorporate clear recommendations on the allocation of federal financial literacy resources across programs and treasury and cfpb agreed with this recommendation as agencies.well , but have not yet implemented it .