doing nothing is not an option . is the program achieving its goals ? does the program duplicate or even work at cross purposes with related programs and tools ? is the program targeted properly ? is the program financially sustainable and are there opportunities for instituting appropriate cost - sharing and recovery mechanisms ? can the program be made more efficient through reengineering or streamlining processes or restructuring organizational roles and responsibilities ? fifth , creating the results - oriented cultures needed to make gpra a useful management tool depends on committed , top - level leadership and sustained attention to management issues . a chief operating officer ( coo ) could provide the sustained management attention essential for addressing key infrastructure and stewardship issues and could facilitate the transformation process . establishing a coo position in selected federal agencies could provide a number of benefits . a coo would be the focal point for elevating attention on management issues and transformational change , integrating various key management and transformation efforts , and instituting accountability for addressing management issues and leading transformational change . a coo would provide a single organizational position for key management functions , such as human capital , financial management , information technology , acquisition management , and performance management as well as for transformational change initiatives . to be successful , in many cases , a coo will need to be among an agency's top leadership ( eg , deputy secretary or under secretary ) . a term appointment would provide sustained leadership . no matter how the positions are structured , it is critical that the people appointed to these positions have proven track records in similar positions and be vested with sufficient authority to achieve results . to further clarify expectations and responsibilities , the coo should be subject to a clearly defined , results - oriented performance contract with appropriate incentives , rewards , and accountability mechanisms . for selected agencies , a coo should be subject to a senate confirmation . in creating such a position , the congress might consider making certain subordinate positions , such as the chief financial officer , not subject to senate confirmation . in view of the broad trends and long - term fiscal challenges facing the nation , there is a need to consider how the congress , omb , and executive agencies can make better use of gpra's planning and accountability framework to maximize the performance of not only individual programs and agencies but also the federal government as whole in addressing these challenges . the congress can play a vital role in increasing the demand for such performance information by monitoring agencies' performance results , asking critical questions about goals not achieved , and considering whether adjustments are needed to maximize performance in the future . the large and growing fiscal gap means that tough , difficult choices will have to be made . the congress and the administration will need to use every tool at their disposal to address these challenges . in addressing these challenges , it will be important to set clear goals , involve all key players , and establish viable processes that will lead to positive results .