ii ) . a key reason for the difference between the 2003 total project cost estimate and the revised 2005 estimate to install in - line baggage screening systems at lax and ont was that the 2003 estimate was developed at an early stage in the design process and was therefore based on preliminary data and assumptions that were subject to change . consequently , the estimate did not adequately foresee some of the costs of retrofitting new systems into existing buildings or allow for sufficient space for the eds machines , baggage inspection rooms , and conveyor belts . lawa officials stated that they were under a tight timeframe to apply for the loi because tsa had told them that federal funding was limited and that 17 other airports were competing for the funding . the 2003 total project cost estimate used concepts and construction estimates developed in about 12 weeks by boeing , tsa's contractor . lawa relied on designs and estimates developed by boeing and its subcontractors to determine the total project cost estimate because the company had expertise in integrating eds equipment into airports . according to tsa and lawa officials , both tsa and los angeles signed the loi / moa knowing the preliminary nature of the cost estimate . according to construction industry guidance , an estimate's accuracy depends on the quality of information known about the project at the time the estimate is prepared . the 2003 estimate was made at the “concept development” stage where the final project cost can be expected to range from 50 percent under to 100 percent over the estimated cost , according to this guidance . the 2005 revised estimate was made at the “design development” stage where the range of the final project cost estimate can be expected to be more accurate — from 20 percent under to 30 percent over the estimated cost . in december 2003 , lawa presented tsa with a summary of inadequacies it had found in the original boeing concept and the associated potential cost and scheduling impacts . lawa then began an engineering study to update the in - line system concepts at lax and ont , the results of which it presented to tsa in september 2004 . tsa reviewed these updated concepts and determined that they would meet its performance requirements ; however , tsa's review did not address cost issues . lawa used these updated concepts to develop its 2005 estimate , which was based on more definitive information about terminal design requirements than the 2003 estimate . according to lawa , new construction and excavation included in the 2005 designs increased the estimated costs . among the design changes , lawa determined that the placement of eds machines in the 2003 concepts was infeasible in five of nine of the lax terminals and both ont terminals . in addition , the 2005 estimate included 20 additional baggage inspection rooms , 9 rooms for on - screen resolution of eds alarms , and 10 computer rooms at lax and ont terminals . the 2005 estimate also included over $11 million in computer networking costs and costs associated with on - screen resolution of eds alarms , which the 2003 estimate did not foresee .