the department agreed with our recommendation . subsequent to the issuance of our march 2011 report,reconsidered and made certain changes to the ngen acquisition approach . specifically , in april 2012 , the office of the secretary of defense approved ngen acquisition approach changes that were intended to support program executability and reduce program risk for usn . like the original approach , the revised approach emphasized segmentation of the network , with the same five segments that had been defined in the previous acquisition approach: the two primary segments are enterprise services and transport services and the remaining three segments are end user hardware ; enterprise software licenses ; and verification , validation , and reporting ( see table 3 for details on these segments ) . further , each segment is expected to be delivered by either a contractor or government provider , with multiple competitive awards . however , don made changes to how certain ngen segments are to be acquired and transitioned . for example , it plans to solicit transport and enterprise services using a single request for proposals and has said it may award a combined contract for both segments ; in addition , it plans to transition both segments to the new provider ( s ) simultaneously instead of staggering their implementation . according to don officials , these changes were made primarily because the transport and enterprise services segments were integrally related under nmci , so acquiring them simultaneously would potentially reduce labor costs and administrative burden , and reduce risk . another change is that usn is expected to acquire end user hardware as a service from the enterprise services contractor rather than purchase the equipment and provide it as government - furnished property to the contractor . according to program officials , this change was made to mitigate a critical ngen risk that the program may not be fully funded if end user hardware must be purchased in fiscal year 2014 and , in the long term , procuring the end user hardware as a service is not more expensive than government - purchased equipment . as an additional change to the acquisition approach , usn is no longer expected to award a contract for the verification , validation , and reporting segment because it now has an internal entity — the tenth fleet cyber command — that is to perform this function . table 3 summarizes the previous and current plans for acquiring ngen . according to cost estimating and acquisition guidance , cost effectiveness is shown by a comparative analysis of all life - cycle costs and quantifiable and nonquantifiable benefits among the competing alternatives . such an analysis should be used to examine viable alternatives to inform acquisition decision making on the most promising solution , without assuming a specific means of achieving the desired result . specifically , as of december 2011 , don had completed early transition activities , such as developing it service management strategies , processes , procedures , and tools to serve as the overarching governance framework for delivering ngen capabilities ; analyzing and validating the current nmci infrastructure inventory ; and conducting job task analyses and assessing learning tools for contractor technical representatives .