no other medical follow - up is required . in addition , taser international and three of the seven law enforcement agencies — the austin , texas , police department ; the phoenix , arizona , police department ; and the san jose , california , police department — provided some technical comments that we incorporated into this report where appropriate . the remaining agency — the san jose police department — does not provide its officers with the discretion to remove taser barbs . the san jose police department calls for officers to transport subjects hit with taser barbs to a hospital so that medical personnel can remove the barbs . also , san jose officers do not routinely call emts to the scene of taser use . they do so only if other life threatening needs or medical treatment is needed . if such treatment is not needed , the officer transports the suspect to a hospital for medical clearance prior to being booked in the county jail . in reviewing various laws , including statutes , regulations , and ordinances , we found that tasers were addressed in some federal , state , and local jurisdictions . we also found that these jurisdictions had different requirements for regulating tasers . in some instances , the extent to which tasers are regulated in these jurisdictions may depend on whether the taser is classified as a firearm . for example , at the federal level , atf has not classified taser as a firearm , which exempts taser from federal firearms requirements . however , we identified other federal agencies , such as the army , that have established taser - related regulations for the possession , use , and sale of tasers . in addition , tsa has identified the taser as a prohibited weapon that cannot be brought past airport security checkpoints by unauthorized personnel . tsa also has authority to approve the use of tasers by flight crews on commercial aircraft . as a result , tasers can be manufactured and distributed domestically without federal restriction . however , we identified some federal agencies that have established regulations that specifically prohibit the sale , possession , and transfer of tasers . for example , army regulations prohibit the sale , possession , carrying , or transportation of tasers on or within specific installations in georgia , including fort gordon and fort stewart , which also includes the hunter army airfield . in addition , tsa has a regulation that prohibits unauthorized individuals from carrying weapons , explosives , and incendiaries beyond airport security checkpoints . to help provide guidance in implementing its regulation , tsa has developed a chart outlining specific items that are prohibited in carry - on baggage and has identified tasers as a prohibited weapon .