iv ) . occ made a similar comment in its technical comments on the draft report . while the methodologies used in our report included a nationally representative survey of banks , econometric modeling of potential drivers of branch closures , and discussions with bank representatives , do not on their own allow us to make a definitive causal linkage between regulation and derisking , the collective evidence we gathered indicates that banks' bsa / aml regulatory concerns have played a role in their decisions to terminate and limit accounts and close branches . we believe that , based on this evidence , further examination by the federal banking regulators and fincen into how banks' perceived regulatory concerns are affecting their offering of services is warranted . we also included the entire population of 115 southwest border banks as a separate certainty stratum . we reviewed the initial population list of banks in order to identify nontraditional banks not eligible for this survey . we treated nontraditional banks as out - of - scope . we also reviewed the initial population list to determine whether subsidiaries of the same holding company should be included separately in the sample . in addition , during the administration of our survey , we identified six banks that had been bought and acquired by another bank , as well as one additional bank that was nontraditional and , therefore , not eligible for this survey . we treated these sample cases as out - of - scope ; this adjusted our population of banks to 5,805 and reduced our sample size to 406 . we obtained a weighted survey response rate of 46.5 percent . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( for example , plus or minus 7 percentage points ) . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn . confidence intervals are provided along with each sample estimate in the report . all survey results presented in the body of this report are generalizable to the estimated population of 5,805 in - scope depository institutions , except where otherwise noted . the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in interpreting a particular question or sources of information available to respondents can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in developing the questionnaire , collecting the data , and analyzing the results to minimize such nonsampling error . to inform our methodology approach and our survey development , we conducted interviews with representatives from seven selected southwest border banks . from these interviews , we gathered information on the type and amount of data banks keep on account terminations for reasons related to bsa / aml risk . the selection process used to identify these banks is described above . we conducted pretests of the survey with four banks .