( see fig . 1 for the limits of liability by vessel type. ) for example , if a vessel's limit of liability is $10 million and a spill resulted in $12 million in costs , the responsible party only has to pay up to $10 million — the fund will pay for the remaining $2 million . the coast guard is responsible for adjusting limits for significant increases in inflation and for making recommendations to congress on whether other adjustments are necessary to help protect the fund . opa also requires that vessel owners and operators must demonstrate their ability to pay for oil spill response up to their limit of liability . specifically , by regulation , with few exceptions , owners and operators of vessels over 300 gross tons and any vessels that transship or transfer oil in the exclusive economic zone are required to have a certificate of financial responsibility that demonstrates their ability to pay for oil spill response up to their limit of liability . opa consolidated the liability and compensation provisions of four prior federal oil pollution initiatives and their respective trust funds into the oil spill liability trust fund and authorized the collection of revenue and the use of the money , with certain limitations , with regard to expenditures . the fund's balance has generally declined from 1995 through 2006 , and since fiscal year 2003 , its balance has been less than the authorized limit on federal expenditures for the response to a single spill , which is currently set at $1 billion ( see fig . the balance has declined , in part , because the fund's main source of revenue — a $0.05 per barrel tax on u.s. produced and imported oil — was not collected for most of the time between 1993 and 2006 . as a result , the fund balance was $604.4 million at the end of fiscal year 2006 . the energy policy act of 2005 reinstated the barrel tax beginning in april 2006 . with the barrel tax once again in place , npfc anticipates that the fund will be able to cover potential noncatastrophic liabilities . opa also defines the costs for which responsible parties are liable and for which the fund is made available for compensation in the event that the responsible party does not pay or is not identified . these costs , or “opa compensable” costs , are of two main types: removal costs: removal costs are incurred by the federal government or any other entity taking approved action to respond to , contain , and clean up the spill . for example , removal costs include the equipment used in the response — skimmers to pull oil from the water , booms to contain the oil , planes for aerial observation — as well as salaries and travel and lodging costs for responders . damages caused by the oil spill: opa - compensable damages cover a wide range of both actual and potential adverse impacts from an oil spill , for which a claim may be made to either the responsible party or the fund .