capacity building for other social innovators . provide a dedicated physical space in the heart of the cambridge , ma tech sector that can accelerate the speed of product development , increase collaboration , and attract new talent . office space for moving new and emerging technologies through the development pipeline . meet - up space for local tech community . recruitment tool for top tech talent . to build a strong and permanent research and development presence in cambridge , ma where microsoft researchers and programmers can build relationships with local universities , biotech , and healthcare companies . teaching space for harvard students . meet - up space for local community . nonprofit to tackle tough social issues , such as family breakdown and social inequality , by building australia's social innovation capability . laboratory for co - designing new social programs for vulnerable populations — this includes generating ideas , conducting ethnographic research , and prototyping potential solutions . number of participants per meeting ( ranges ) . phase i lasted from march through june 2012 . during these first 4 months after the lab was built , opm made the space available to the opm workforce for meetings and events . opm leadership also used this time to investigate an appropriate problem - solving approach to pair with the lab that would be consistent with approaches used by other labs ; they determined that a human - centered design approach and curriculum would complement opm employees' technical expertise and analytic competencies . opm also began to recruit interested staff from the employee services division to be trained in human - centered design fundamentals: this staff would then support project sessions in the lab as part of their collateral duties . phase ii lasted from july 2012 through march 2013 and consisted mostly of facilitated sessions with opm project teams . during these sessions , employee services staff worked with project teams to generate ideas to long - standing problems through exercises such as project or strategic planning , brainstorming sessions , or stakeholder mapping aimed at discussing and testing potential solutions . topics discussed during these sessions involved a variety of initiatives directed at improving opm processes and addressing government - wide human resources challenges . opm officials noted that innovation lab projects have included , among others , designing an implementation plan with other federal agencies to collect valid , accurate , and timely data on the federal cyber security workforce ; updating the government - wide strategy for veterans recruitment ; attracting and retaining individuals with talent in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics disciplines ; and specific challenges unique to individual agencies . phase iii lasted from april through november 2013 . in phase iii , opm continued to provide facilitated design sessions and in some cases , follow - on coaching to program offices from within opm and opm - led projects . for example , a facilitated design session included lab staff working with the food and drug administration's ( fda ) battery working group to more effectively engage with the group's external stakeholders . according to an opm case study about the lab , eight fda employees attended the fundamentals of human - centered design course .