other organizations . partnerships with community organizations and housing commissions helped states address transportation and housing needs through referrals and coordinated services . for example , local workforce officials in washington told us they work with partners through subcontracts or memoranda of understanding to help job seekers with childcare and housing so they can attain and retain employment . also , officials in new hampshire told us that one state partner works with sober living houses , which are group homes in which people in recovery can live during and after treatment . several state workforce officials we interviewed noted that a key benefit to the wioa targeted - assistance grants was forging partnerships which will have lasting impacts on how they conduct services in the workforce system . for example , officials in new hampshire noted that the state plans to continue to leverage relationships with their partners after the grant expires . also , officials in ohio said these partnerships put new processes in place , including referral systems that will facilitate getting people in recovery into the workforce system over the long term . states not receiving targeted grants . workforce officials in alabama and arizona , the states we selected that did not receive targeted dol grants but are still experiencing high levels of opioid misuse in their communities , stated that they were engaged in some newly formed partnerships to address the workforce aspects of sud . alabama workforce officials said they recently began participating in a statewide opioid task force , including serving on the workforce subcommittee with other state departments , such as the state department of commerce . arizona officials said that the state workforce agency partners with the state department of corrections and has implemented second chance centers , which offer services such as job training and onsite job fairs , within three prisons . they noted that in one of these prisons , the majority of women are incarcerated for drug - related offenses . officials in the four selected states that received targeted dol grants said they used this funding to assist those in recovery from sud to obtain employment . while many of the services are also offered to other job seekers , officials said grant - funded efforts involved intensive work with sud - recovering individuals , who may have inconsistent work histories or long periods of unemployment . new hampshire state workforce officials reported providing individuals in recovery with services , including job training , direct placement in a job , or on - the - job training . as of january 2020 , officials said the state had enrolled 177 individuals into its program , including some who are participating in on - the - job training ( employment that is partially subsidized by grant funds ) . similarly , officials at a local workforce agency in washington told us that the agency aims to place 125 people affected by sud into transitional jobs as part of its grant - funded activities . these subsidized jobs allow individuals to add experience to their resumes , as well as gain an employment reference .