madam chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . we have not evaluated the reasonableness of the payment rate established in the final rule . lacking detail on the components of asp , cms is not well - positioned to confirm asp's accuracy . in addition , cms has no procedures to validate the data it obtains from manufacturers by an independent source . in our 2006 report on lessons learned from our hospital survey , we noted several options available to cms to confirm the appropriateness of its rates as approximating health care providers' drug acquisition costs . specifically , we noted that cms could , on an occasional basis , conduct a survey of providers , similar to ours but streamlined in design ; audit manufacturers' price submissions ; or examine proprietary data the agency considers reliable for validation purposes . hhs agreed to consider our recommendation , stating that it would continue to analyze the best approach for setting payment rates for drugs . because asp is based on actual transaction data , is relatively timely , and is administratively efficient for cms and health care providers , we affirm the practicality of the asp - based method for setting part b drug payment rates . however , we remain concerned that cms does not have sufficient information about asp to ensure the accuracy and appropriateness of the rates . it allows the patient to inhale medicine in the form of a mist . is , an average , calculated from price and volume data reported by drug manufacturers , of sales to all u.s. purchasers . the law directed that asps be net of rebates and other price concessions and that 2005 payments to physicians for these drugs be set at 106 percent of asp . the mma took a different approach to setting rates for a subset of medicare part b drugs delivered in the hopd setting . prior to the mma , medicare paid hopds for part b drugs based on hospitals' 1996 median costs for these drugs . in response to concerns that payments would not reflect the cost of newly introduced pharmaceutical products — such as those used to treat cancer or rare blood disorders — 1999 legislation authorized augmented payments for these drugs on a temporary basis . subsequently , the mma defined a new payment category for these drugs called specified covered outpatient drugs ( scod ) . the mma required the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to set rates for this subset of part b drugs . specifically , it directed cms to set 2006 payment rates for scod products equal to hospitals' average acquisition costs — the cost to hospitals of acquiring a product , net of rebates . subsequently , cms selected asp as the basis to pay for scods provided at hopds . in several related requirements , the mma directed us to provide information on scod costs and cms's proposed rates .