the delays now range from 14 to 86 months . for instance , the delays in orlando have extended from 39 months to 57 months . table 1 presents updated information on cost increases and schedule delays for these four projects compared with original estimates . we found in april 2013 that of the four largest medical - facility construction projects va had underway , denver had the highest cost increase . we reported that the estimated cost increased from $328 million in june 2004 to $800 million , as of november 2012 . further , va's initial estimated completion date was february 2014 ; subsequently va estimated the project would be completed in may 2015 . however , in april 2014 , va's primary contractor on the project had expressed concerns that the project would ultimately cost more to complete . in a january 2015 update , va stated that the final project cost and schedule will be determined pursuant to execution of interim cost plus fixed fee contract and issuance of a long term contract by the u.s. army corps of engineers . in commenting on a draft of our april 2013 report , va stated that using the initial completion date from the construction contract would be more accurate than using the initial completion date provided to congress ; however , using the initial completion date from the construction contract would not account for how va managed these projects before it awarded the construction contract . cost estimates at this earlier stage should be as accurate and credible as possible because congress uses these initial estimates to consider authorizations and make appropriations decisions . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in our april 2013 report , we found that costs increased and schedules were delayed for all four of va's largest medical - facility construction projects , when comparing november 2012 construction project data with the cost and schedule estimates first submitted to congress . since our 2013 report , these projects have experienced further increases and delays . when we compared the most recent construction project data,of december 2014 , with the cost and schedule estimates first submitted as to congress , cost increases ranged from 66 percent to 144 percent,representing a total cost increase of over $1.5 billion and an average increase of approximately $376 million per project . for example , the cost for the new orleans project increased by nearly $40 million . schedule delays have also increased since our april 2013 report . specifically , in april 2013 we reported that the schedule delays ranged from 14 to 74 months with an average delay of 35 months per project . we used a similar methodology to estimate changes to cost and schedule of construction projects in a previous report issued in 2009 on va construction projects . we believe that the methodology we used in our april 2013 and december 2009 report on va construction provides an accurate depiction of how cost and schedules for construction projects can change from the time they are first submitted to congress .