other such state groupings exist . for example , state dots along interstate 10 have organized an i - 10 partnership to conduct research on managing freight movement along the corridor running from california to florida . the i - 10 partnership group developed a transportation planning study based on vehicle volume , traffic flow , and alternative scenario testing for freight movement . rather than focusing on one particular mode , the study included highways , railroads , and barges in its analysis of freight traffic , and explicitly attempted to be mode neutral . while the partnership study projected the effects of different possible infrastructure improvements along the corridor , individual states are ultimately responsible for deciding whether to implement the study's findings . in contrast to these multistate groupings , planning for intrastate projects fits more easily into the framework of state planning . for example , in the case of passenger rail corridor development in california , intrastate passenger rail is funded primarily by the state dot and the localities and operated by state and local joint powers authorities . in some cases , amtrak serves as the operator for these state - supported routes . ( see app . i for more information about our scope and methodology. ) the nation's federal surface transportation investment policy has become increasingly complex , changing from a narrow focus on completing the nation's interstate highway system to a broader emphasis on maintaining and more efficiently operating our highways , supporting mass transit , protecting the environment , and encouraging innovative technologies . istea and tea - 21 both articulated a goal of moving from a traditional focus on single transportation modes to a more efficient , integrated system that draws upon each mode to enhance passenger and freight mobility . these key pieces of legislation also provided mpos and states discretion in selecting projects to address local needs and conditions . in exchange , mpos and states are expected to follow federal planning and program requirements to reflect the national public interest in their decisions . the approach for investment planning and decision - making that emerged from istea and tea - 21 provides guidance on a systematic process for making transportation investment choices and a host of factors to consider , while generally allowing mpos and states considerable discretion in choosing the analytical methods and tools that will be used to evaluate and select projects . our work has shown that while much analysis is done by states and mpos , the results of those analyses do not appear to play a decisive role in many investment decisions , except to rule out the most problematic projects . instead , other factors play a major role in shaping investment choices , including the federal government's funding structure that provides incentives for investing in highway or transit projects rather than railroad infrastructure or intermodal projects , public or political support for certain projects , and the practical realities of simply preserving the existing infrastructure . in addition , the data and other limitations associated with using analytical tools , such as benefit - cost analysis , may discourage their use by decision - makers .