i would be pleased to answer questions . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact j. christopher mihm , managing director , strategic issues at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or gary engel , director , financial management and assurance at ( 202 ) 512-3406 . in addition to the contact names above , key contributions to this testimony were made by nabajyoti barkakati , kathleen m. drennan , joah iannotta , thomas j. mccabe , timothy persons , james sweetman , jr. , and staff on our consolidated financial statement audit team . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . treasury has taken or plans to take actions to address these recommendations . treasury , in coordination with omb , implemented corrective actions during fiscal year 2013 to address certain internal control deficiencies detailed in our previously issued reports regarding the process for preparing the consolidated financial statements . these include further developing and beginning to implement a methodology to reconcile certain outlays and receipts between treasury's records and underlying federal entity financial information and records . nevertheless , the federal government continued to have inadequate systems , controls , and procedures to ensure that the consolidated financial statements are consistent with the underlying audited entity financial statements , properly balanced , and in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ( u.s. gaap ) . for example , treasury was unable to properly balance the accrual - based consolidated financial statements . to make the fiscal years 2013 and 2012 consolidated financial statements balance , treasury recorded a net decrease of $9.0 billion and a net increase of $20.2 billion , respectively , to net operating cost on the statements of operations and changes in net position , which were identified as “unmatched transactions and balances.” treasury recorded an additional net $5.9 billion and $1.8 billion of unmatched transactions in the statement of net cost for fiscal years 2013 and 2012 , respectively . over the years , we have made numerous recommendations to treasury to address these issues . most recently , in june 2014 , we recommended that treasury , working in coordination with omb , include all key elements for preparing well - defined corrective action plans from the chief financial officers council's implementation guide for omb circular a - 123 , management's responsibility for internal control – appendix a , internal control over financial reporting , in treasury's and omb's corrective action plans . treasury has taken or plans to take actions to address these recommendations . the 2013 financial report includes comprehensive long - term fiscal projections for the u.s. government that , consistent with our recent simulations , show that while the near - term outlook has improved — absent policy changes — the federal government continues to face an unsustainable long - term fiscal path . our most recent report on this subject reinforces these earlier findings .