dot . if performance standards not met , actions must be taken to comply . performance and monitoring requirement no certification required by u.s . dot as no specific performance standards must be met . however , participants are required to report on “value pricing” elements up to 10 years . pub . 109-59 , § 1604 ( b ) ( 7 ) ( a ) . construction and construction has not begun on the fifth , no performance reporting for completed eld projects currently exists . dot also requires project sponsors that receive vppp funds to monitor and evaluate the performance of their projects so that the agency can report results biannually to congress as required by statute . project sponsors report five categories of effects — ( 1 ) driver behavior , traffic volumes , and travel speeds ; ( 2 ) transit ridership ; ( 3 ) air quality ; ( 4 ) equity for low - income individuals ; and ( 5 ) availability of funds for transportation programs . as with the eld program , projects that receive vppp grants are not required to meet specific performance standards . under the upa and crd programs , dot has provided funds to the battelle memorial institute to conduct an independent national evaluation of the effectiveness of the program's four congestion reduction strategies — tolling , transit , technology , and telecommuting . projects will be assessed individually and results compared across all projects in the six metropolitan areas according to specific metrics . these metrics include reductions in congestion delay and duration ; increases in the number of cars and people in cars ( i.e. , vehicle and passenger throughput ) , and shifts to travel during off - peak times , among other factors . see appendix iv for list of performance and monitoring requirements for federal programs for congestion pricing projects . evaluations of 14 congestion pricing projects in the united states have generally shown reduced congestion , although other results are mixed , and not all possible relevant effects have been assessed . hot lane projects , which aim to improve the flow of traffic and throughput with increased speeds and decreased travel times , have reduced congestion by increasing vehicle throughput , and have generally shown reduced congestion , increased speeds , and decreased travel times in the priced and unpriced lanes . some hot lane projects have added new lanes and thus , for these projects , the effects of pricing on performance have not been distinguished from the effects of the added lane . in addition , although the number of cars using hot lanes has risen , there were fewer people in the cars — a fact attributed to an increase in the share of toll - paying solo drivers or a decrease in carpooling on hot lanes . peak - period pricing projects that aim to reduce congestion by encouraging drivers to travel at off - peak times have shifted some drivers to travel during those times . other effects of congestion pricing projects , such as equity income impacts , have not always been evaluated . evaluating these impacts is important to address public and elected officials' concerns about the effects of pricing on travelers and communities .