these practices are discussed below . covert testing: two of the 13 foreign rail systems we visited utilize covert testing to keep employees alert about their security responsibilities . covert testing involves security staff staging unannounced events to test the response of railroad staff to incidents such as suspicious packages or setting off alarms . in one european system , this covert testing involves security staff placing suspicious items throughout their system to see how long it takes operating staff to respond to the item . similarly , one asian rail operator's security staff will break security seals on fire extinguishers and open alarmed emergency doors randomly to see how long it takes staff to respond . officials of these operators stated that these tests are carried out on a daily basis and are beneficial because their staff know they could be tested at any moment , and they , therefore , are more likely to be vigilant with respect to security . random screening: of the 13 foreign operators we interviewed , 2 have some form of random screening of passengers and their baggage in place . in the systems where this is in place , security personnel can approach passengers either in stations or on the trains and ask them to submit their persons or their baggage to a search . passengers declining to cooperate must leave the system . for example , in singapore , rail agency officials rotate the stations where they conduct random searches so that the searches are carried out at a different station each day . a summary of these efforts follows . customer awareness: customer awareness programs we observed used signage and announcements to encourage riders to alert train staff if they observed suspicious packages , persons , or behavior . of the 32 domestic rail operators we interviewed , 30 had implemented a customer awareness program or made enhancements to an existing program . foreign rail operators we visited also attempt to enhance customer awareness . for example , 11 of the 13 operators we interviewed had implemented a customer awareness program . similar to programs of u.s. operators , these programs used signage , announcements , and brochures to inform passengers and employees about the need to remain vigilant and report any suspicious activities . only one of the european passenger rail operators that we interviewed has not implemented a customer security awareness program , citing the fear or panic that it might cause among the public . increased number and visibility of security personnel: of the 32 u.s. rail operators we interviewed , 23 had increased the number of security personnel they utilized since september 11 , to provide security throughout their system or had taken steps to increase the visibility of their security personnel . in addition to adding security personnel , many operators stated that increasing the visibility of security was as important as increasing the number of personnel . for example , several u.s. and foreign rail operators we spoke with had instituted policies such as requiring their security staff , in brightly colored vests , to patrol trains or stations more frequently , so they are more visible to customers and potential terrorists or criminals .