stat . § 162.075 false swearing . rev . stat . § 166.250 unlawful possession of firearms . rev . stat . § 166.270 possession of weapons by certain felons . rev . stat . § 166.416 providing false information in connection with a firearm transfer . rev . stat . § 166.418 improperly transferring a firearm . rev . stat . § 166.425 unlawfully purchasing a firearm . rev . stat . § 166.435 firearm transfers by unlicensed persons ; requirements ; exceptions ; penalties . rev . stat . § 166.470 limitations and conditions for sales of firearms . generally , oregon's constitution requires the election by districts of a sufficient number of prosecuting attorneys ( district attorneys ) , who are the law officers of the state , and of the counties within their respective districts , and are to perform duties pertaining to the administration of law . district attorney responsibilities may include , but are not limited to , representing the district in felony prosecutions , misdemeanor prosecutions , grand jury proceedings , mental commitment hearings , family abuse prevention hearings , and juvenile delinquency hearings . after a trooper completes an investigation , they submit a report to the district attorney's office . a prosecuting attorney then reviews the case and decides whether to charge an individual or individuals with a crime . when a case is not prosecuted , a rejection memo is provided to the trooper that submitted the report . according to two oregon county prosecutors we interviewed , from late 2014 through 2017 , their offices accepted about 140 of the more than 700 firearms denial investigations referred to their offices , with most prosecuted successfully . according to osp officials , the most common types of cases resulting in convictions are related to misdemeanor domestic violence convictions , followed closely by prior felony convictions . the officials said that a new working group was created in 2016 to review gun relinquishment protocols in domestic violence cases , review outcomes and make recommendations to improve the safety of domestic violence survivors . with regard to sentencing , these prosecutors said common penalties in firearms denial cases include fines ( usually in the hundreds of dollars ) , and probation ranging up to 1 year , depending on the criminal background of the denied individual . according to osp , data is not collected on what prosecutions and convictions result from investigations by prohibited category . however , anecdotally , investigators and prosecutors said the prohibiting category of convicted felons is the most common among persons prosecuted for fics denials . prosecution outcomes are not automatically reported back to osp ; each county's district attorney must be contacted to obtain their agency's respective case outcome data . reporting disposition of firearms denial cases back to fics is voluntary and can be done via an online form . the participating local agencies are requested to report back to osp on the findings of their investigations ; however , this reporting is voluntary and according to fics officials , many agencies do not consistently submit this information . this appendix includes information on the investigation and prosecution of individuals denied firearms purchases in the state of pennsylvania .