availability . the coast guard reported in october 2015 that no existing icebreakers were available to lease or purchase that met both its legal and operational requirements . first , with respect to legal requirements , the coast guard would need to either purchase or demise charter an icebreaker , as legal requirements associated with several coast guard missions prohibit a short - term lease . specifically , under federal law , to be capable of conducting all of its statutory missions , the coast guard must use a public vessel , which federal law defines as one that the united states owns or demise charters . for example , federal law states that the coast guard's ports , waterways , and coastal security mission may be carried out with public vessels or private vessels tendered gratuitously for that purpose . similarly , for the coast guard to employ its law enforcement authorities in the conduct of certain missions , the icebreaker would need to operate as a warship , and warships are necessarily sovereign immune , public vessels , according to coast guard officials . in addition , federal law also provides that no coast guard vessel may be constructed in a foreign shipyard . according to the coast guard , besides the polar star and the polar sea , the only existing icebreakers that are powerful enough to meet the coast guard's operational requirements were built in and are owned by russia , and , thus , would not comply with this legal requirement . as a result of these constraints , that is , the lack of a u.s. - built icebreaker available to purchase or demise charter with sufficient horsepower to conduct all of the coast guard's missions , the coast guard's only procurement options are for a u.s. - based shipyard to agree to build a new icebreaker for the coast guard to lease or purchase outright . however , the coast guard has also reported that the long - term lease of a polar icebreaker built expressly for the coast guard is likely to be more costly than purchasing an icebreaker for several reasons . budgeting and total cost . office of management and budget ( omb ) guidelines require federal agencies to acquire assets in the manner least costly overall to the government . for a large acquisition like a heavy icebreaker , omb circular a - 94 requires the coast guard to conduct a lease - purchase analysis based on total lifecycle costs . to then proceed with a lease , the coast guard would need to show that leasing is preferable to direct government purchase and ownership . the purpose of this requirement is to promote efficient resource allocation through well - informed decision - making by the federal government . budget scorekeepers — specifically , omb , the congressional budget office , and the house and senate budget committees — score purchases and capital leases at the outset of the acquisition . based on scoring rules , the long - term lease of a polar icebreaker would not qualify as an operating lease , which is intended for short - term needs and would allow the costs to be recognized over time .