we agree . we have an engagement under way that reviews measurement practices for eeo and diversity management in selected federal agencies . we also have begun work that is to provide examples from the private sector of the leading diversity management practices identified in this report . in written comments , the director of opm generally agreed with the findings of the draft report , noting that the agencies identified merit recognition for their efforts in diversity management ( see app . v ) . the director of opm also noted that the area of diversity is an important element in the president's management agenda . in addition , the director of opm provided technical comments , which we incorporated . we also provided drafts of the relevant sections of this report to cognizant officials from the 10 agencies we reviewed . we made technical clarifications based on these comments where appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to other interested congressional parties , the director of opm , and the chair of eeoc . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report is available on gao's home page at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-9490 or belva martin , assistant director , on ( 202 ) 512-4285 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . our objectives were to identify ( 1 ) leading diversity management practices and ( 2 ) examples of those practices in federal agencies . to identify leading diversity management practices , we first reviewed literature on diversity management . this review included academic literature on diversity management , books and articles written by consultants and practitioners , and reports produced by government agencies and research organizations . we then met with various federal officials and experts in diversity management . this included officials from the central leadership agencies — the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) , merit systems protection board , u.s. office of personnel management ( opm ) , and the u.s. office of special counsel . at the national academy of public administration ( napa ) , we met with one former official — a former director of the center for human resource management — and two current officials — the director and deputy director of the center for human resources management . these officials were helpful in suggesting experts to contact in the field of diversity management . on the basis of our literature review and our discussions with federal and napa officials , we established criteria for and identified a list of recognized experts . these criteria included the expert's recognition in the professional or academic community , depth of experience in diversity management , and relevance of his or her published work or research to diversity management .