and as stated in gao comment no . the briefing slides are in appendix i . we will report separately on our work on customs and cms . as discussed with your staff , our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the primary reasons for the low collection rates and significant write - offs of osm's cfp debt , ( 2 ) whether adequate processes exist at osm to collect cfp debt , and ( 3 ) what role , if any , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and treasury play in overseeing osm's collection of cfp debt . to determine the primary reason for the low collection rates and significant write - offs of cfp debt , we obtained and reviewed osm's audited financial statements , annual reports , and other financial information related to its cfp collection activities , and we analyzed osm's cfp receivables and related accounts and information for fiscal years 1997 through 2000 . regulation that blocked the issuance of a permit to any surface coal mining operation owned or controlled by either the applicant or by a person who owns or controls the applicant that is currently in violation of the smcra ( upstream owner or controller ) . the court ruled that the regulation was inconsistent with the authority conferred on osm by section 510 ( c ) of smcra . as a result , section 510 ( c ) of smcra limits osm's ability to deny permits to certain applicants associated with smcra violations . permits to three applicants where “they would have been denied” under the regulations the court invalidated . osm further stated that the denials would have been based on an upstream owner or controller violation , where at the time of the applications for new permits , the upstream owners or controllers were linked to unabated violations , including the unpaid principal portion11 of the cfp receivable balances totaling approximately $31,600 , plus another $122,697 of unpaid aml fees and reclamation costs . for example , osm stated that its knoxville office issued an applicant a new surface mining permit in december 2000 . the applicant was comprised of three 30 percent and one 10 percent shareholders , who were also managers of the limited liability company . three of the shareholders had unabated violations . osm provided only the principal portion of the cfp receivable and stated that the interest , administrative costs , penalties , and post judgements portions were not readily available and that generally , the total cfp receivable amounts were equal to double the principal portion . one of the 30 percent shareholders was issued 2 cos in 1984 , and was convicted by a tennessee jury of a criminal offense of continuing to conduct surface coal mining operations without a permit and failing to stop after being notified by the authorities .