( recommendation 1 ) . we conducted this performance audit from march 2018 to march 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the construction division's ( hereafter the division ) costs include both direct and indirect costs . direct costs are costs directly attributed to and expended on a project , such as labor ( i.e. , trade workers ) and materials . indirect costs are costs that cannot be directly attributed to a single project , such as costs associated with employee leave and training . table 1 shows the components of the division's direct and indirect costs . for a copy of this extension form , see appendix iv . aoc's layoff policy allows the director of ppm , as delegated by the architect of the capitol , to lay off the division's temporary employees for lack of work , lack of funds , or failure to meet management's expectations . the policy does not specify which factors aoc should consider in selecting employees to be laid off , thereby allowing the agency discretion in this area . our review of the layoff letters for the 30 temporary employees laid off in march 2017 confirmed that aoc communicated to the employees that the layoff was due to a lack of work . in this particular situation , the division officials said they determined the number of temporary employees needed to carry out its projected workload and considered two factors equally: ( 1 ) the employees' performance and skillset and ( 2 ) the employees' ability to work independently and as part of a team . human capital officials told us that aoc's offices of employee and labor relations and its general counsel reviewed the division's request , and found no human - capital or legal concerns . the human capital officials drafted letters notifying the 30 employees of their layoff , effective upon receipt . division supervisors provided the letters to employees at the start of their shifts on march 21 , 2017 . figure 8 provides summary information by trade on the 30 temporary employees that aoc laid off in march 2017 . at the time of the march 2017 layoff , aoc did not have a policy that required the division to notify the division's temporary employees of an impending layoff . human capital officials told us that they did not provide the division's temporary employees with advance notice of their layoff because of concerns that such advance notice could result in an unproductive and disruptive work environment . in terms of notifying relevant employee unions , human capital officials said they provided 12- hour advance notification of the layoff to one employee union , in accordance with that union's collective - bargaining agreement . the five rehired employees we interviewed told us they were caught off guard by the march 2017 layoffs . none of the 30 temporary employees filed grievances related to the layoff , according to human capital officials .