hhs did not comment on the draft . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of health and human services and justice , the inspector general of hhs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to identify subjects of health care fraud cases in medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) — including referrals , investigations , prosecutions , and outcomes — by provider type , and to examine changes in the distribution of provider types in 2005 and 2010 , we obtained data on health care fraud cases from the department of health and human services' office of inspector general ( hhs - oig ) , the department of justice's ( doj ) executive office of u.s . attorneys ( eousa ) — which provides administrative support for the 94 u.s. attorney's offices ( usao ) — and doj's civil division . we obtained data on fraud cases involving medicare , medicaid , and chip that were closed in calendar year 2005 or 2010 . we collected data for closed cases only — meaning that the agencies were no longer actively investigating or prosecuting a case — to avoid concerns about analyzing or reporting information about open cases . we obtained data from hhs - oig's investigative reporting and information system , which contains information on health care fraud cases received or investigated by hhs - oig . the data we received contained information on civil and criminal health care fraud cases closed in calendar years 2005 or 2010 , as well as exclusions from program participation . the hhs - oig data included information about the subjects , sources of the cases , outcomes of the investigations and prosecutions ( if the cases were pursued ) , and the reasons for which the cases were closed ( such as lack of evidence ) . the data we received from hhs - oig also contained information on the provider types of the subjects . additionally , we obtained data from two divisions within doj — eousa and the civil division . the data we received from eousa was from the legal information office network system and contained information about the subjects of the fraud cases , outcomes of the prosecutions , and the reasons for which the cases were closed . provider type is not a required field in the usaos database ; consequently the usaos do not consistently have provider type information . doj's civil division provided us data from the cases database . many other categories of providers accounted for the remaining 23.4 percent .