county variation . we used the data to examine variation among counties in their rates of opioid prescriptions and di claims . specifically , we examined the distribution of these rates among all counties . we had data available on both rates of opioid prescriptions and di claims for 2,953 out of 3,142 counties nationwide . we then examined counties with the highest rates of opioid prescriptions and di claims . hhs did not provide any comments . we are sending copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the commissioner of the social security administration , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or curdae@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . we examined ( 1 ) what is known about the relationship between trends in prescription opioids and disability insurance ( di ) claims , and ( 2 ) how the social security administration ( ssa ) considers potential prescription opioid misuse in its di eligibility decisions . this appendix provides a detailed account of the information and methods we used to answer these objectives . section 1 provides an overview of our methods and key data sources . ssa agreed with our recommendations . regarding both recommendations , ssa stated that it will continue to train staff on the agency's policies and procedures related to substance use disorders and the daa evaluation process , as well as the importance of fully documenting these evaluations . sections 2 through 4 provide additional details on the three main methods we used to answer our objectives . to answer our first objective on the relationship between trends in prescription opioids and di claims , we reviewed relevant literature and analyzed data from the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and ssa . specifically , we reviewed existing studies and interviewed several researchers currently examining the relationship between prescription opioids and di claims . we also reviewed available data from ssa on prescription opioid use among di claimants . in addition , we analyzed county - level data on the rates of opioid prescriptions from cdc and number of di claims from ssa from 2006 through 2017 , the most recent year of data available at the time of our review . we used aggregate data to illustrate nationwide trends over time . we also examined variation among counties , including differences among those with the highest rates of opioid prescriptions and di claims . lastly , we used these data to conduct multiple regression analyses to examine the relationship between opioid prescriptions and di claims , taking into account economic , demographic , and other factors . we discuss these analyses in greater detail in section 2 .