109-295 , 120 stat . the provisions of the post - katrina act became effective upon enactment , october 4 , 2006 , with the exception of certain organizational changes related to fema , most of which took effect on march 31 , 2007 . over the last decade , we identified and reported on issues related to dhs's and fema's management of four of the largest preparedness grants and the challenges associated with assessing national preparedness capabilities . in april 2002 , shortly after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , we identified the need for goals and performance indicators to guide the nation's preparedness efforts and help to objectively assess the results of federal investments . for example , dhs first developed plans in 2004 to measure preparedness by assessing capabilities , but these efforts have been repeatedly delayed and are not yet complete . fema's proposed revisions to the new npgp may help the agency overcome these continuing challenges to developing and implementing a national preparedness assessment . since 2004 , dhs and fema have initiated a variety of efforts to develop a system of measuring preparedness . from 2005 until september 2011 , much of fema's efforts focused on developing and operationalizing a list of target capabilities that would define desired capabilities and could be used in a tiered framework to measure their attainment . in july 2005 , we reported that dhs had established a draft target capabilities list that provides guidance on the specific capabilities and levels of capability at various levels of government that fema would expect federal , state , local , and tribal first responders to develop and maintain.to organize classes of jurisdictions that share similar characteristics — such as total population , population density , and critical infrastructure — into tiers to account for reasonable differences in capability levels among groups of jurisdictions and to appropriately apportion responsibility for development and maintenance of capabilities among levels of government and across these jurisdictional tiers . in our february 2012 report , we note that one of fema's section chiefs said that the primary reasons for the current lack of coordination across programs are the sheer volume of grant applications that need to be reviewed and fema's lack of resources to coordinate the grant review process . she added that fema reminds grantees not to duplicate grant projects ; however , due to volume and the number of activities associated with grant application reviews , fema lacks the capabilities to cross - check for unnecessary duplication . fema has proposed changes to enhance preparedness grant management , but these changes may create new challenges . since its creation in april 2007 , fema's grant programs directorate ( gpd ) has been responsible for the program management of dhs's preparedness grants . gpd consolidated the grant business operations , systems , training , policy , and oversight of all fema grants and the program management of preparedness grants into a single entity . gpd works closely with other dhs entities to manage grants , as needed , through the grant life cycle , shown in figure 1 .