each is shown in table 2 . dod has completed two of its four long - term studies examining potential offensive strike systems to provide global strike capabilities sometime after 2018 . three of the four studies assess possible offensive strike weapons systems that would provide a prompt and long - range capability for global strike , while the fourth study , the next generation long range strike analysis of alternatives , examines potential strike systems that could potentially travel great distances to penetrate and loiter deep within an enemy's territory to deliver high - volume strikes against time - critical targets . enabling capabilities that dod considers critical in supporting global strike operations include intelligence collection and dissemination , surveillance and reconnaissance , command and control , communications , and battlefield damage assessment . planning , executing , and assessing the success of global strike operations may place greater demands on enabling capabilities as new offensive capabilities are acquired . although the successful conduct of all strike operations depends on enabling capabilities , the nature of global strike operations — such as the potentially long distances over which strike systems may be required to operate , compressed time frames for execution , improved accuracy , the fleeting nature of some global strike targets , and the high - level decision authority required — creates potential operational challenges for these capabilities . figure 1 shows the role of enabling capabilities in supporting sequential key events in the conduct of strike operations from prior monitoring of the area ; initially finding , locating , and identifying a target ; executing a strike ; to conducting of battlefield damage assessment to determine the success of the strike and whether further actions are required . according to the defense science board's report on future strategic strike forces , current enabling capabilities are not sufficient to fully support the requirements for global strike operations . current intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance and command and control capabilities generally do not provide the persistent coverage , processing and sharing of information , and rapid planning required for compressed global strike time frames , according to u.s. strategic command officials . additionally , air force space command officials told us that they are concerned about whether current capabilities of intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance assets would be able to recognize and assess the damage caused by future global strike systems . for example , future systems may use flechette warheads , which would disperse metal darts upon impact that do not create large craters like traditional explosive devices ; therefore , the damage may not be readily visible to intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance assets . both were scheduled for late 2006 . global lightning and terminal fury are annual command post exercises sponsored by u.s. strategic command and u.s. pacific command , respectively , and involve the commanders and their staffs in testing and validating the communications within and between headquarters and simulated forces in deterring a military attack and employing forces as directed . terminal fury is partly intended to train the command's staff in exercising its theater warfighting concept plan and is considered by the commander of the pacific command to be the command's number one priority exercise .