this information is discussed in appendix i . further , we examined how section 889 of the homeland security act of 2002 affected the reporting of funding data and the challenges omb continues to face in tracking activities — specific lines of work — related to combating terrorism and ensuring the transparency of related funding data . the impact of section 889 on the reporting of funding data and the challenges omb continues to face in tracking activities is discussed in appendix iii . what is the status of the recommendations from our 2002 report ? in addition , we also identified patterns and trends in funding for combating terrorism activities for fiscal years 2002 through 2005 as well as the president's budget request for fiscal year 2006 . finally , we reviewed combating terrorism activities that were funded through 34 budgetary accounts to determine whether the activities were consistent with omb's definitions of homeland security and overseas combating terrorism as defined in omb circular no . the information on combating terrorism activities funded through these 34 accounts is included in appendix iv . to address our objectives , we met with staff from omb and with officials from 7 agencies that conduct a range of combating terrorism activities — the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and justice ( doj ) , and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) . to reflect a range of funding levels , we selected these agencies from 33 agencies and the district of columbia that reported receiving funding related to combating terrorism activities to omb . the 7 agencies we selected account for about 90 percent of the total fiscal year 2006 budget request that the 33 agencies and the district of columbia estimate relate to combating terrorism . because we obtained information from a nonprobability sample of 7 agencies and their directorates and offices with combating terrorism responsibilities , the information we obtained cannot be generalized to all agencies with combating terrorism responsibilities . we reviewed activities in 34 budgetary accounts for the agencies in our review to determine whether the activities were consistent with omb's definitions of homeland security and overseas combating terrorism as defined in omb circular no . we selected accounts with the most funding for combating terrorism at each agency as well as some accounts with smaller amounts . by reviewing the activities in these 34 accounts , we reviewed at least 70 percent of each agency's estimated gross budget authority related to combating terrorism activities as reported in the president's fiscal year 2006 budget request . although we initially selected budgetary accounts to review at dod , we did not review these accounts because neither dod nor omb maintains information on activities conducted by dod to combat terrorism at the account level . for illustrative purposes , we have included a description of some of these accounts as well as the activities funded through each account and the related budget authority in appendix iv . we also analyzed combating terrorism data from the database used to prepare the budget of the united states for fiscal years 2002 through 2006 .