gao - 12-269 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2011 . u.s. customs and boarder protection's border security fencing , infrastructure and technology fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan . gao - 12-106r . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2011 . we did not make any recommendations in our september 2011 report . chairman miller , ranking member cuellar , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i am pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . for future questions about this statement , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4523 or leporeb@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this statement include mark pross , assistant director ; yecenia camarillo ; carolynn cavanaugh ; nicole willems ; lori kmetz ; charles perdue ; richard powelson ; terry richardson ; and jason wildhagen . border security: additional steps needed to ensure that officers are fully trained . arizona border surveillance technology: more information on plans and costs is needed before proceeding . gao - 12-22 . washington , d.c.: november 4 , 2011 . observations on the costs and benefits of an increased department of defense role in helping to secure the southwest land border . gao - 11-856r . improve unit readiness or mission capability . deputy secretary of defense memorandum , department support to domestic law enforcement agencies performing counternarcotic activities ( october 2 , 2003 ) . avoid the use of title 10 forces ( military services ) for continuing , ongoing , long - term operation support commitments at the same location . given the complexity of legal authorities and policy issues related to dod providing support to law enforcement and the number of dod entities that must approve a support mission by title 10 forces , it can take up to 180 days to obtain final approval from the office of the secretary of defense to execute a mission in support of law enforcement . while supporting law enforcement , dod may be subject to certain limitations . for example , one limitation is that dod units working on border missions cannot carry loaded weapons . instead , dod units working on the border rely on armed border patrol agents , who are assigned to each military unit to provide protection . in addition , we reported in september 2011 that dod's operational tempo may impact the availability of dod units to fill law enforcement support missions . while some dod units are regularly available to meet specific mission needs at the border ( eg , mechanized units to construct roads ) , other dod units ( eg , ground - based surveillance teams ) are deployed or may be deployed abroad making it more difficult to fulfill law enforcement requests at any given time . further , dod officials we spoke with also raised information - sharing challenges when providing support to law enforcement missions .