however , these standards are not specific to supply chain security . they also told us that independence is critical to their business . the officials said the vendor has no visibility into the evaluation process , and , typically , the vendor is obligated to report testing results . the congressional report further stated that regardless of the testing technique employed , fully preventing a determined and clever insider from intentionally inserting flaws into equipment means finding and eliminating every significant vulnerability from a complex product , a monumental , or even — in the words of one congressional report — ”virtually impossible” task . similarly , officials from one third - party testing firm whom we spoke with told us that they have concerns about the effectiveness of network monitoring as a way of detecting vulnerabilities . they said that security monitoring , in most cases , can only detect attempts to exploit known vulnerabilities , or in more complex approaches , identify potentially dangerous anomalous network activity . and as systems evolve and are updated , new vulnerabilities that have long existed in the underlying equipment may be inadvertently exposed in a manner that makes exploitation possible . there are currently no industry standards that address all aspects of supply chain risk management , including supply chain security , and few best practices that provide industry with guidance on determining what practices to use . see appendix i for more information about our scope and methodology . federal policy calls for critical infrastructure protection activities that are intended to enhance the cyber and physical security of private infrastructures , such as telecommunication networks , that are essential to national and economic security . dhs , commerce , and fcc have critical infrastructure protection responsibilities over issues related to the security of communications networks . appendix iv provides additional information on these agencies' legal authority related to supply chain security for commercial communication networks . in addition , some executive actions have focused on supply chain risk management issues related to cybersecurity , which are described below . the homeland security act of 2002 established dhs and assigned it the following critical infrastructure protection responsibilities: develop a comprehensive national plan for securing the key resources and critical infrastructure of the united states and disseminate , as appropriate , information to assist in the deterrence , prevention , and pre - emption of or response to terrorist attacks . commerce is responsible under presidential policy directive 21 ( ppd - 21 ) , in coordination with other federal and nonfederal entities , for improving security for technology and tools related to cyber - based systems , and promoting the development of other efforts related to critical infrastructure to enable the timely availability of industrial products , materials , and services to meet homeland security requirements . within commerce , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) has responsibility for , among other things , cooperating with other federal agencies , industry , and other private organizations in establishing standard practices , codes , specifications , and voluntary consensus standards .