but we can do better than we do now . the primary consequences of risk are often more time and money and unplanned — or latent — concurrency in development , testing , and production . yet , when significant risks are taken , they are often taken under the guise that they are manageable and that risk mitigation plans are in place . the question is why aren't we doing it ? ” we need to look differently at the familiar outcomes of weapon systems acquisition — such as cost growth , schedule delays , large support burdens , and reduced buying power . some of these undesirable outcomes are clearly due to honest mistakes and unforeseen obstacles . however , they also occur not because they are inadvertent but because they are encouraged by the incentive structure . it is not sufficient to define the problem as an objective process that is broken . rather , it is more accurate to view the problem as a sophisticated process whose consistent results are indicative of its being in equilibrium . the rules and policies are clear about what to do , but other incentives force compromises . the persistence of undesirable outcomes such as cost growth and schedule delays suggests that these are consequences that participants in the process have been willing to accept . these undesirable outcomes share a common origin: decisions are made to move forward with programs before the knowledge needed to reduce risk and make those decisions is sufficient . there are strong incentives within the acquisition culture to overpromise a prospective weapon's performance while understating its likely cost and schedule demands . thus , a successful business case — one that enables the program to gain approval — is not necessarily the same as a sound one . incentive to overpromise: the weapon system acquisition culture in general rewards programs for moving forward with unrealistic business cases . strong incentives encourage deviations from sound acquisition practices . in the commercial marketplace , investment in a new product represents an expense . company funds must be expended and will not provide a return until the product is developed , produced , and sold . in dod , new products represent revenue , in the form of a budget line . a program's return on investment occurs as soon as the funding decision is made . competition with other programs vying for defense dollars puts pressure on program sponsors to project unprecedented levels of performance ( often by counting on unproven technologies ) while promising low cost and short schedules . these incentives , coupled with a marketplace that is characterized by a single buyer ( dod ) , low volume , and limited number of major sources , create a culture in weapon system acquisition that encourages undue optimism about program risks and costs . program and funding decisions: budget requests , congressional authorizations , and congressional appropriations are often made well in advance of major program decisions , such as the decision to approve the start of a program . at the time these funding decisions are made , less verifiable knowledge is available about a program's cost , schedule , and technical challenges . this creates a vacuum for optimism to fill .