outlays . this section shows the relationship between obligations and outlays ( also referred to as disbursements or expenditures ) and discloses the payments made to liquidate obligations . obligations are usually liquidated by means of cash payments ( outlays ) , such as currency , checks , or electronic fund transfers . this section reconciles outlays with obligations incurred and the change in obligated balances during the year . the content of this section is the same for the sbr and the schedule of budgetary activity . the office of management and budget ( omb ) requires federal government financial statements , including the sbr , to be presented in accordance with gaap for the federal government . the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) establishes gaap for federal governmental entities . federal government entities also are required to follow the u.s. standard general ledger ( ussgl ) chart of accounts , established by the department of the treasury ( treasury ) for budgetary and proprietary accounting . budgetary accounts related to the sbr and schedule of budgetary activity are used to recognize and track budget approval and execution , whereas proprietary accounts are used to recognize and track assets and liabilities reported on the balance sheet and revenue and expenses reported on the statement of net cost . these four areas of work are referred to as the four phases of an audit . in the planning phase , the auditor obtains an understanding of the audited entity's operating environment , including business processes and the related systems and controls ; reviews financial activity related to significant financial statement line items and accounts ; assesses the risk of material misstatement ; and develops an audit strategy . planning continues throughout the audit as decisions are made about the risk of material misstatement and whether to perform additional procedures . during the internal control phase , the auditor identifies and tests key internal controls and information technology system controls as a basis for determining the extent to which the auditor will be able to rely on controls in conducting the audit . based on the information obtained during the planning and internal control phases , the auditor determines the nature , extent , and timing of substantive testing . depending on the extent to which controls can be relied on for assurance of fair presentation of the financial statements , the auditor will perform more or less substantive testing . in the testing phase , the auditor performs substantive testing of detail support for transactions and may also perform analytical procedures . in accordance with au section 318 , these substantive procedures are performed to detect material misstatements at the relevant assertion level and include tests of classes of transactions , account balances , and disclosures . during the reporting phase , the auditor reviews the body of evidence obtained , reviews the conclusions reached about that evidence , and determines the materiality of uncorrected misstatements and untested amounts as a basis for forming an opinion .