we disagree . the final rule that set new upls for nonstate - governmental facilities , including a 150-percent upl for nonstate - government - owned hospitals and a mandated phase - out of payments above this limit , was published in january 2001 and effective march 2001 , well before the illinois waiver was approved in january 2002 . a second rule , to which hhs may have been referring , reduced the upl for nonstate - government - owned hospitals from the 150-percent level to 100 percent of what medicare would pay and was effective may 2002 . we revised the report to clarify the effective dates of these two rules . what types of waiver proposals have been submitted and approved ? has hhs ensured that the approved waivers are consistent with the goals and fiscal integrity of medicaid and schip ? to what extent has there been opportunity for public input in the expedited process ? our work is based on a review and analysis of section 1115 waiver proposals for new demonstration projects submitted since august 2001 and related to expanding insurance or providing pharmacy coverage in line with the two new initiatives . we analyzed hhs data on section 1115 waiver proposals for new programs submitted from august 2001 to may 2002 , and documented the type , number , and outcome of these proposals . for the four approved waivers , we reviewed waiver proposals , hhs decision memorandums and approval letters , approved waiver applications , waiver terms and conditions , and operational protocols when available , and documentation of the states' public process and budget neutrality justifications . we also discussed these initiatives and waiver approvals with officials at hhs , the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms , the agency within hhs with the lead role in receiving and reviewing the applications ) , omb , and relevant state agencies . to obtain information on the opportunity for public input to the waiver - approval processes and any related research studies , we also contacted several health research and advocacy organizations including the center for budget and policy priorities , the national health law program , and the kaiser commission on medicaid and the uninsured . we examined the statutory provisions governing the medicaid and schip programs and the section 1115 waiver authority , and obtained hhs's opinion on a legal question through written correspondence . finally , we relied upon our past reports and testimonies on the approval of section 1115 waivers and other issues . we conducted our work from december 2001 through june 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . medicaid and schip are the nation's largest health - financing programs for low - income people , accounting for about $232 billion in federal and state expenditures in 2001 to cover about 40 million people . medicaid was established in 1965 under title xix of the social security act to provide health care coverage to certain categories of low - income families and aged and disabled individuals . schip was established in 1997 under title xxi of the social security act to provide health care coverage to children living in low - income families whose incomes exceed the eligibility requirements for medicaid .