consistent with circular no . a - 11 , omb staff told us that after the shutdown , they did not direct agencies to update their contingency plans or document in another way how the shutdown was planned for , managed , or implemented in terms of lessons learned for future reference . for a longer shutdown , such as one lasting more than five days , documenting what actually happened once a shutdown is over including how operations were fully resumed could help agencies better prepare and plan in the event of a future shutdown . federal standards indicate that agencies should identify , record , and distribute pertinent information to the right people in sufficient detail , in the right form , and at the appropriate time to enable them to carry out their duties and responsibilities . without documentation of how the shutdown was implemented , agencies may not have timely , appropriate information that could help inform planning and implementation efforts in the event of a future shutdown . the selected departments did not report any longer - term effects from the shutdown on operations and services and indicated that it is difficult to assess the effects from the shutdown in isolation from other budgetary events , such as sequestration . however , officials raised concerns about how the timing of the shutdown , occurring soon after sequestration , affected the morale of its employees . the impacts of sequestration on the workforce , which included reduced employee travel , training , and monetary awards , affected employee morale . according to department officials , this effect on employee morale was further exacerbated by the lapse in appropriations . according to hhs officials , once the shutdown ended , the department's functions were fully reestablished and operations were back to normal within 6 months of reopening . department officials do not anticipate any longer - term effects from the shutdown on departmental operations and services . however , according to hhs officials , the morale of hhs employees was low as a result of being furloughed . also , the longer the shutdown lasted , the more challenges arose that they had to unexpectedly manage . for example , furloughed federal employees were eligible to apply for unemployment insurance benefits , which the department of labor is responsible for administering . hhs needed guidance on how to instruct its employees to apply for unemployment insurance since each state has different rules and procedures . hhs officials said they could not provide general guidance to all employees . after the shutdown , the department had to work with opm to instruct its employees on how to repay the insurance benefits since they received back pay . at the component level , nih officials stated the longer - term effects of the shutdown are much harder to detect than any immediate disruptions to the operations of the agency . according to nih officials , there are also less tangible impacts , such as external partners' decreased trust and confidence in nih to continue funding their research after it is approved . according to dot officials , they are unable to identify any longer - term effects of the shutdown on their operations and services at the department level .