according to sfas no . 98 , accounting for leases , and sfas no . 66 , accounting for sales of real estate , the way a capital lease is accounted for depends on whether you are the lessor or the lessee . the lessor , tva in the 50-year lease , would account for the lease as a sale ( sales - type lease ) or financing ( direct financing lease ) , whichever is appropriate . a lease involving real estate is not classified by the lessor as a sales - type lease unless ( 1 ) the title to the leased property is transferred and ( 2 ) there is not any form of continuing involvement in the daily operations . since tva did not transfer legal title of the assets and continues to be involved in the operation and maintenance of the turbine units and to control the distribution of power produced by the facilities , tva accounted for the lease proceeds of $320 million as a direct financing lease resulting in financing obligations . table 7 below shows the fiscal year 2002 accounting entries for the fiscal year 2002 lease - leaseback arrangement . the accounting transactions for tva's fiscal year 2002 lease - leaseback arrangements are presented in its financial statements as follows: outstanding lease financing obligations are included in the “current liabilities” and “other liabilities” line items on the balance sheet . the cash proceeds were included in the “proceeds from combustion turbine financing” line item on the cash flow statement . the lease costs are included in the “operating and maintenance” line item on the income statement . in addition to the above journal entries , tva records the normal accounting entries related to construction , capitalization , depreciation , and operation of the combustion turbine units consistent with all other generating assets it owns . the fiscal year 2002 lease - leaseback transaction assets were initially constructed at a historical cost of $226.4 million . tva depreciates the assets using the straight - line depreciation method over the 20-year term of the leaseback agreement . in addition to the individual named above , rich cambosos , donald neff , chanetta reed , and brooke whittaker made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases .