pub . 108-173 , title ii , 117 stat . recompete the contracts at least once every 5 years . cms implemented the mma contracting reform requirements by shifting claims administration tasks from 51 legacy contracts to new entities called medicare administrative contractors ( macs ) . originally , cms selected 15 macs to process both part a and b medicare claims ( known as a / b macs ) and 4 macs to process durable medical equipment ( dme ) claims ( known as dme macs ) . cms also selected 4 a / b macs to process claims for home health care and hospice services . cms began awarding the mac contracts in 2006 ; however , bid protests and consolidation of some of the mac jurisdictions delayed some of the macs from being fully operational . by 2009 , most of the legacy contracts had been transitioned to macs and by december 2013 , cms completed that transition . under the far , agencies may generally select from two broad categories of contract types: fixed - price and cost - reimbursement . when implementing contractor reform , cms chose to structure the mac contracts as cost - plus - award - fee contracts , a type of cost - reimbursement contract . this type of contract allows cms to provide a financial incentive — known as an award fee — to contractors if they achieve certain performance goals . in addition to reimbursement for allowable costs and a contract base fee ( which is fixed at the inception of the contract ) , a mac can earn the award fee , which is intended to incentivize superior performance . in 2010 , we reviewed three macs that had undergone award fee plan reviews and found that all three received a portion of the award fee for which they were eligible , but none of the three received the full award fee . in the new contracting environment , macs are responsible for a variety of claims administration functions , most of which were previously performed by the legacy contractors . macs are responsible for processing and paying claims , handling the first level of appeal ( often referred to as redeterminations of denied claims ) , and conducting medical review of claims — which is done before or after payment to ensure that the payment is made only for services that meet all medicare requirements for coverage , coding , and medical necessity . in addition , the macs serve as providers' primary contact with medicare , including enrolling providers , conducting outreach and education , responding to inquiries , and auditing provider cost reports . cms is moving toward further consolidation of mac contracts in hopes that consolidation will further improve cms's procurement and administration processes . since the original implementation , cms chose to consolidate the 15 a / b macs into 10 jurisdictions and is in the process of that consolidation . currently , there are 5 consolidated a / b macs that are fully operational , 7 a / b macs that will eventually be consolidated into 5 jurisdictions , and 4 dme macs that are fully operational .