however , these plans were only a beginning . approximately 20 percent of all remaining activities and milestones were missing predecessor links , successor links or both . officials stated that many of these activities were related to contract data requirements list deliveries and internal or external handoffs ( called givers / receivers ) . we found other areas of questionable sequencing logic . each satellite makes about 14 orbits a day . as the earth rotates beneath it , each satellite views the entire earth's surface twice a day . currently , there is one operational poes satellite and two operational dmsp satellites that are positioned so that they cross the equator in the early morning , midmorning , and early afternoon . in addition , the government relies on a european satellite , called the meteorological operational ( metop ) satellite , for satellite observations in the midmorning orbit . in addition to the operational satellites , noaa , the air force , and a european weather satellite organization maintain older satellites that still collect some data and are available to provide limited backup to the operational satellites should they degrade or fail . the last poes satellite was launched in february 2009 . the air force plans to launch its two remaining dmsp satellites as needed . figure 1 illustrates the current operational polar satellite constellation . polar satellites gather a broad range of data that are transformed into a variety of products . satellite sensors observe different bands of radiation wavelengths , called channels , which are used for remotely determining information about the earth's atmosphere , land surface , oceans , and the space environment . these environmental data records include a wide range of atmospheric products detailing cloud coverage , temperature , humidity , and ozone distribution ; land surface products showing snow cover , vegetation , and land use ; ocean products depicting sea surface temperatures , sea ice , and wave height ; and characterizations of the space environment . combinations of these data records ( raw , sensor , temperature , and environmental data records ) are also used to derive more sophisticated products , including outputs from numerical weather models and assessments of climate trends . figure 2 is a simplified depiction of the various stages of satellite data processing , and figure 3 depicts examples of two different weather products . with the expectation that combining the poes and dmsp programs would reduce duplication and result in sizable cost savings , a may 1994 presidential decision directive required noaa and dod to converge the two satellite programs into a single satellite program — npoess — capable of satisfying both civilian and military requirements . the converged program , npoess , was considered critical to the nation's ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting and global climate monitoring . npoess satellites were expected to replace the poes and dmsp satellites in the morning , midmorning , and afternoon orbits when they neared the end of their expected life spans .