achieve results . gao and omb guidance state that one such result should be providing data that are consistent and reliable . without this guidance , agencies cannot ensure that they are collecting and reporting consistent and reliable data on their structures internally , data that are then submitted to frpp . for example , officials told us that replacement values in the frpp seemed too high or too low , and other officials told us the replacement value did not match or come close to matching the replacement value listed in agencies' own property - management databases ( see fig . however , because local agency officials were often not the ones entering data into the agencies' real property databases or entering the data into the frpp database , they could not explain why there were differences between frpp and their agency's own property databases for these structures . to calculate the replacement value for all structures annually as required by frpp guidance , the agencies we reviewed reported using a number of different methods , including adjusting cost models designed for buildings to structures , escalating the original cost of constructing structures , and relying on estimates made by local officials and experts . while there are cost - estimating models available for calculating the replacement value of a building , there are no standard estimation methods available for all types of structures . officials from interior , va , and doe said that the lack of standard cost - estimating models for structures makes it more challenging and could introduce variation into the estimates as agencies develop their own models . although the agencies we reviewed identified annual operating costs for structures as required by frpp guidance , we found that these costs were not always accurate , thereby reducing the consistency and reliability of frpp data . as stated earlier , the standards for internal control in the federal government and omb guidance state that management should put in place control mechanisms and activities to enable it to enforce its directives and achieve results . in addition , gao and omb guidance state that one such result should be providing data that are consistent and reliable . officials from one usda site we visited said that none of the annual operating costs listed in the frpp are accurate because the calculation is based on a standard formula of 1 percent of the replacement value , which does not reflect the structures' true costs . usda officials agreed that their approach to calculating the operating costs did not produce accurate results at the individual structure level , but they said that usda does not have the capacity to collect operating cost data for individual structures . although frpp guidance does not address the issue , gsa officials recognize that agencies must estimate the operating costs if they do not have the capacity to track operating costs for individual structures . we also found instances where local officials at sites we visited told us the annual operating costs listed in the frpp are inaccurate .