b . establish controls to ensure that navy organizations either demilitarize materiel or provide demilitarization instructions to the defense logistics agency depots , prior to requesting the depot ship materiel to disposal , and respond to depot requests for demilitarization instructions in a timely manner . c. validate that the realtime reutilization asset management program office reprograms its computer system to ensure that disposal shipment notifications , rather than disposal shipment confirmations , are sent to defense reutilization and marketing service for disposal shipments . d. request that the defense reutilization and marketing service provide management reports which identify navy organizations that are not responding to disposal follow - up transactions for materiel reported as shipped but not received and that are not sending disposal shipment notifications for materiel shipped to disposal . establish controls to ensure that defense distribution depot personnel request the required demilitarization instructions for all materiel awaiting disposal instructions and reverse the disposal transactions if the required instructions are not received . b . establish controls to ensure that the defense reutilization and marketing service reviews and analyzes management data to identify navy organizations that are not routinely preparing shipment disposal notifications or are not routinely responding to follow - up transactions and identify to the naval supply systems command potential problems with data in the in - transit control system in order for the naval supply systems command to ensure that navy organizations comply with disposal procedures . the commanding general , marine corps logistics command should: 1 . identify all excess materiel and return the materiel to the supply system , as required by marine corps order p4400.151b , “intermediate - level supply management policy manual,” july 9 , 1992 . perform physical inventories of all materiel in all storage locations and adjust inventory records accordingly . second , the government will be responsible for assessing security and for decisions to close and reopen ports . security efforts should address vulnerabilities along supply - chain network edges . efforts to improve the security of the container shipping system continue to be focused on ports and facilities ( although many ports around the world still failed to meet international ship and port security code guidelines even after the july 1 , 2004 , deadline. ) unfortunately , the route over which cargo travels is vast and difficult to secure . measures to keep cargo secure while it is en route are essential to a comprehensive strategy to secure the global container supply chain . research and development should target new technologies for low - cost , high - volume remote sensing and scanning . current sensor technologies to detect weapons or illegal shipments are expensive and typically impose significant delays on the logistics system . new detection technologies for remote scanning of explosives and radiation would provide valuable capabilities to improve the security of the container shipping system . level logistics and army / land component logistics requirements and the need for a joint theater - level logistics commander . codify in joint doctrine the distinction between joint theater document a joint theater sustainment command and assign to combatant commands . implement useful practices of other services . don't preclude early use of logistics civilian augmentation program .