gao - 14-90 . washington , d.c.: december 27 , 2013 . ( see app . i for hhs's advanced development priorities for cbrn countermeasures. ) flexible manufacturing generally refers to the equipment and technologies that allow a facility to rapidly develop or manufacture a number of products simultaneously or in quick succession . these technologies include the use of disposable equipment , such as growing cell cultures in disposable plastic bag systems rather than in stainless steel tanks that require more time to clean and sterilize prior to the next use and the use of modular sterile rooms to allow for the manufacture of multiple products simultaneously within a given facility . other technologies include alternatives to more traditional methods of making influenza vaccine , such as using cell - based or recombinant technologies to make vaccine , rather than the traditional egg - based technology , or using adjuvants to enhance the immune response to vaccines . in addition to alternative vaccine development technologies , platform technologies provide flexible systems that have the potential to produce medical countermeasures for multiple threats . the use of flexible manufacturing technologies also has the potential to help provide surge capacity production in a public health emergency . we previously reported on the barriers industry faces in developing and manufacturing cbrn and pandemic influenza medical countermeasures , which create challenges for hhs . in april 2011 , we found that the barriers hhs identified in the phemce review continued to exist . specifically , we found that the lack of a commercial market continued to hinder large pharmaceutical companies from developing medical countermeasures . as a result , less - experienced biotechnology companies became the primary developers of such products , but these companies needed more scientific and regulatory assistance for testing the safety and efficacy of their countermeasures in development . in its 2010 phemce review , hhs stated that new approaches to vaccine manufacturing , such as the use of flexible manufacturing technologies , offered promising ways to meet the demands of pandemic vaccine production while simultaneously meeting needs related to other public health emergency threats . in our june 2011 review , hhs officials told us that the ciadms are intended to support countermeasure developers by providing needed resources for and expertise about manufacturing and to reduce the technical risks of researching and developing medical countermeasures . in addition , hhs officials indicated that such assistance by the ciadms could reduce the research and development costs of smaller , less - experienced companies . in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 , hhs's barda awarded nearly $440 million to establish its ciadms and a network of facilities to provide packaging support to ready the product for distribution , known as the fill finish manufacturing network . the ciadm contractors are required to develop three activities to support flexible manufacturing: pandemic influenza surge capacity , core services for cbrn medical countermeasure developers , and workforce training programs . according to barda officials , the fill finish manufacturing network will supplement the ciadms' pandemic influenza surge capacity and cbrn core services activities . hhs's barda awarded approximately $400 million in fiscal year 2012 to three contractors to establish the ciadms .