transmission control . transmission control measures decrease the risk for transmission of microorganisms through proper hand hygiene and the use of personal protective equipment , such as masks , gowns , and gloves . these measures also include the decontamination of objects and rooms . the types of transmission control measures used are based on how an illness is transmitted . for example , some categories of transmission are as follows: direct contact: person - to - person contact ( eg , two people shaking hands ) and physical transfer of the microorganism between an infected person and an uninfected person . indirect contact: contact with a contaminated object , such as secretions from an infected person on a doorknob or telephone receiver . droplet: eye , nose , or mouth of an uninfected person coming into contact with droplets ( larger than 5 micrometers ) containing the microorganism from an infected person , for example an infected person sneezing without covering his / her mouth with a tissue . airborne: contact with small droplets ( 5 micrometers or smaller ) or dust particles containing the microorganism , which are suspended in the air . exposure management . exposure management is the separation of infected individuals from noninfected individuals through isolation or quarantine . isolation refers to the separation of individuals who have a specific infectious illness from healthy individuals and the restriction of their movement to contain the spread of that illness . quarantine refers to the separation and restriction of movement of individuals who are not yet ill , but who have been exposed to an infectious agent and are potentially infectious . the success of these infectious disease control measures — case identification and contact tracing , transmission control , and exposure management — depends , in part , on the frequent and timely exchange of information . public health officials and health care providers need to be informed about any modifications of existing infectious disease control measures , the geographic progression of an outbreak , and reports of disease occurrence . likewise , elevating public knowledge about an infectious disease and its symptoms will enable infected individuals to seek medical attention as soon as possible to contain the spread . infectious disease experts emphasized that existing infectious disease control measures played a pivotal role in containing the spread of sars in both health care and community settings . the combinations of measures that were used depended on either the prevalence of the disease in the community or the number of sars patients served in a health care facility . no new measures were introduced to contain the sars outbreak in the united states ; instead , experts said strict compliance with and additional vigilance to enforce the use of current measures was sufficient . the successful implementation of all of the infectious disease control measures depended , in part , on effective communication among health care professionals and the general public . to prevent the spread of sars , public health authorities worked to identify every individual who might have been infected with the disease .