are they using financial statements ? if so , what information in the financial statements are they using to value stock ? what additional information would assist them in more accurately valuing stock ? participants noted the need to report information about the business model , as users of financial reports first must better understand the entity's business model in order to comprehend financial and nonfinancial information about the entity . financial statements today focus on reliability much more than on relevance . historical information is reliable , but not necessarily relevant . what are analysts doing with financial statements ? what do analysts use to value stock ? fair value information is evolving but improvements in reliability are needed . participants agreed that reliability is fundamental to useful business reporting ; however , participants felt that financial reporting would be much more useful if it were expanded to include key performance indicators and measures ( including disclosures on how the key measures were chosen ) . participants raised questions about the gaps in reporting of intangibles . for example , in a knowledge - based economy , one could argue that the most important assets are people ( human capital ) ; however , current financial reporting records investments in people as an expense and liability . participants agreed that it would be useful if financial reporting recognized people as assets , but raised the difficulty in valuing human capital . participants generally agreed that there is a demand for both historical and fair value reporting . however , participants felt that fasb needed to better differentiate between the two . in that respect , some participants felt that fasb is marching toward a “fair value” path and cautioned that the fair value reporting model is not always good and needs to be used only where it really makes sense . participants acknowledged that financial reporting , in addition to being largely driven by the accounting profession , also has been driven by the legal system , resulting in an overload of information that is too complex and not easily understood . disclosures that run on for pages are not understandable . experts are needed to interpret the disclosures and sometimes even they cannot decipher what is being reported . however , participants understand that accountants are taking a risk when they issue an opinion on the financial statements . the litigious environment has also led to a “check box” mentality where it is more important to follow the accounting rules when preparing financial statements than actually reporting the economic substance of the transaction . participants generally agreed that financial statements are not designed to serve all business needs and that other types of business reporting are needed to assist investors and other users in making decisions . participants also generally agreed that the demand side ( investors and other users of financial information ) , has not been as involved as it needs to be to make financial reporting more meaningful and understandable . more needs to be done to convince investors and other users to demand different reporting . voluntary disclosures are rare and only in industries that demand this type of information .