uasi ? impairs regional collaboration ? “yes” q4 . are there are any jurisdictions within your msa that are not a part of the uasi area ? yes 27 no 22 if “no,” go to question 8 . fema agreed with our recommendations . in prior reviews , we examined effective regional coordination in emergency preparedness efforts and collaboration among federal agencies to identify common approaches and practices . for example , in september 2004 we reviewed coordination practices in various metropolitan areas to identify regional programs with lessons learned that could be applied in the national capital region and elsewhere and identified four factors that enhance regional coordination efforts — a collaborative regional organization , flexibility in the membership and geographic area , a strategic plan with measurable goals and objectives , and funding at a regional level . ( see table 3 ) . in 2005 , we examined challenges that federal agencies face in coordinating their efforts and identified key practices that can enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts by among other things: defining and articulating a common outcome ( s ) ; establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies to achieve the outcome ; identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources ; achieving mutual agreement ( s ) on agency roles and responsibilities ; establishing compatible policies , procedures , and other means to operate developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report the results of collaborative efforts ; and reinforcing agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency plans and reports . in march 2000 , we reported that agencies can encounter a range of barriers when they attempt to collaborate . these include such challenges as missions that are not mutually reinforcing or that may even conflict , agencies' concerns about protecting jurisdiction over missions and control over resources , and incompatible procedures , processes , data , and computer systems — making reaching a consensus on strategies and priorities difficult . in september 2004 , we also reported that the short history of regional collaboration for homeland security is characterized by attempts of federal , state , and local governments to overcome a fragmented federal grant system and local jurisdictional barriers to assess needs , fill gaps , and plan for effective prevention and emergency response . in july 2002 , the president issued the national strategy for homeland security , which emphasized a shared responsibility for security involving close cooperation among all levels of government . to enhance emergency preparedness , the strategy called for systems that avoid duplication and increase collaboration to better align public and private resources for homeland security . we have consistently called for the development of a national , rather than purely federal , strategy that involves partners from all levels , including federal , state , and local organizations . for example , in testimony given in 2003 , we highlighted multiple barriers to addressing one basic area of preparedness — interoperable communications systems — including the lack of effective , collaborative , interdisciplinary , and intergovernmental planning . in another study of bioterrorism preparedness , we reported that although progress had been made in local planning , regional planning involving multiple municipalities , counties , or jurisdictions in neighboring states lagged .