army special operations command , u.s . special operations may differ from conventional operations in degree of strategic , physical , and political or diplomatic risk ; operational techniques ; modes of employment ; and dependence on intelligence and indigenous assets . as outlined in dod guidance , special operations can be conducted independently , but most are coordinated with conventional forces and interagency and multinational partners . moreover , sof needs support from the conventional force to perform most of its missions . the percentage of special operations military positions in each service's total authorized force level varied slightly by service . we reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with dod officials . figure 4 shows the percentage of authorized special operations military positions for each military service for fiscal years 2001 through 2014 . over the next few years , special operations military positions will likely constitute an increasing percentage of the services' authorized force levels should conventional forces be reduced . dod projects that authorized special operations military positions will remain at approximately 63,000 through fiscal year 2019 . however , overall force levels for the military services are expected to be reduced . specifically , dod's fiscal year 2015 budget request outlines a plan to cut more than 125,000 active - duty positions and approximately 63,000 reserve and national guard positions by the end of fiscal year 2019 . as the military services' authorized positions are reduced , special operations military positions would constitute a larger proportion of the services' total authorized force levels , but are likely to remain a relatively small portion of the overall force . while the size of sof has increased by about 47 percent since fiscal year 2001 , our analysis shows that the special operations – specific funding to support the force has more than tripled . we found that sof – specific funding increased from about $3.1 billion in fiscal year 2001 to about $9.8 billion in fiscal year 2014 . however , these figures may significantly understate the department's total investment in sof because the department does not fully track how much it costs the military services to support sof . in 1986 , congress called for the establishment of a joint service special operations capability under a single command . in april 1987 , the secretary of defense established socom with the mission to provide trained and combat - ready special operations forces to dod's geographic combatant commands . socom is a unified combatant command that performs service - like functions and has military department - like responsibilities and authorities . under u.s. code title 10 , sections 164 and 167 , socom's commander has the responsibility to organize , train , and equip sof for current and future challenges . in this capacity , socom develops special operations strategy and doctrine and is responsible for employment of forces , requirements validation , acquisition of special operations – peculiar equipment , and intelligence support . socom is also responsible for providing resources in the form of funding and special operations – specific equipment for sof .