support to the nset . the nni , through the nnco and appropriate agencies , among others , is directed to ( 1 ) establish goals , priorities , and metrics for evaluation for federal nanotechnology research , development , and other activities ; ( 2 ) invest in federal research and development programs in nanotechnology and related sciences to achieve these goals ; and ( 3 ) provide for interagency coordination of federal nanotechnology research , development , and other activities . the federal nanotechnology commitment is significant . cumulative reported nni funding since fiscal year 2001 amounts to more than $14 billion . nanotechnology research projects and activities undertaken by the nni member agencies are categorized into eight program component areas . agencies report their research funding for each program component area to the office of management and budget ( omb ) as part of the annual federal budget process . the seventh program component area comprises research “primarily directed at understanding the ehs impacts of nanotechnology development and corresponding risk assessment , risk management , and methods for risk mitigation,” which we refer to in this report as ehs research . these three strategy documents are: ( 1 ) nstc , committee on technology , subcommittee on nanoscale science , engineering , and technology , national nanotechnology initiative strategic plan ( february 2011 ) ; ( 2 ) nstc , committee on technology , subcommittee on nanoscale science , engineering , and technology , national nanotechnology initiative environmental , health , and safety research strategy ( october 2011 ) ; and ( 3 ) nstc , committee on technology , subcommittee on nanoscale science , engineering , and technology , the national nanotechnology initiative supplement to the president's 2012 budget ( february 2011 ) . economy and levels of government and involve a range of public and private organizations and entities . the 2011 nni strategic plan provides a vision and overarching goals for the program , including responsible development of nanotechnology , which includes ehs research . the 2011 nni ehs research strategy expands on the goal of the responsible development of nanotechnology by describing the state of science and research needed to ensure that nanotechnology provides maximum benefits to the environment and human well - being . the nni supplement to the president's 2012 budget serves as the annual report for the nni and describes recent activities by the nni member agencies and funding of the nni , including the funding level for the program component area related to ehs research . these nni strategy documents are the principal public record of the nstc's coordinating activities and reflect the nstc's guidance to agencies as they separately determine their budgets and activities for nanotechnology ehs research . in prior work , we have identified six desirable characteristics for national strategies and reviewed strategies that the federal government has used to plan for and report on crosscutting issues including emergency preparedness , financial literacy , influenza , and terrorism for these characteristics . programs , priorities , resource allocations , and standards that would enable federal agencies and other stakeholders to implement the strategies and achieve the identified results .