single - patient . for example , one manufacturer said that it evaluates whether it has enough supply of its drug available to successfully administer its clinical trial , as well as to provide the drug to expanded access patients . another manufacturer said that this is a particular concern early in the drug development process , as manufacturers typically only produce the amount of drug needed to support each clinical trial phase . generally , the drug's supply is low in the early clinical phases and increases in the later clinical phases . the financial and administrative resources required to fulfill the request . manufacturers said that resource requirements could particularly impact smaller manufacturers that have fewer resources available to process expanded access requests and administer clinical trials simultaneously . fda officials told us that the factors they consider when reviewing expanded access requests to determine whether that request should be allowed to proceed are based on criteria in regulation . specifically , upon receipt of an expanded access request , fda officials said that they review that request against the following four general criteria established in regulation: 1 . the patient has a serious or immediately life - threatening disease or condition . there is no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy . the potential benefit justifies the potential risks of the treatment , and those potential risks are not unreasonable in the context of the disease or condition to be treated . where the drug is at in the drug development process can affect the type of expanded access request that may be submitted to fda . ( see figure 2. ) in response to concerns raised by patients and physicians that the process for physicians trying to request expanded access to drugs for single patients was complex and cumbersome , fda issued a new simplified , alternative application form for these requests ( form fda 3926 ) in june 2016 , finalized its related guidance , and made changes to its website . according to fda , prior to these changes physicians who wanted expanded access for a single patient had to complete and submit the same form that manufacturers complete when establishing clinical trials ( form fda 1571 ) . according to fda officials , the new form requires the physician to complete 11 elements of information , far fewer than the 26 elements identified on form fda 1571 . fda officials estimate that the new application will take physicians , on average , 45 minutes to complete . in addition to the new application , fda finalized another guidance document which provided more details on the implementation of fda expanded access regulations , to further assist physicians in the expanded access process . fda has also redesigned its expanded access website pages to explain the new form and guidance document in detail . most stakeholders , including physicians , spoke positively about the new application and some said the new application is easier and takes less time to complete compared to form fda 1571 .