investigating accidents . fta requires oversight agencies to investigate accidents on the rail system that meet a certain damage or severity threshold and develop a corrective action plan for the causes leading to the accident . oversight agencies may hire a contractor or allow the transit agency to conduct the investigation on its behalf . submitting an annual report to fta . according to the fta rule , oversight agencies must submit an annual report to fta detailing their oversight activities , including results of accident investigations and the status of ongoing corrective actions . under the fta rule , rail transit agencies are mainly responsible for meeting the program standards that oversight agencies set out for them . however , the fta rule also lays out several specific requirements that oversight agencies must require transit agencies to follow , such as developing separate system safety and security plans , performing internal safety and security audits over a 3-year cycle , developing a hazard - management process , and reporting certain accidents to oversight agencies within 2 hours . fta also requires that these requirements are included in each oversight agency's program standard . the locations and types of transit agencies participating in the program are shown in figure 3 . in addition to fta , the state oversight agencies , and the rail transit agencies , other governmental agencies have some role in ensuring the safety and security of rail transit systems . one of these agencies is dhs' tsa . the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) , passed by congress in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , gave tsa authority for security over all transportation modes , including authority to issue security regulations . while tsa's most public transportation security duties are its airport screening and aviation related activities , tsa has taken steps to enhance rail transit security . for example , in may 2004 , tsa issued security directives to rail transit agencies to ensure all agencies were implementing a consistent baseline of security . also , tsa has hired 100 rail security inspectors , as authorized by congress . while the exact responsibilities of the inspectors are still being determined , a tsa official stated that they will monitor and enforce compliance with the security directives by passenger rail agencies , as well as increase security awareness among rail transit agencies , riders , and others . the inspectors have begun outreach activities with rail transit systems aimed at enhancing security in rail and mass transit systems . tsa officials stated their responsibilities encompass the security of other rail systems , including freight rail , which is consistent with atsa . in contrast to the enforcement role of tsa , the office of grants and training within dhs' preparedness directorate , plays a role in ensuring rail transit security through supporting security initiatives . the office of grants and training ( formerly known as the office of domestic preparedness ) is the primary federal source of security funding for passenger rail systems , and is the principal component of dhs responsible for preparing the united states for acts of terrorism .