reg . 824 , 828. entities at the end of 2011 . in the proposed rule , sec analyzed the anticipated initial compliance burden for the registration requirement , and estimated that the institutions would spend 6.5 hours completing the registration , on average , and individuals would spend 3 hours , on average . in the proposed rule , sec sought comment on whether the definition of a municipal advisor should exclude banks to the extent that the bank provides advice to a municipal entity about traditional banking products , such as deposit accounts . industry associations commented that banks should be explicitly exempted in the proposed rule because their activities are already supervised by federal and state banking regulators . however , sec noted that federal and state banking regulators supervise banks for safety and soundness purposes and not the quality of the investment advice they provide to their municipal entity clients . sec also received several comment letters from members of congress who noted that it was not the intent of congress to include traditional banking in the definition of municipal advice . sec is reviewing the comments it has received as it develops a final rule , and sec staff commented that the agency expects to implement its new oversight responsibilities for municipal advisors after careful consideration of the comments received . regulators and industry officials have noted that the full impact of the dodd - frank act on community banks and credit unions remains uncertain . industry officials also have noted that it generally is too soon to determine the act's overall impact on community banks' and credit unions' ability to lend to small businesses . according to our analysis of snl financial data , almost 90 percent of community banks and about one - third of credit unions held loans to small businesses in 2011 . although any provision in the dodd - frank act that affects these institutions could impact their customers ( including small businesses ) , officials from federal agencies , state regulatory associations , and industry associations we interviewed identified only one provision in the dodd - frank act ( discussed below ) that may directly impact community banks' and credit unions' ability to lend to small businesses . as discussed above , community banks are important lenders to small businesses . over the past decade , community banks have done more small business lending as a percentage of their total lending than large banks , although large banks have done more small business lending overall . small business lending by credit unions with less than $10 billion in assets has increased over the past decade from 2 percent to about 7 percent of their total lending . although a number of provisions may ultimately impact lending by smaller institutions , section 1071 was the only dodd - frank act provision identified by regulators and industry representatives as potentially having a direct impact on small business lending by community banks and credit unions . section 1071 amends the equal credit opportunity act to require financial institutions to collect and report information concerning credit applications made by women - owned , minority - owned , and small businesses .