the contract expires in 2017 . aoc also completed several projects to lower the costs of providing chilled water . aoc officials said that in fiscal year 2012 they began a practice known as “free cooling” at cpp to reduce electricity costs . during winter months , cpp uses outside air , the plant's cooling towers , and heat exchangers to chill water rather than using its electric chillers . a 2013 study of the chilled water system shows that cpp should be able to meet the majority of chilled water demand in winter months using free cooling , thereby lowering its electricity costs . the study estimated that free cooling would achieve about $307,000 annually in savings through reduced electricity use . also , in fiscal year 2014 , aoc installed new chillers at cpp . the 2013 chilled - water - system audit concluded cpp could produce chilled water more efficiently if it increased its use of two relatively new and efficient chillers located in the east refrigeration plant , where the chillers were underused due to the relatively poor condition of the cooling towers there . aoc initially planned to move the two chillers to the west refrigeration plant expansion . ultimately , aoc purchased and installed two new chillers of similar capacity and efficiency . additionally , in fiscal year 2014 aoc started construction to add two new chillers and three cooling towers to the west refrigeration plant expansion as part of the rpr project . aoc budget documents state the new chillers will operate 50 percent more efficiently than the older chillers . to better understand energy consumption , aoc installed energy meters at most of the buildings it serves and is installing sub - meters within selected buildings . energy meters can provide information on the consumption of steam , chilled water , and electricity . according to aoc officials , metering allows the agency to identify changes in energy consumption that could indicate equipment problems , measure progress on energy conservation , assist in identifying future conservation measures , and evaluate energy losses during distribution . within the last 6 years , aoc installed meters for most of the buildings served by cpp . aoc does not have meters for individual office spaces , but plans to install meters for some energy - intensive spaces , such as kitchens and data centers . according to aoc officials , the agency does not generally track energy use at the occupant level because of the cost and instead encourages energy conservation within offices through education and awareness activities . select operators of other district energy systems we interviewed specifically mentioned the installation of energy meters to minimize the costs of operating their systems . some of these operators said they installed meters at individual buildings served by their systems and are considering installing or have already installed submeters where appropriate . in addition , between 2008 and 2013 , aoc commissioned energy audits of most of the buildings served by cpp . energy audits involve examining a building's physical features and utility history to identify conservation opportunities .