iii ) . on average , the services reported they obligated almost $5 billion annually for installations in pacom's area of responsibility , with $3.7 billion obligated for operations and maintenance ( see fig . data provided by the military services projects that they will require approximately $5.2 billion per year through 2015 , of which $2.3 billion ( 45 percent ) will be for military construction and family housing and $2.9 billion per year ( 55 percent ) will be for installation operations and maintenance costs . however , the operations and maintenance costs may be significantly understated since the military services historically obligated approximately $3.7 billion annually from 2006 through 2010 for installation operation and maintenance costs , as discussed above , and the major transformation initiatives under way in south korea , japan , and guam may significantly increase costs over the long term , potentially through 2015 and beyond , as illustrated by the following examples . potential for cost growth in south korea: to provide housing for thousands of dependents that dod wants to move to south korea under tour normalization , dod has established the humphreys housing opportunity program , whereby , according to usfk officials , private developers would build housing for dod families and then recover their investments through the rents that military families pay using dod overseas housing allowance funds . ( current estimates indicate this monthly allowance would be about $4,200 / month for service members at camp humphreys. ) although using the humphreys housing opportunity program has the potential to lower or even eliminate construction - funding requirements , it would increase the army housing - allowance costs . one army estimate indicates fully implementing tour normalization could increase education and medical costs by almost $10 billion from 2012 through 2050 . according to usfk and state department officials , the united states and korea are currently consulting on the extent to which special measures agreement contributions ( funds provided and expenditures borne by the government of south korea to help defray the costs of the u.s. military presence in south korea ) will be used to pay for some military construction costs . based on historical information and the current special measures agreement through 2013 , south korea has provided or agreed to provide the united states on average ₩786 billion per year from fiscal years 2007 through 2013 , which is equivalent to approximately $698 million u.s. dollars . while using these contributions to pay for construction costs can lower dod's construction funding requirements , it also eliminates the opportunity dod has to apply those funds to reduce operation and maintenance costs and related appropriations , thus increasing the required funding in these appropriations . potential for cost growth in japan: the government of japan has historically been a major financial contributor , in the form of host - nation support funding , to help defray dod posture costs . however , after peaking in 1999 ( ¥276 billion ) , funding from japan has steadily declined . in 2010 , the government of japan provided ¥187 billion in host - nation support — the lowest total since 1992 .