( recommendation 4 ) . findings from these countries are not generalizable to those we did not review . to examine how the united states historically has met its iea 90-day reserve obligation , we analyzed eia data . to examine the extent to which doe has identified the optimal size and potential need for additional petroleum product reserves for the spr , we reviewed doe studies and interviewed some of the authors of these studies . specifically , we reviewed doe's 2016 long - term strategic review of the spr , as well as studies and analyses conducted as part of the 2016 review . we also estimated days of u.s. net import protection for 2017 and 2027 using doe's estimates of the spr's size , iea data on days of net import protection , and eia's 2017 annual energy outlook forecast data on net oil imports . we compared those estimates to the iea 90-day reserve obligation . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed relevant documentation , interviewed officials , and compared the data with similar data published in other sources . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . to examine the extent to which doe's modernization plans for the spr have taken into account the effects of congressionally mandated oil sales , we reviewed documentation on the spr's modernization , including plans and analysis of alternatives . we also reviewed our best practices for analysis of alternatives , when we examined doe's analysis of alternatives for the spr's modernization . we reviewed the energy policy and conservation act that authorizes the spr , doe annual reports on spr activities , and doe budget justifications for fiscal years 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 . we interviewed doe's contractor that maintains spr sites to obtain views on any challenges in moving forward with modernization plans and meeting congressionally mandated sales . crude oil and petroleum product markets are global . therefore , while a release of crude oil or petroleum products from any country during a supply disruption can have global benefits , the ability of any individual country to significantly affect these global markets is limited . we conducted this performance audit from february 2017 to may 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . oil and petroleum products markets have changed substantially in the years since the establishment of the spr . in its review , doe did not determine an optimal size for the spr , and its analysis was limited in several ways . in particular , doe did not fully consider recent and expected future changes in crude oil and petroleum market conditions such as the implications of projected fluctuations in u.s. net imports or the role that increased levels of private reserves could play in responding to supply disruptions .