in this scenario , net losses would continue through year 10 . the reduced borrowing costs reduced the net benefits of switching to a $1 coin . for example , officials from the bureau of printing and engraving pointed out that replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin would also have environmental impacts relating to obtaining raw materials and carbon dioxide emissions , among others . benefits of reduced interest expense due to increased seigniorage would occur more heavily in later years . under a scenario that does not consider interest savings due to seigniorage , a net loss of approximately $1.8 billion would accrue during the 10-year period for an average cost of $179 million per year . as shown in figure 3 , net losses would be incurred in 9 of the 10 years . in particular , large costs would be incurred in each of the first 4 years because of the large number of coins that would need to be produced for the transition , as was the case in the scenario discussed above . as in the previous analysis , in year 5 , there would be a temporary net benefit because coins would be overproduced during the previous 4 years and coin production would fall to zero in that year — and the cost is therefore less than the cost of producing $1 notes that would have been incurred had the transition not taken place . after year 5 , net losses would continue to be incurred because , although the life of a $1 coin is longer than the life of a $1 note , coins cost more than notes to produce . in 2011 , we reported the results of our sensitivity analyses , including one in which replacement leads to a decrease in the demand for currency as people switch to electronic payments . the treasury also provided technical comments , which we addressed as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , and the chairman of the federal reserve . while this scenario suggests that there would be no net benefits from switching to a $1 coin , we believe that not including the interest savings related to seigniorage omits a monetary benefit to the government . under this scenario , we include the net benefits of interest savings related to seigniorage , but assume that a single $1 coin would be produced to replace each $1 note . in total , across the 10 years the total net loss of switching to $1 coins would be $582 million , or just over $58 million per year . as shown in figure 4 , net losses would be incurred in 9 of 10 years of this scenario . the costs of producing coins for the transition are highest in the first 3 years , followed by benefits in the fourth year because of the overproduction of coins during the transition . in this scenario , far fewer coins would be produced because of the low replacement ratio , and thus the costs associated with their production would be much less than in the previous scenarios .