not available . not available . in addition to the individual named above , rita grieco , assistant director ; amy abramowitz ; derrick collins ; elizabeth eisenstadt ; gregory hanna ; carol henn ; susan irving ; bert japikse ; thanh lu ; sara ann moessbauer ; michelle sager ; and laura shumway made key contributions to this report . iv ) . ( 2 ) what advantages and challenges did stakeholders say were associated with these three programs ? ( 3 ) what approaches are available for enhancing the three programs ? to address these questions , we ( 1 ) reviewed federal law , proposed regulations , and a department of transportation ( dot ) report on the pnrs program ; ( 2 ) reviewed pertinent documentation , including some of the project proposals , plans , and information submitted to dot for projects funded by these programs ; and ( 3 ) interviewed officials from 56 “stakeholder” entities to understand the programs' advantages , challenges , and possible enhancements . stakeholders broadly have interest and expertise in one or more of the three programs , in a specific transportation project funded by one of these programs , or in federal surface transportation policy generally . the stakeholders we interviewed included officials from the following entities: dot headquarters in washington , d.c. , including the office of the secretary ; fhwa ; the federal railroad administration ( fra ) ; and the maritime administration ( marad ) , as well as fhwa division offices in eight states for a total of 12 dot entities ; and 16 state transportation departments , 16 local government agencies , and 12 transportation associations or other expert organizations . we conducted some of these interviews as part of our site visits to eight states — california , new york , new jersey , connecticut , illinois , wisconsin , washington , and oregon — where we met with officials who manage projects funded through the three programs . the 16 state transportation departments we selected for interviews included 14 states that collectively accounted for 86 projects funded by the three programs and 2 states , florida and wyoming , that did not have projects funded by these three programs . in selecting our sites , we considered geographic diversity , the funding authorized by states for these programs , and the characteristics of the projects funded . in addition , for comparison , we contacted transport canada , the transportation department of the federal canadian government , and the ministry of transportation and infrastructure of the canadian province of british columbia , to obtain information about similar infrastructure investment programs . ( see app . i for a full list of the entities we contacted during our work on this report. ) we also reviewed fhwa's data on amounts authorized , appropriated , and obligated for pnrs , nciip , and cbi . to assess the reliability and quality of fhwa's financial data , we analyzed related documentation and interviewed knowledgeable agency officials . through these efforts , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for this report . we conducted this performance audit from december 2007 to february 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .