usaid . usaid administers projects awarded to implementing partners that address counter - trafficking in persons , including increased investments in conflict and crisis areas , and integrating such projects into broader development projects . usaid field missions manage the majority of these counter - trafficking activities through projects that address trafficking challenges specific to the field mission's region or country . usaid's center of excellence on democracy , human rights and governance ( drg center ) in washington , d.c. is responsible for oversight of usaid's counter - trafficking policy . the drg center is responsible for coordinating and reporting on usaid - wide counter - trafficking in persons efforts ; oversees the implementation of usaid's counter - trafficking in persons policy in collaboration with regional bureaus and country missions ; works with regional bureaus and country missions to gather counter - trafficking best practices and lessons learned ; provides technical assistance and training to field and washington - based staff on designing , managing , and monitoring and evaluating trafficking in persons projects ; and conducts and manages research and learning activities related to combating trafficking in persons to collect data to inform the design of field projects . dod . dod's combating trafficking in persons program management office , under the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness in the defense human resources activity , develops trafficking awareness and training material for all dod components . on december 16 , 2002 , the president signed national security presidential directive 22 , which declared the united states had a zero tolerance policy for trafficking in persons . the combating trafficking in persons program management office is responsible for overseeing , developing , and providing the tools necessary for implementing national security directive 22 within dod . the office has developed several different training programs , designed to provide an overview of trafficking in persons ( including signs of trafficking , key policies and procedures , and reporting procedures ) , as well as awareness materials for distribution to dod components and defense contractors overseas . treasury . treasury has activities , but not specific programs , that may support wider u.s. efforts to address counter - trafficking in persons , according to treasury officials . dol . within dol , the bureau of international labor affairs' ( ilab ) office of child labor , forced labor , and human trafficking ( ocft ) conducts research , publishes reports , and administers projects awarded to implementing partners on international child labor , forced labor , and trafficking in persons . ilab's reports include the annual findings on the worst forms of child labor report , which assesses the efforts of approximately 140 countries and territories to eliminate the worst forms of child labor in the areas of laws and regulations , institutional mechanisms for coordinating and enforcement , and government policies and programs . ilab also reports on the list of goods produced by child labor or forced labor showing goods and their source countries which ilab has reason to believe are produced by child labor or forced labor in violation of international standards .