complex conditions have contributed to increasing wildland fire severity . these conditions have been decades in the making , and will take decades to resolve . the agencies must develop an effective and affordable strategy for addressing these conditions in light of the large federal deficit and the long - term fiscal challenges facing our nation . to make informed decisions about an effective and affordable long - term approach to addressing wildland fire problems , the agencies need to develop a cohesive strategy that identifies the available long - term options and associated funding for reducing excess vegetation and responding to wildland fires . because the agencies cannot develop such a strategy until they complete certain key tasks , we continue to believe that in the interim the agencies must create a tactical plan for developing this strategy so that congress can monitor the agencies' progress . while the agencies continue to work toward developing a cohesive strategy , they have initiated a number of efforts intended to contain wildland fire costs , but the agencies cannot demonstrate the effectiveness of these cost containment efforts , in part because the agencies have no clearly defined cost - containment goals and objectives . without clear goals , the agencies cannot develop consistent standards by which to measure their performance . further , without these goals and objectives , federal land and fire managers in the field are more likely to select strategies and tactics that favor suppressing fires quickly over those that seek to balance the benefits of protecting the resources at risk and the costs of protecting them . perhaps most important , without a clear vision of what they are trying to achieve and a systematic approach for achieving it , the agencies — and congress and the american people — have little assurance that their cost - containment efforts will lead to substantial improvement . moreover , because cost - containment goals should be considered in relation to other wildland fire program goals — such as protecting life , resources , and property — the agencies must integrate cost - containment goals within the overall cohesive strategy for responding to wildland fires that we have consistently recommended . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . the officials said they expected to have a prototype developed for the council's review in june 2007 and to substantially complete the system by june 2008 . we have yet to systematically review the modifications , but after reviewing agency reports on the modifications and interviewing knowledgeable officials , we have concerns that the modifications may not allow the agencies to meet fpa's key goals . for example , under the redesigned system , local land managers will use a different method to analyze and select various budget alternatives , and it is unclear whether this method will identify the most cost - effective allocation of resources . in addition , it is unclear how the budget alternatives for local units will be meaningfully aggregated on a nationwide basis , a key fpa goal .