performance measures . u.s. agencies implementing capacity development projects have not developed performance measures for all of their efforts , particularly outcome - related performance measures that would allow them to determine whether u.s. efforts at the civilian ministries have achieved both u.s. and iraqi desired goals and objectives . the u.s. embassy did conduct a baseline assessment in august 2006 of the civilian ministries to gauge their capacity to plan , prepare an operating budget , and conduct key tasks rather than the progress or impact of ministry capacity efforts . the assessment was completed by u.s. senior advisors and included indicators such as whether a ministry had a strategic plan and the percentage of budgeted funds disbursed in the previous year . u.s. officials stated that an updated state assessment of the civilian ministries was scheduled for completion at the end of june 2007 , but the embassy decided in july not to continue this effort , according to embassy officials . in comparison , mnstc - i is developing metrics to measure the progress and impact of efforts at the security ministries . mnstc - i began conducting monthly assessments of mod and moi in mid - 2006 . however , in april 2007 , mnstc - i officials stated that the commanding general decided to retool the assessment in consultation with the iraqi government to better gauge the results of u.s. efforts . officials stated that monthly assessments are being conducted at the field level to determine whether the mod and moi are ensuring iraqi security forces units are sufficiently manned , have required weapons , and are being paid . mnstc - i officials stated that they also recently began conducting quarterly assessments to determine what tasks or processes at the ministries may need to be adjusted to achieve results in the field . for example , the new assessment might determine whether capacity development efforts help mod recruit and retain enough troops to maintain manning requirements . officials were not able to share the new assessments with us because they are still being developed . future costs , resource needs , and risk . the overall strategy should also address costs , priorities , and resources needed to achieve the end - state and how the strategy balances benefits , costs , and risks . guidance on costs and resources needed using a risk management approach would assist congress and implementing organizations to make resource decisions . although u.s. agencies have provided data on u.s. funding for current capacity development efforts at the iraqi civilian and security ministries , agencies have not identified the costs and resources needed beyond the budget requests for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . moreover , they have not determined how much funding overall is necessary to achieve the stated long - term goal of a self - sufficient iraqi government . without these cost data , neither u.s. agencies nor congress can reliably determine the cost of capacity development , which u.s. and international officials have noted is a long - term process .