gao - 11-401 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2011 . we did not independently determine households' eligibility . in april 2012 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) released a report on snap that estimates a 4.3 percent annual reduction in snap participants over the 2013-2022 period if federal snap income and asset limits were applied to all categorically eligible households . ( 2 ) what effect has bbce had on program costs ? ( 3 ) what are the program integrity implications , if any , of bbce ? as criteria for our review , we examined federal laws affecting snap , as well as usda regulations and guidance related to snap and specifically to bbce . to answer our research questions , we collected and analyzed information through several methods . at the federal level , we reviewed usda's information on states' bbce policies and interviewed department officials . we also reviewed usda's data on snap households , program costs , and error rates for the 50 states ; washington , d.c. ; guam ; and the virgin islands . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . because usda's data lack information on the assets of snap households deemed eligible under bbce , which is key to understanding the effects of bbce on participation and benefit costs , we also reviewed additional national data sources that provide information on household assets , such as the survey of consumer finances , and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . while these data sources provide estimates of the average amount of assets owned by households of different income levels , which can therefore be used to approximate the level of assets owned by snap households , they do not directly provide estimates of snap households' assets . to gather additional background information on the effects of various factors on snap participation and costs , we identified and reviewed additional studies on snap conducted by usda and several research organizations that assess programs for low - income populations . to gather information from state and local snap administrators on the effects of bbce policies , as well as other simultaneous changes to the program , we conducted site visits to 5 states ( arizona , illinois , north carolina , south carolina , and wisconsin ) and 18 local snap offices located in both urban and rural areas in those states . we selected these states because they varied in their bbce adoption dates , characteristics of their bbce policies , and geographic locations . states selected also had relatively large snap caseloads and generally high proportions of their snap households deemed eligible under bbce policies . within each state , we interviewed state snap administrators , as well as local snap administrators from three to four local offices . we cannot generalize our findings from the site visits beyond the states and localities we visited . in addition to our site visits , we also interviewed state snap administrators in idaho and michigan to gather information on the impacts of the asset limits that these states added to their bbce policies in 2011 .