mr . chairmen , census day is less than 2 years away and address canvassing is 1 year away . the challenges we highlighted today call for effective risk mitigation by the u.s. census bureau , and careful monitoring and oversight by the department of commerce , the office of management and budget , the congress , gao , and other key stakeholders . as in the past , we look forward to supporting the committee and subcommittee's oversight efforts to promote an accurate and cost - effective census . mr . chairmen , this concludes our statement . we would be glad to answer any questions you and the committee and subcommittee members may have . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact mathew scirè at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sciremj@gao.gov or david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . other key contributors to this testimony include signora may , assistant director ; mathew bader ; thomas beall ; jeffrey demarco ; elizabeth hosler ; richard hung ; anne inserra ; andrea levine ; lisa pearson ; sonya phillips ; cynthia scott ; niti tandon ; jonathan ticehurst ; timothy wexler ; and katherine wulff . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . this has the potential to significantly increase costs . the bureau still needs to agree upon and finalize requirements for the fdca program . in march 2006 , we reported that the fdca project office had not implemented the full set of acquisition management capabilities ( such as project and acquisition planning and requirements development and management ) that were needed to effectively manage the program . for example , although the project office had developed baseline functional requirements for the acquisition , the bureau had not yet validated and approved them . subsequently , in october 2007 , we reported that changes to requirements had been a contributing factor to both cost increases and schedule delays experienced by the fdca program . in june 2007 , an assessment by an independent contractor of the fdca program reported on requirements management problems — much like those we reported in march 2006 . similar to our recommendation , the independent assessors recommended that the bureau immediately stabilize requirements by defining and refining them . the bureau has recently made efforts to further define requirements for the fdca program , and it has estimated that the revised requirements will result in significant cost increases . on january 16 , 2008 , the bureau provided the fdca contractor with a list of over 400 requirements for the fdca program to reconcile .