( see fig . in contrast , there was a significant difference between ses and non - ses managers' perceptions of having the decision - making authority they needed to help the agency accomplish its strategic goals . compared to the 57 percent of ses managers who reported having such authority to a great or very great extent in 2003 , only 38 percent of non - ses managers reported having such authority to a great or very great extent . ( see fig . moreover , fewer than half of managers reported receiving relevant training . managers also perceived a lack of positive recognition for helping agencies achieve results . unfortunately , most existing federal performance appraisal systems are not designed to support a meaningful performance - based pay system in that they fail to link institutional , program , unit , and individual performance measurement and reward systems . in our view , one key need is to modernize performance management systems in executive agencies so that they link to the agency's strategic plan , related goals , and desired outcomes and are therefore capable of adequately supporting more performance - based pay and other personnel decisions . managers reported persistent challenges in setting outcome - oriented goals , measuring performance , and collecting useful data . focus group participants and survey respondents noted that outcome - oriented performance measures were especially difficult to establish when the program or line of effort was not easily quantifiable . for example , implementing gpra in a regulatory environment and meeting gpra reporting requirements for intergovernmental grant programs are particularly challenging . managers also identified difficulties in distinguishing between the results produced by the federal program and results caused by external factors or nonfederal actors , such as with grant programs . finally , managers reported that timely and useful performance information is not always available . crosscutting issues continue to be a challenge to gpra implementation . our review of six agencies' strategic and annual performance plans showed some improvement in addressing their crosscutting program efforts , but a great deal of improvement is still necessary . we have previously reported and testified that gpra could provide omb , agencies , and congress with a structured framework for addressing crosscutting policy initiatives and program efforts . it can also be a valuable tool to address mission fragmentation and program overlap . omb could use the provision of gpra that calls for omb to develop a governmentwide performance plan to integrate expected agency - level performance . it could also be used to more clearly relate and address the contributions of alternative federal strategies . unfortunately , this provision has not been fully implemented . instead , omb has used the president's budget to present high - level information about agencies and certain program performance issues . the current agency - by - agency focus of the budget does not provide the integrated perspective of government performance envisioned by gpra . for example , the fiscal year 2004 budget identified budget requests and performance objectives by agency , such as the u.s. department of defense , as opposed to crosscutting governmentwide themes .