dearborn . city officials said epa region 5 did everything that could have been done to inform the public about the cleanup . according to these officials , epa informed the mayor's office very early in the process and asked the city to appoint a liaison to work with epa on the site cleanup . city officials also said epa met with local government officials and the emergency - management coordinator to determine any concerns they might have . overall , city officials thought epa was professional , in control of the situation , and cognizant that they needed to maintain frequent contact with the residents . minneapolis . city officials said they already had a good working relationship with epa region 5 and were impressed with epa's efforts to be open and available to the community through , among other things , public meetings and door - to - door contacts . they said that epa was very upfront with city officials , established good credibility with members of the community , and was respected by local activist groups . salt lake city ( two sites ) . officials from the salt lake city government said epa's interaction with the local government was excellent and epa staff were always accessible to discuss their concerns . epa region 8 staff first called them to explain that the sites had processed asbestos - contaminated ore from libby and were likely contaminated . when the city public utility offices raised concerns about whether contamination under the streets near one of the sites was a threat to their employees , epa met with them to address their concerns . once epa began the removal action , epa kept the local government informed via weekly e - mails , three meetings , and a site visit . there were four sites ( newark , wilder , great falls , and hamilton township ) where local government officials said they were somewhat to largely dissatisfied with epa's notification efforts . newark . a city official said a newark fire department official first found out about the site cleanup from county health department officials and the california department of health . after hearing about the contamination and activities at the site , the fire department official informed the city manager and the city's executive team . the city officials said that epa region 9 had very little contact with the local government as the cleanup proceeded . wilder . a city official said he first learned about the site from a local newspaper reporter and that epa region 4 notified the city after it decided to clean up the site . according to this official , if the city had known earlier , it could have cordoned off the area to prevent children from riding their bikes through the site . the city official was also concerned that epa did not do enough to contact former workers and identify people who took asbestos - contaminated waste rock from the site to use in their yards . great falls . a city official at the great falls site said epa region 8 did not notify the city about the cleanup .