( see fig . we selected the hud field office in miami - dade because it oversaw the miami - dade housing authority , which had been the most recent housing agency to go into receivership pursuant to a settlement agreement resolving allegations of financial mismanagement . we also met with officials from three other hud field offices: baltimore , san francisco , and washington , d.c . within their portfolios , these field offices all have housing agencies with active operating fund , capital fund , and hope vi programs , with a range of housing agencies of different sizes , and in proximity to cities near gao offices . although the results of our discussion with these field offices may not be generalized across all field offices , our discussions provided important context on hud's implementation of its oversight processes and corroboration of information we collected . we also obtained information on hud's oversight procedures with staff from selected public housing agencies in each of the hud field office locations: the housing authority of the city of alameda , housing authority of the county of monterey , richmond housing authority , and san francisco housing authority in california ; the miami - dade housing authority and housing authority of the city of fort lauderdale in florida ; the district of columbia housing authority ; and the housing authority of baltimore city and prince george's county housing authority in maryland . to understand commonly occurring reported findings of inappropriate use or mismanagement of public housing funds by housing agencies , we conducted a content analysis of findings in hud's office of inspector general ( oig ) audit and single audit reports of housing agencies . through this analysis we developed a number of categories and subcategories of common findings reported in these audits , including instances of noncompliance and internal control deficiencies . we took steps to ensure that the categories and subcategories we developed were consistently applied across both oig and single audit reports , which included independent verification that the established categories and subcategories in the oig reports were applicable to the findings we analyzed in the single audit reports . to select oig audits for our analysis , we obtained a list of all audit reports with findings related to the three public housing funds ( operating fund , capital fund , and hope vi ) from 2002 through 2007 . this list contained 144 audit reports . we also determine whether these audits met the following additional criteria for inclusion in our content analysis sample: ( 1 ) the audit findings were related to inappropriate use of funds and mismanagement issues , and ( 2 ) the audits were initiated by oig or entities other than hud program officials . we identified 81 oig audits that met these criteria and constituted our final sample . single audit reports for our analysis were selected from audits conducted from audit years 2002 through 2005 . this period differs from one for our analysis of oig audit report because single audit reports are not due to hud or to the federal audit clearinghouse — the source from which we drew our sample — until 9 months after a housing agency's fiscal year end .