that system is now complete . however , the federal highway program's financing and delivery mechanisms have not substantially changed and their continued relevance in the 21st century is unclear . in addition , without significant changes in funding mechanisms or revenue sources , or reductions in planned spending , the htf is projected to begin incurring significant deficits in the years ahead . as a result , in 2007 , we added financing the nation's federal transportation infrastructure to gao's high risk list . the proliferation of federal surface transportation programs has , over time , resulted in an amalgam of policy interests that may not accurately reflect current national concerns and priorities . although policymakers have attempted to clarify federal transportation policy in the past and an fhwa task force has called for focusing federal involvement on activities that clearly promote national objectives , current policy statements continue to cover a wide spectrum of broadly defined federal interests ranging from promoting global competitiveness to improving citizens' quality of life . while these federal programs , activities , and funding flows reflect the interests of various constituencies , they are not as a whole aligned with a strategic , coherent , and well - defined national interest . in short , the overarching federal interest has blurred . once the federal interest has been refocused and more clearly defined , policymakers will have a foundation for allocating scarce federal resources according to the level of national interest . with the federal interest in surface transportation clearly defined , policymakers can clarify the goals for federal involvement . the more specific , measurable , achievable , and outcome - based the goals are , the better the foundation will be for allocating resources and optimizing results . even though some federal transportation safety programs are linked to measurable outcome - based goals , such as achieving a specific rate of safety - belt use to reduce traffic fatalities , the formula funding for general improvements to transit facilities or highway systems is generally provided without reference to achieving specific outcomes for federal involvement . for example , the guidelines for state and local recipients' use of the largest highway and transit formula grant funds , such as the surface transportation program or block grant program ( urbanized area formula grants ) , are based on broad project eligibility criteria . these criteria involve the type of highway or type of work ( eg , transit capital investment versus operating assistance ) rather than the achievement of clearly defined and measurable outcomes . furthermore , although dot has already established some outcome measures as part of its strategic planning process , its agencywide goals and outcomes cover a vast array of activities and are generally not directly linked to project selection or funding decisions for most highway funding and the largest transit and safety programs . without specific and measurable outcomes for federal involvement , policymakers will have difficulty determining whether certain programs are achieving desired results . after identifying the federal interest and federal goals , policymakers can clearly define the federal government's role in working toward each goal and define that role in relation to the roles of other levels of government and other stakeholders .