iii ) . as detailed in appendix iii , product coverage , as measured by tariff lines eligible for duty - free treatment , is extensive for most u.s. preference programs , products , and partners . in 1996 , the number of duty - free tariff lines offered under gsp was expanded to provide additional benefits to beneficiary least - developed countries ( ldc ) . enactment of the regional programs continued this expansion . but , as figure 1 shows , notable gaps remain in tariff lines available for duty - free import under preference programs , particularly in agricultural and textile and apparel products . moreover , in examining coverage by beneficiary countries' trade with the united states in 2006 , using the ratio of eligible to dutiable imports for each partner , we find wide variation in coverage even within programs . our analysis finds that: ( 1 ) countries eligible for only gsp or gspldc have the least coverage of partners' dutiable imports — approximately 25 percent , ( 2 ) regional programs and gspldc have much higher coverage of partners' dutiable imports , and ( 3 ) country variations in coverage are wide . for example , 35 gsp or gspldc beneficiaries , including lebanon , paraguay , somalia , and zimbabwe , have high coverage rates , exceeding 75 percent of the value of their dutiable imports . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe how u.s. preference programs affect the united states , ( 2 ) review the effects of the programs on exports and development of foreign beneficiaries , ( 3 ) identify trade - offs facing the programs , and ( 4 ) evaluate the overall approach to preference programs . we followed the same overall methodology to complete objectives 1 , 3 , and 4 . we reviewed and analyzed u.s. laws and regulations , authoritative international trade reports / documents describing the impact of trade preference programs on the united states , such as the biennial impact studies from the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) on the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) and the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , and periodicals . we interviewed officials from agencies participating in the trade policy staff committee — including the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) ; the departments of agriculture , commerce , labor , state , and the treasury ; u.s. customs and border protection ; and itc — regarding the impact of preferences on the u.s. economy . we also interviewed representatives of businesses that used the preference programs and nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) that have filed petitions under the programs . we reviewed academic , world trade organization , and other research studies , on the effects of preference erosion on developing countries . in addition , we analyzed the 2006 u.s. government reports on the special 301 process , the august 2007 report on the worst forms of child labor , and finally , the 2007 state department report on trafficking in persons .