( see fig . for sponsors who make contributions in any given year that exceed the minimum required contribution , the excess plus interest is credited against future required contributions . limiting the use of credit balances to offset contribution requirements might also prevent sponsors of significantly underfunded plans from avoiding contributions . such limitations might also be applied based on the plan sponsor's financial condition . for example , sponsors with poor cash flow or low credit ratings could be restricted from using their credit balances to reduce their contributions . limit lump - sum distributions . defined benefit pension plans may offer participants the option of receiving their benefit in a lump - sum payment . allowing participants to take lump - sum distributions from severely underfunded plans , especially those sponsored by financially weak companies , allows the first participants who request a distribution to drain plan assets , which might result in the remaining participants receiving reduced payments from pbgc if the plan terminates . however , the payment of lump sums by underfunded plans may not directly increase losses to the single employer program because lump sums reduce plan liabilities as well as plan assets . raise the level of tax - deductible contributions . the irc and erisa restrict tax - deductible contributions to prevent plan sponsors from contributing more to their plan than is necessary to cover accrued future benefits . raising these limitations might result in pension plans being better funded , decreasing the likelihood that they will be underfunded should they terminate . modifying program guarantee would decrease pbgc from underfunded plans . this approach could preserve plan assets plan underfunding modifying certain guaranteed benefits could decrease losses incurred by by preventing additional losses that pbgc would incur when a plan is terminated . however , participants would lose benefits provided by some plan sponsors . erisa could be amended to: phase - in the guarantee of shutdown benefits . pbgc is concerned about its exposure to the level of shutdown benefits that it guarantees . shutdown benefits provide additional benefits , such as significant early retirement benefit subsidies to participants affected by a plant closing or a permanent layoff . such benefits are primarily found in the pension plans of large unionized companies in the auto , steel , and tire industries . in general , shutdown benefits cannot be adequately funded before a shutdown occurs . phasing in guarantees from the date of the applicable shutdown could decrease the losses incurred by pbgc from underfunded plans . however , modifying these benefits would reduce the early retirement benefits for participants who are in plans with such provisions and are affected by a plant closing or a permanent layoff . dislocated workers , particularly in manufacturing , may suffer additional losses from lengthy periods of unemployment or from finding reemployment only at much lower wages . expand restrictions on unfunded benefit increases . currently , plan sponsors must meet certain conditions before increasing the benefits of plans that are less than 60 percent funded . increasing this threshold , or restricting benefit increases when plans reach the threshold , could decrease the losses incurred by pbgc from underfunded plans .