for considered . effective monitoring and reporting can also help detect emerging issues . in addition , agencies can also enhance detective controls to identify and recover overpayments . for instance , enhancing incentives for grantees , such as state and local governments , could help increase attention to preventing , identifying , and recovering improper payments . agencies cited a number of causes for the estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments , including insufficient documentation ; incorrect computations ; changes in program requirements ; and , in some cases , fraud . beginning in fiscal year 2011 , according to omb's guidance , agencies were required to classify the root causes of estimated improper payments into three general categories for reporting purposes: ( 1 ) documentation and administrative errors , ( 2 ) authentication and medical necessity errors , and ( 3 ) verification errors . information on the root causes of the current improper payment estimates is necessary for agencies to target effective corrective actions and implement preventive measures . while agencies generally reported some description of the causes of improper payments for their respective programs in their fiscal year 2011 reports , many agencies did not use the three categories to classify the types of errors and quantify how many errors can be attributed to that category . of the 79 programs with improper payment estimates in fiscal year 2011 , we found that agencies reported the root causes information using the required categories for 42 programs in their fiscal year 2011 pars and afrs . together , these programs represented about $46 billion , or 40 percent of the total reported $115 billion in improper payment estimates for fiscal year 2011 . of the $46 billion , the estimated improper payment amounts were spread across the three categories , with documentation and administrative errors being cited most often . we did not calculate the dollar amounts in each category due to the imprecise narratives included in some of the agencies' reporting of identified causes , which would have required more detailed information and / or detailed examination of the underlying data . nonetheless , additional analysis regarding the root causes is needed in order to identify and implement effective corrective and preventive actions in the various programs . many agencies and programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments , including overpayments and underpayments . preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of eligibility , predictive analytic tests , training programs , and timely resolution of audit findings . further , addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an effective preventive strategy to be considered . upfront eligibility validation through data sharing . data sharing allows entities that make payments — to contractors , vendors , participants in benefit programs , and others — to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate . when effectively implemented , data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs and in identifying improper payments that have already been made .