damage was widespread . in the wake of katrina , for example , the red cross estimated that nearly 525,000 people were displaced . their homes were declared uninhabitable , and streets , bridges , and other landmarks were destroyed . approximately 90,000 square miles were affected overall and , as shown in figure 4 , entire communities were obliterated . the task of updating maf / tiger for 2010 to reflect these changes will be a formidable one , as much has changed since the 2000 census . for the 2010 census , locating housing units and the people who reside in them will be critical to counting the population of places hit by the hurricanes , especially since it is estimated that hundreds of thousands of people have — either temporarily or permanently — migrated to other areas of the country . to ensure an accurate count , it will be important for the bureau to have accurate maps and an updated address file for the 2010 census in those areas affected by hurricanes katrina and rita . bureau officials do not believe a specific plan is needed to update the address and map files for those areas affected by hurricanes katrina and rita . although census day is still several years away , preliminary activities , such as operations for building the maf , have to occur sooner . consequently , a key question is whether the bureau's existing operations are adequate for capturing the dramatic changes to roads and other geographic features caused by the hurricanes , or whether the bureau needs to develop enhanced or additional procedures before august 2007 when luca is scheduled to begin . for example , new housing and street construction in the areas affected by the hurricanes could require more frequent updates of the bureau's address file and maps . also , local governments' participation in luca might be affected because of the loss of key personnel , information systems , or records needed to verify the bureau's address lists and maps . further , the bureau has not identified local partners with whom it can monitor this situation . the bureau's short - term strategy for dealing with the effect of the hurricanes on maf / tiger is to see who returns and whether communities decide to rebuild . bureau officials stated that by 2009 , as census workers prepare to go out in the field for address canvassing for the 2010 census , residents will have decided whether to return to the region . the bureau believes that by then it will be in a better position to add or delete addresses for areas in the gulf region affected by the hurricanes . however , bureau officials could not provide us with information on the basis of their conclusion that by 2009 , most affected persons will have made final decisions about whether they are returning to the region . this approach may not be adequate , given the magnitude of the area , population , and infrastructure affected .