( see fig . for for - profit and nonprofit snfs , both overall costs and total revenues increased , on average , in each of the 4 years we examined . for example , for - profit and nonprofit snfs generally had small annual increases in their direct care costs . however , because their revenue also increased slightly each year , on average , their direct care costs remained relatively constant as a percentage of revenue . both overall costs and direct care costs decreased , on average , at government snfs in each fiscal year from 2011 through 2014 . total revenues also decreased , on average , at government snfs between fiscal years 2011 and 2014 . regardless of ownership type and chain affiliation , snfs' costs for capital - related assets and administrative services accounted for a similar percentage of revenue , on average , during each fiscal year from 2011 through 2014 . according to the cost report data , capital - related asset costs accounted for 4 percent to 7 percent of revenue , on average , at for - profit , nonprofit , and government snfs in each year . similarly , costs for capital - related assets at chain and independent snfs generally accounted for 5 percent to 6 percent of revenue , on average , in each year . during these 4 years , costs for administrative services accounted for 8 percent to 9 percent of revenue , on average , regardless of ownership type and chain affiliation . in addition , median margins were higher for for - profit and chain snfs than for other snfs . as a group , for - profit snfs had a higher median margin ( between 16 percent and 19 percent ) than nonprofit and government snfs ( between 12 percent and 15 percent and between 3 percent and 13 percent , respectively ) for each fiscal year between 2011 and 2014 . similarly , median margins were generally higher at chain snfs ( between 16 percent and 19 percent ) than at independent snfs ( between 12 percent and 17 percent ) in each year . all snf organization types had positive median all - payer margins each year , meaning that their payments more than covered their costs . moreover , from fiscal years 2011 through 2014 , median margins increased regardless of ownership type and chain affiliation , but the amount of the increase differed between organization types . the median margin increased more at government snfs than at for - profit and nonprofit snfs and more at independent snfs than at chain snfs . during the 4-year period , the median margin at government snfs increased 10 percentage points ( from 3 percent to 13 percent ) , while it increased 3 percentage points at for - profit snfs ( from 16 percent to 19 percent ) and at nonprofit snfs ( from 12 percent to 15 percent ) . in addition , independent snfs' median margin increased by 5 percentage points ( from 12 percent to 17 percent ) and chain snfs' median margin increased by 3 percentage points ( from 16 percent to 19 percent ) . ( see fig .