dod concurred with our recommendation . however , as of february 2005 , teams had not been created or deployed to review contract activities . second , there is a lack of coordination of contract activities between all of the logcap parties . amc is the executive agent for logcap , but several other dod components also have important logcap responsibilities , and these components must work in coordination with amc to ensure the contract's effective and efficient use . however , amc does not have command authority over the other components and , while it has sought to influence how the other components carry out their roles , its influence is limited outside the command . we are also sending a copy to the director , office of management and budget , and we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8365 or by e - mail at solisw@gao.gov . major contributors to this report are included in appendix iii . to determine the actions the army has taken for improving the management and oversight of the logistics civil augmentation program ( logcap ) , we met with representatives of the army field support command's ( afsc ) logcap program manager , logcap contracting office , and logcap support unit to gain a comprehensive understanding of the status of efforts regarding the logcap contract , the contract management process , and issues related to using the contract effectively . we drew upon our prior work , including visits to u.s. military sites using the logcap contract in kuwait and units that had returned from iraq . among the units that had returned from iraq , we met with representatives of the 101st airborne division and the 1st armored division . we also met with customers who used the logcap contract , including logistics planners from the army central command , who were responsible for planning for the use of logcap in operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom , to discuss their experiences , and with contracting officials within the same command who played a role in contract management and oversight . to identify further opportunities to use the contract effectively , we undertook a number of actions . we believe that this dispersed responsibility has led to numerous instances of inadequate coordination , which we have cited in our earlier reports . our previous work has shown that when government officials ( including customers ) review a contractor's work for economy and efficiency , savings are generated . for example , u.s. army europe's reviews of contract activities under the balkans support contract resulted in approximately $200 million in savings , or 10 percent of estimated project costs , by reducing services and labor costs and by closing or downsizing camps that were no longer needed . u.s. army europe officials told us that our 2000 report on the management of the balkans support contract was a “wake up call” to them to be more engaged in managing the contract .