state . state has provided technical assistance to mexico through the power sector program , which supplies guidance and training on a number of regulatory frameworks , market processes , and software tools to support mexico's transition to a competitive power market . for example , the program has supported the development of a competitive wholesale power market through technical support to mexico's energy regulatory commission , the national center for energy control , and mexico's secretariat of energy . according to u.s. agency officials we interviewed , multiple agencies have provided input and advice in preparation for summits and meetings such as the north american leaders' summit , the north american energy ministerial , the north american foreign ministers' meeting , and the u.s. – mexico high level economic dialogue . according to officials , broadly focused ministerial meetings such as these have included participation from multiple agencies . for example , the u.s. – mexico high level economic dialogue — a whole - of - government effort that included energy as one its priorities — led to the development of the u.s. – mexico energy business council , which is cochaired by doe , commerce , mexico's secretariat of energy , and mexico's secretariat of economy . agency officials we interviewed stated that they also coordinate on follow - up efforts after these meetings . for example , doe and commerce officials said that they conduct ongoing coordination on council business , holding weekly calls with each other and their mexican counterparts to coordinate the council's implementation . in addition , commerce officials told us that they report on the council's progress to other agencies at the nsc working group . officials of multiple agencies we surveyed reported other interagency coordination efforts related to north american energy integration . these efforts included participating in formal coordinating bodies , soliciting and providing input , collaborating directly with other agencies' staff , and collaborating at u.s. embassies . participating in formal coordinating bodies . multiple u.s. agencies ( eg , dot , ferc , and the department of homeland security ) participate in the electricity sub - sector coordinating council , the energy sector government coordinating council , and the oil and natural gas sector coordinating council , according to doe officials . the electricity sub - sector coordinating council's charter states that the council's purpose includes coordinating activities and initiatives designed to improve the reliability and resilience of the electricity subsector and serving as the principal liaison between the council's membership and the energy sector government coordinating council . the energy sector government coordinating council — the government counterpart of the electricity sub - sector coordinating council and the oil and natural gas sector coordinating council — enables interagency and cross - jurisdictional coordination on planning , implementing , and executing resilience programs for the nation's critical energy infrastructure . agency officials reported that the oil and natural gas sector coordinating council serves as the principal liaison between the u.s government and representatives for oil and natural gas companies and major trade associations on matters related to oil and natural gas physical and cyber security . soliciting and providing input . multiple agencies reported soliciting or providing input regarding certain energy integration efforts .