i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact william russell at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or russellw@gao.gov . officials at the other airport estimated that they move tsos between terminals about 40 times per day . chairman katko , ranking member watson coleman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include ellen wolfe ( assistant director ) , joel aldape , brendan kretzschmar , and natalie swabb . key contributors for the previous report that this testimony is based on are listed in the product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . officials at another airport we visited relied on these canines in busy terminals during peak periods . according to officials at two of the airports we visited , the use of passenger screening canines helped them to reduce wait times due to increased passenger volumes in the spring and summer of 2016 . each hour's reported wait time is then applied to all of a lane's throughput for that given hour . fsds or their designees at category iii and iv airports may estimate wait times initially , but the directive requires them to measure actual wait times when wait times are estimated at 10 minutes or greater . the directive also requires fsds or their designees to collect passenger throughput data directly from the walkthrough metal detectors and advanced imaging technology units . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . tsa allocates tsos to airports using its resource allocation plan , which is intended to provide each airport with the optimum number of tsos needed to screen passengers for threats to aviation security , such as prohibited and other potentially dangerous items . to implement passenger screening and pursue efficient operations , in addition to relying on tsos , tsa works with officials from airlines and airports , as well as officials from associations that represent airlines and airports . at airports , fsds and their designees work with individual airport operators and airlines to , among other things , adjust tsa resources ( i.e. , tsos and screening assets such as metal detectors ) in response to increases in passenger throughput at each checkpoint , and monitor passenger wait times at checkpoints . at tsa headquarters , the office of security operations ( oso ) has primary responsibility for operation of the resource allocation plan and allocation of tsos across airports . to allocate staff to the nearly 440 tsa - regulated airports in the united states , oso is to use a combination of computer - based modeling and line - item adjustments based on airport - specific information .