evaluation . states are required to conduct evaluations to assess whether their demonstrations are achieving the state's goals and objectives . after a demonstration is approved , states are required to submit an evaluation design to cms for review and approval . the evaluation design must discuss the hypotheses that will be tested , the data that will be used , and other items outlined in the stcs . in the event that a state wishes to extend its demonstration , the state's extension application must include , among other things , a report presenting the evaluation's findings to date , referred to as an interim evaluation report . states are also required to submit final evaluation reports at the demonstration's end . all evaluation designs and reports are to be made public . transparency requirements for new demonstrations and extensions the transparency requirements for new medicaid section 1115 demonstrations and extensions of existing demonstrations are established in federal regulations at 42 c.f.r . part 431 , subpart g. we found that cms has developed procedures for assessing states' applications for new demonstrations and extensions against the transparency requirements established in 2012 ( see sidebar ) . specifically , cms's procedures involve reviewing incoming applications for new demonstrations or extensions against detailed checklists the agency designed to align with transparency requirements in the regulations . ( cms refers to these as completeness checks. ) for example , the checklist for new demonstrations includes checks for whether the application included a description of the demonstration ; any proposed changes to the benefits , delivery system , or eligibility requirements ; information on the public hearing ( s ) and public comment process the state conducted ; and a summary of the issues raised in the state public comment process . ( see fig . we found that cms completed checklist reviews for each of the 11 applications for new demonstrations or extensions that cms approved from january 2017 through may 2018 . cms has also developed and implemented procedures for seeking public input at the federal level and making that input publicly available . this includes cms sending email notifications to individuals who have registered on the agency's website when demonstration applications are open for public comment ; posting the application on the website where the public can post comments during the 30-day comment period ; and maintaining the public comments on the website , which are maintained indefinitely , according to cms officials . we found that cms conducted a federal comment period for all 11 of the new and extension applications in our review period . in addition to storing the federal public comments , cms's website contains a record of key decisions and documents for each demonstration ( referred to as the administrative record ) . the administrative record includes states' applications , as well as cms's approvals , denials , and decisions about the completeness of applications — a requirement under the 2012 regulations . cms officials told us that they include additional documents as standard practice , though they are not required to be posted , such as a fact sheet on the demonstration and other official communication between the agency and the state , to support transparency .