gao - 13-337 . ( washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2013 ) . associated installations depends on the stationing decision . for example , in the model used to support the 2007 grow the army initiative stationing decisions , the army identified yakima training center , located in washington state , as a stand - alone installation because it was considering stationing a bct at yakima . in contrast , in the 2013 version of the model supporting the bct inactivation decisions , army training officials told us that yakima should be considered as part of joint base lewis mcchord because yakima's primary purpose is to support the training of units assigned to the installation . despite the potential for different treatment of these non - contiguous areas in different stationing decisions , the army has not established a clear and consistent policy in this regard . army training officials said that subject matter experts that provide data for the installations do not have a holistic view of the model and their individual views on whether to include non - contiguous areas may differ depending on their area of expertise . additionally , communication between army officials indicated that subject matter experts raised questions about whether certain non - contiguous training areas should be combined with the installation for some of the attributes , such as indirect fire , within the 2013 model . without a consistent policy , the army has wavered in how to deal with this issue . for example , there has been a lack of clarity regarding the extent to which joint base lewis mcchord and yakima should be aggregated and for what attributes within the military value analysis model . in a 2010 version of the model used to determine where to station a heavy bct and a fires brigade , as well as the 2011 interim model , the two locations were aggregated for the airspace attribute . however , a 2012 interim version of the model that was prepared for senior army leaders did not aggregate yakima with joint base lewis mcchord for this attribute . as a result , joint base lewis mcchord received a lower military value score relative to other installations in this 2012 interim version of the model than it had in prior versions of the model . after reviewing the results of the interim model , an army force management official said that the goal was to maintain consistency with how non - contiguous training areas were treated in the past and to treat all installations with non - contiguous training land the same . however , a lack of clarity still remained for the airspace attribute leading up to the bct inactivation decision and the center for army analysis ran two different versions of the model , one that aggregated airspace data for the two locations and one that excluded airspace data for yakima . the two versions of the model produced different military value scores and rankings for joint base lewis mcchord . ultimately , the version of the model used to support the bct inactivation stationing decision did not aggregate the two locations for the airspace attribute .