commerce concurred with our findings and recommendations . eda has recognized many of the weaknesses we identified and has already made initial efforts to address them . chairman platts , ranking member towns , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . for further information on this statement , please contact j. alfredo gomez , at ( 202 ) 512-4101 or gomezj@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include kim frankena , assistant director ; christina bruff ; david dayton ; leah dewolf ; barbara el osta ; bradley hunt ; and erin preston . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .  eda relies on multiple data requests from the taa centers . eda frequently makes additional requests to the centers to obtain their program data when preparing required reports . however , when we compared eda's data with data provided by the centers , we identified errors in eda's data .  lack of guidance results in dissimilar information across centers . eda has also not developed guidance on the format and types of program data that centers collect , which has contributed to a lack of comparable data on program activities across the centers . given the weaknesses we found in eda's performance measures and data collection , we undertook further analysis to determine the impact of the taa for firms program . our analysis of data collected from the taa centers showed that the program was statistically associated with increased sales and productivity for manufacturing firms , although some factors were more strongly correlated with improved performance than was participation in the taa for firms program . we determined the following:  there is a small positive and statistically significant relationship between program participation and sales . we identified the following issues:  gaps in centralized data . according to eda officials , the agency maintains databases of information from petitions , such as firm location , or information about sales or production , but eda does not maintain the necessary data to conduct a quantitative analysis of the program , such as whether a firm is a public or private firm or a multiplant firm .  data requests require verification but can still result in inaccuracies . in addition , eda relies on each of the centers to validate its data . overall , we estimate that the effect of participation in the program was an increase in firm sales , ranging from 5 to 6 percent on average , if all other factors are held constant . the effect was greater for firms with 300 or fewer employees , which account for 95 percent of firms in our sample .