credits are provided for 10 years . state housing credit agencies usually award tax credits through competitive rounds . each state receives an annual allocation of $1.75 per capita . states must reserve a minimum of 10 percent of the credits for nonprofit developers . major reconstruction of obsolete projects ( mrop ) under mrop , which last funded new development in 1994 , hud provided funds to phas to perform major reconstruction of obsolete public housing or to maintain or expand the supply of housing for low - income families . projects formerly funded as mrop are now funded through the capital fund . through the operating fund , hud provides phas with a subsidy , on a formula basis , to fund the operating and maintenance expenses of the developments they own or operate . it enables phas to keep rents affordable for lower - income families and to cover a variety of expenses , including maintenance , utilities , and tenant and protective services . public housing drug elimination program ( phdep ) eligible phas received phdep grants from hud to reduce or eliminate drug - related crime in and around public housing . grantees were encouraged to develop a plan that included initiatives that could be sustained over a period of several years for addressing the problem of drug - related crime in and around public housing . you requested that we comprehensively review the hope vi program . because of the scope of the request , we agreed with your office to provide the information in a series of reports . the funds may not be used for luxury improvements , direct social services , costs funded by other hud programs , or ineligible activities , as determined by hud on a case - by - case basis . community development block grant ( cdbg ) program the cdbg funding that hud provides is split between states and local jurisdictions called “entitlement communities.” funds are awarded on a formula basis to entitled metropolitan cities and urban counties . states distribute the funds to localities that do not qualify as entitlement communities . cdbg funds can be used to implement a wide variety of community and economic development activities directed toward neighborhood revitalization , economic development , and improved community facilities and services . comprehensive grant program ( cgp ) under cgp , hud provided funds , on a formula basis , to help large phas ( those with at least 250 units ) correct physical , management , and operating deficiencies and keep units in the housing stock as safe and desirable homes for low - income families . the quality housing and work responsibility act of 1998 shifted cgp into the capital fund . comprehensive improvement assistance program ( ciap ) under ciap , hud provided competitive grants to help smaller phas ( those with fewer than 250 units ) to correct physical , management , and operating deficiencies and keep units in the housing stock as safe and desirable homes for low - income families . the tif program can be used to support new development or the rehabilitation of existing buildings in industrial , commercial , residential , or mixed - use development proposals .