v ) . in his letter , the commissioner said that ( 1 ) our report provided a fair and balanced assessment of irs' efforts to deliver a filing season that was relatively error - free while providing taxpayers with top quality service and ( 2 ) irs would make every effort to resolve the issues noted in our report . the commissioner also commented on our discussion of irs' performance in providing telephone service . while agreeing that irs can improve its delivery of telephone service , the commissioner did not believe that we should compare irs' performance to 1998 because irs had significantly changed its telephone service operating environment after 1998 . we agree , and have acknowledged in this report , that there were major changes after 1998 , but we do not agree that those changes make it inappropriate to compare irs' performance in 1998 to its performance in 1999 and 2000 . the reviewers were to complete a checksheet covering issues such as did the assistor indicate a willingness to help by using an appropriate phrase such as “may i help you ? ” and did the assistor provide a complete and accurate response , explaining any procedures and ordering the necessary forms and publications ? the reviewers made 272 visits between late - october 1999 and mid - january 2000 and another group of visits during the 2000 filing season . as described by irs , results from the first group of visits “indicated significant opportunity to improve our quality results.” specifically , the results showed an error rate ( incorrect answers ) of 50 percent and indicated that reviewers were denied service in 21 percent of the visits ( eg , reviewers were told to take a form or publication and figure out the answer themselves ) . several recommendations for improving performance were set forth , including an intensive back - to - basics training program and increased managerial oversight . results from the second group of visits were not available at the time we completed our audit work . the national office established taxpayer wait - time goals of 30 minutes for return preparation and 15 minutes for all other services during the 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 filing seasons . in our reports on irs' 1998 and 1999 filing seasons , we reported that although irs monitored walk - in sites' timeliness , it did not require that monitoring results be reported to the national office . during the 2000 filing season , irs did require that its four regional offices submit monthly reports on timeliness to the national office . however , three factors adversely affected the usefulness of the timeliness data . first , even though irs required that timeliness data be reported to the national office , it did not specify what percentage of the time sites were to meet the 15- and 30-minute wait - time goals . the southeast region established its own goal , which called for districts in that region to meet the wait - time goals 90 percent of the time . according to southeast regional analysts we talked with during the filing season , most of the nine districts in that region were meeting or exceeding the 90-percent goal .