( see fig . appendix i includes information on 90 / 10 funding by state . across the country , states' changes to medicaid eligibility it systems ranged from full system replacements to more limited modifications , with the scope of a state's changes dependent on a number of factors , including the age of their system and the extent of integration among state programs . according to cms , 34 states implemented full system replacements , while 17 states implemented system modifications . state - reported spending of 90 / 10 funding varied widely , ranging from $1.8 million in south dakota to $180 million in north carolina , as of june 30 , 2014 . ( see fig . although there were spending differences among individual states , the median amount spent on eligibility it systems in states modifying their systems was about one half of the median amount spent in states that were undertaking full system replacements during this time . among the six states we reviewed , the prior medicaid eligibility it systems in five of the states were 20 to 30 years old , and varied in terms of the extent of integration with other state programs and overall function , as illustrated by the following two examples . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) expanded the availability of an enhanced federal financial participation ( ffp ) matching rate of 90 percent — which we refer to as 90 / 10 funding — to states' expenditures related to the design , development , and installation of new or improved medicaid eligibility it systems incurred from april 19 , 2011 , through december 31 , 2015 . however , the capability to conduct real time application transfers for immediate eligibility determinations remains elusive in all states . while a cms official acknowledged that real time application transfers continue to be a goal , he does not anticipate this occurring until 2015 or 2016 , given variability in states' abilities . some of the states that we reviewed cited evolving technical requirements from cms as a challenge to their initial efforts to implement this critical success factor . for example , cms issued the initial technical requirements for application transfers in april 2013 and then final requirements two months later — about three months before the open enrollment period . since cms's technical requirements involve thousands of lines of code , a cms official acknowledged that changes to the initial requirements created additional work for states that were following them . a new mexico official indicated that the state made some initial assumptions in developing its system that later needed modifying once cms issued final requirements . a cms official noted variation in states' abilities to make such adjustments in a timely manner and that some states began incorporating the initial requirements into their systems , while other states purposely waited for the final requirements . the delay in ffe readiness to transfer applications to and from the states further complicated efforts to implement this critical success factor .