not met . few , if any , actions toward meeting the criterion have been taken . officials from indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs expressed their commitment to addressing the issues that led to the high - risk designation for federal management of programs that serve tribes and their members . since we last testified before this committee on june 13 , 2018 , we met with agency leaders and worked with each agency to identify actions the agencies took or plan to take to address the concerns that contributed to the designation . we determined that indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs demonstrated some progress to partially meet each of the criteria for removing a high - risk designation . however , additional progress is needed for the agencies to fully address the criteria and related management weaknesses . as we reported in the march 2019 high - risk report , when we applied the five criteria for high - risk list removal to each of the three segments — education , energy , and health care — we determined that indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs have each demonstrated some progress . overall , the agencies have partially met the leadership commitment , capacity , action plan , monitoring , and demonstrated progress criteria for the education , health care , and energy areas . however , the agencies continue to face challenges , particularly in retaining permanent leadership and a sufficient workforce . the following is a summary of the progress that indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs have made in addressing the five criteria for removal from the high - risk list . to meet the leadership commitment criterion for removal of a high - risk designation , an agency needs to have demonstrated strong commitment and top leadership support to address management weaknesses . the following examples show actions indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs took to partially meet the leadership commitment criterion . education . indian affairs' leaders have demonstrated commitment to addressing key weaknesses in the management of bie schools in several ways . for example , the bie director formed an internal working group , convened meetings with other senior leaders within indian affairs , and publicly stated that his agency is committed to ensuring implementation of our recommendations on indian education . in addition , the bie director and other indian affairs leaders and senior managers have met with us frequently to discuss outstanding recommendations , actions they have taken to address these recommendations , and additional actions they could take . we also met with the new assistant secretary - indian affairs , who expressed her commitment to supporting the agency's efforts to address weaknesses in the management of bie schools . however , it is important that indian affairs leaders be able to sustain this level of commitment to solving problems in indian education . indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs each made some progress in identifying capacity and resources to implement some of our recommendations , but bie and ihs continue to face significant workforce challenges .