the work is now scheduled for 2008 . the consequence of deferring block 2004 work to block 2006 and block 2006 to 2008 is that the full cost of block 2006 cannot be determined . some mda prime contractors too often employ a planning methodology that has the potential to obscure the time and money that will be needed to produce the outcomes intended . contractors typically divide the total work of a contract into small efforts in order to define them more clearly and to ensure proper oversight . for that reason , the weapon system did not release the ground - based interceptor and program officials declared the flight test a “no test” event . to date , program officials have not determined the root cause of the malfunction . work may be planned in categories including ( 1 ) level of effort ( loe ) — work that contains tasks of a general or supportive nature and do not produce a definite end product — or ( 2 ) discrete work — work that has a definable end product or event . level of effort work assumes that if the staff assigned to the effort spend the planned length of time , they will attain the outcome expected . according to earned value experts and the national defense industrial association , while it is appropriate to plan such tasks as supervision or contract administration as loe , it is not appropriate to plan tasks that are intended to result in a product , such as a study or a software build , as loe because contractors do not report schedule variances for loe work . our analysis is presented in table 3 below . appendix ii provides further details on the cost and schedule performance of the contractors outlined in the table . technical problems and software issues caused several bmds elements to overrun their fiscal year 2007 budgeted costs . in addition , 4 of the 10 contracts we reviewed contained some kind of replanning activity during fiscal year 2007 and the abl contract was partially rebaselined . contractors may replan when they conclude that the current plan for completing the effort remaining on the contract is unrealistic . a replan can include reallocating the remaining budget over the rest of the work , realigning the schedule within the contractually defined milestones , and setting either cost or schedule variances to zero or setting both to zero . a rebaseline is similar , but it may also add additional time and / or funding for the remaining work . the abl contractor was overrunning both its fiscal year 2007 budget and schedule early in the year . in june 2007 , mda directed the kei program to focus on two near - term objectives — the development of its booster and its 2008 booster flight test . some work , such as development of the fire control and communications and mobile launcher , was deferred into the future . during fiscal year 2007 , the kei program conducted all planned test activities , including booster static fire tests that demonstrated the rocket motor's performance in induced environments and wind tunnel tests that gathered data to validate aerodynamic models for the booster flight controls .