mho soldiers fall into three groups . the first comprises soldiers who are being treated while still on mobilization orders . depending on the amount of time left on these soldiers' mobilization orders , they may be treated and returned to duty or released from duty before their mobilization orders expire . soldiers in this group fall outside the scope of our audit . the second group comprises soldiers whose mobilization orders have expired but who have been retained on active duty on mrp orders and are receiving medical treatment or being evaluated at an mtf . the third group comprises soldiers who are on mrp orders and whom the army has agreed can return home as part of cbhci and receive medical care through tricare — dod's worldwide network of civilian health care providers — rather than remaining at an army installation and receiving care through an mtf . specifically , we asked whether the medical retention processing units ( mrpu ) provided formalized training for new staff when they arrive at the mrpus for duty and if so , whether training officers were assigned to coordinate the training . we also interviewed and obtained documentation on various aspects of mrp with officials from the following offices or commands: national guard bureau , arlington , virginia army human resource command , alexandria , virginia u.s. army reserve command , fort mcpherson , georgia army's office of the surgeon general , falls church , virginia army g - 1 , army pentagon , washington , d.c. army task force cbhco - west , fort sam houston , texas army task force cbhco - east , fort jackson , south carolina defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) , indianapolis , indiana as part of our work with the army's office of the surgeon general , we requested and analyzed all available data and metrics related to mrp and cbhci — including metrics related to ( 1 ) soldiers' satisfaction with these programs , ( 2 ) the amount of time injured or ill reserve component soldiers had spent on mrp orders ( by treatment location ) , and ( 3 ) the timeliness of processing mrp requests . with respect to the army's automated systems , we assessed whether they provided reasonable assurance that once an mrp order was issued , the appropriate pay , personnel , and medical eligibility systems are updated in an accurate and timely manner . specifically , we obtained and reviewed procedural guidance for reserve component soldiers on medical retention processing orders , including the department of the army medical holdover ( mho ) consolidated guidance , medical holdover ( mho ) soldier's handbook , and department of defense ( dod ) and army regulations . we also relied on the standards for internal control in the federal government to provide a framework for assessing the army's mrp program and its community - based health care initiative ( cbhci ) . we applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the key army and dod components involved in providing active duty pays and medical benefits to reserve component soldiers .