, homelessness ) . particular client . hhs staff told us overlapping programs helps ensure access to services because persons experiencing homelessness are not steered toward one point of entry and in contrast can access services through several points of entry . another provider stated that it was important for persons experiencing homelessness to receive services from both targeted and mainstream programs because the ultimate goal was to house clients and have them live independently ( that is , not be in need of homeless services ) . ultimately , fragmentation across agencies can create an environment in which persons experiencing homelessness are not served as efficiently and effectively as possible , making coordination across government essential . by addressing inefficiencies that result from fragmentation and overlap , agencies will be able to better leverage government resources , decrease administrative burdens , and assist persons experiencing homelessness more effectively . the majority of targeted programs maintain performance data , which is an important component for measuring program performance . performance measurement is the ongoing monitoring and reporting of program accomplishments , particularly progress toward pre - established goals . performance measures may address the type or level of program activities conducted ( process ) , the direct products and services a program delivers ( outputs ) , or the results of those products and services ( outcomes ) . according to the questionnaire responses , 25 of 26 targeted programs reported that they maintained performance information such as metrics and targets for the level of performance to be achieved , or report the actual level of performance achieved ( see app . iii ) .respondents to provide examples of the types and uses of performance information collected . for instance , hhs's services in supportive housing grants program responded that it collects various data related to mental health when an individual enters the program , at 6 months into the program , and again when the individual is discharged , which enables the program to measure performance and report outcomes . va's domiciliary care for homeless veterans program responded that it uses a monitoring system that includes baseline information about veterans at admittance to the program and their clinical outcomes at the time of discharge . a majority ( 24 of 26 ) of the targeted programs reported that they collected data on the number of homeless served , which is a measure of program output . emergency food and shelter program — collects information on services such as meals provided or nights of lodging but not the number of homeless served . the other program — the acquired property sales for homeless providers — did not collect data on the number of homeless served because the program transfers government properties to nonprofit organizations or other entities , which in turn provide services to persons experiencing homelessness . the program tracks the number of properties transferred . the data for numbers of homeless served are not comparable across programs because program staff used different approaches and reporting periods to collect this information . for example , some programs reported actual data according to annual reports from grant recipients , while others estimated the expected number of participants or reported frequency of services .