tsa collected these data in early march 2004 . officials told us that they plan to analyze at least 3 months of data — february , march , and april 2004 — to determine more precisely how the data can be used to measure screener performance in detecting threat objects and to validate what the data tells tsa about screener performance . additionally , officials stated that they plan to use tip as an evaluation tool once sufficient data are collected to establish firm performance standards . a third indicator of screener performance is the results of the annual recertification testing . atsa requires that tsa collect performance information on all screeners by conducting an annual proficiency evaluation to ensure each screener continues to meet all qualifications and standards related to the functions that he or she performs . to meet this requirement , tsa established an annual recertification program comprised of two assessment components , one of the screener's knowledge and skills and the other of the screener's performance . the knowledge and skills assessment program consists of three modules: ( 1 ) knowledge of standard operating procedures , ( 2 ) image recognition , and ( 3 ) practical demonstration of skills . as part of the performance assessment , screeners are rated on both organizational and individual goals , such as maintaining the nation's air security , vigilantly carrying out duties with utmost attention to tasks that will prevent security threats , and demonstrating the highest levels of courtesy to travelers to maximize their levels of satisfaction with screening services . to be certified , a screener must have passed all the applicable modules and have a rating of “met” or “exceeded” standards on their annual performance assessment . as we reported in february 2004 , staffing shortages and lack of high - speed connectivity at airport training facilities have made it difficult for screeners to fully utilize these programs . screeners have completed all three modules of the knowledge and skills assessment program . atsa sets forth numerous requirements regarding the pilot program . specifically , it requires that the private screening company be owned and controlled by a citizen of the united states ; the private screening company , at a minimum , meet employment standards , compensation and benefits rates , and performance requirements that apply to federal screeners ; all private screener candidates meet the same minimum qualifications as federal screeners , including u.s. citizenship , high school diploma or equivalent , english proficiency , and pass a criminal background check ; and all private screener candidates undergo the same battery of employment screening tests that federal screener candidates undergo . another key source of information on screener performance in detecting threat objects is the results from the tip system . tip is designed to test screeners' detection capabilities by projecting threat images , including guns and explosives , into bags as they are screened during actual operations . screeners are responsible for positively identifying the threat image and calling for the bag to be searched . once prompted , tip identifies to the screener whether the threat is real and then records the screener's performance in a database that could be analyzed for performance trends .