several examples follow . the need for such resource - intensive procedures primarily results from inadequate financial management systems . after receiving a disclaimer of opinion for fiscal year 2001 , nasa was able to produce auditable financial statements for fiscal year 2002 ; however , the auditors reported that significant weaknesses still existed in nasa's internal controls related to accounting for the international space station and for equipment and materials held by contractors . because of these control weaknesses , the auditors found numerous errors in property records and had to significantly expand the scope of their testing . to correct auditor - identified errors , nasa had to make about $11 billion of adjustments to its records . the auditors also identified a material weakness related to nasa's process for preparing its financial statements and performance and accountability report . deficiencies included errors made in recording significant adjustments to the statements and reports . auditors attributed the errors to insufficient resources to address the volume of work needed to compile the financial statements , lack of an integrated financial management system , lack of understanding by nasa staff of new federal reporting requirements , and lack of quality controls over financial reporting . after 8 consecutive years of disclaimers of opinion , usda received an unqualified opinion on its fiscal year 2002 financial statements . while we consider this a positive step toward achieving financial accountability , it took extraordinary efforts outside the normal business processes by the department and its auditors , particularly at the forest service . the usda office of inspector general's transmittal letter for the fiscal year 2002 forest service audit report stated that “the forest service does not yet operate as an effective , sustainable , and accountable financial management organization . the fiscal year 2002 ending account balances were primarily derived from a 2-year audit effort on beginning balances and numerous statistical samples of fiscal year 2002 transactions . as a result of these efforts , multiple adjustments were processed to the general ledger and / or subsidiary ledgers . for example , the financial statement line item general property , plant and equipment , net , was reduced by over $1 billion based on audit coverage . the achievement of an unqualified opinion , therefore , did not necessarily result from improvement in underlying financial management systems , but rather as an extensive ad hoc effort.” if usda is to achieve and sustain financial accountability , it must fundamentally improve its underlying internal controls , financial management systems , and operations to allow for the routine production of accurate , relevant , and timely data to support program management . our unqualified opinions on irs's fiscal years 2002 and 2001 financial statements were made possible by the extraordinary efforts of irs senior management and staff to develop processes to compensate for serious internal control and systems deficiencies . as noted earlier in this testimony , irs made significant progress during fiscal year 2002 . nonetheless , it continued to require costly , resource - intensive processes ; statistical projections ; external contractors ; substantial adjustments ; and monumental human efforts to derive reliable year - end balances for its financial statements .