operational uncertainties . most of the banks' representatives were not sure how they would operationalize rehabilitation programs . one bank's representatives said that they sell defaulted loans to debt purchasers and that it would be difficult to offer rehabilitation programs for loans that had been sold . representatives of two other banks said that the banks' systems are not able to change the status of a loan once it has defaulted , so they were not certain how their systems would track rehabilitated loans . another bank's representatives said that they did not know how rehabilitated loans would be included for accounting purposes in developing their financial statements . reduced borrower incentives to avoid default . representatives from two banks said they believed the option to rehabilitate a defaulted loan might reduce borrowers' incentives to avoid default or to enter a repayment program before default . risk of compliance violations . one bank representative said a rehabilitation program could put the bank at risk for violations of unfair and deceptive acts and practices if borrowers misunderstood or misinterpreted how much the program would improve their credit scores . representatives from this bank and another explained that they did not know how much the program would improve credit scores , limiting their ability to describe the program's benefit to borrowers . representatives from three of these banks and other organizations , however , noted that there could be advantages for banks to offer private student loan rehabilitation programs . representatives from the banks said these programs could help banks recover some nonperforming debt , and one of these representatives stated the program could be marketed to borrowers as a benefit offered by the bank . a representative of a consumer advocacy group said a rehabilitation program could improve a bank's reputation by distinguishing the bank from peer institutions that do not offer rehabilitation for private student loans . because ncua is not one of the federal banking regulators by statutory definition , officials said the act does not require credit unions to seek approval from the agency before offering a rehabilitation program . ncua officials told us examiners would likely review private student loan rehabilitation programs for the credit unions that choose to offer them as part of normal safety and soundness examinations . the two credit unions we spoke with — which are among the largest credit union providers of private student loans — told us they do not plan to offer rehabilitation programs . one of these credit unions cited reasons similar to those offered by banks , including a low private student loan default rate that suggested there would be a lack of demand for a rehabilitation program . the other credit union explained that it was worried about the effect of removing defaults from credit reports on its ability to make sound lending decisions . ncua officials also noted that as of january 2019 , they had not received any inquiries from credit unions about these programs . occ , fdic , and the federal reserve have issued information regarding the availability of private student loan rehabilitation programs to their regulated entities , including how they would review applications .