commercial trucks . almost 60 percent of state dots ( 30 of 51 ) reported that they would support federally - led field tests of mileage fees for commercial trucks . to date , very few states have evaluated mileage fees for commercial trucks . in a march 2011 report to congress , fhwa reported that additional technical research would be required to assess methods to charge heavy trucks based on their infrastructure wear . clicking on “completed” indicates that your answers are official and final . your answers will not be used unless you have done this . ( check one. ) in addition to the contact named above , steve cohen , assistant director ; matt barranca ; richard bulman ; colin fallon ; bert japikse ; terence lam ; jean mcsween ; faye morrison ; josh ormond ; namita bhatia sabharwal ; and chad williams made key contributions to this report . ( check one per row. ) what level of priority should be placed on the following funding mechanisms to meet future surface transportation revenue needs ? we might contact this person if we have follow - up questions . please check one of the options below . ( check one per row. ) how likely or unlikely is it that your state will introduce a vmt user fee program for the following types of vehicles in the next ten years ? ( check one per row. ) what additional comments do you have on vmt user fees ? what is the name , title , telephone number , and e - mail address of the person who primarily completed this survey ? to what extent would your state dot support or oppose the federal government taking the following actions toward the development of future vmt user fee systems ? ( check one per row. ) would your state dot support or oppose federally - led field tests to evaluate vmt user fees for the following types of vehicles ? ( check one per row. ) ( check one per row. ) how important or unimportant is it that the following options are included in future vmt field tests ? identifying additional surface transportation revenue sources 7 . ( check one per row. ) ( check one per row. ) how important or unimportant is it that an alternative funding mechanism be identified by either your state or the federal government to meet surface transportation revenue needs in the next ten years ? ( check one per row. ) according to fhwa , charging trucks based on weight and distance traveled has been recognized as the best way to reflect the road damages caused by different types of trucks.although the trucking industry has resisted weight - distance taxes , fhwa reported that many of their objections , including administrative burden , can be overcome if linked with a mileage fee system . however , other technological issues would need to be resolved , such as how to measure the weight of combination vehicles that pull different types and numbers of trailers . fhwa reported that the federal government has a leadership role to play to prevent different systems from being established across states that later could not be reconciled into a national mileage fee .