mark a . little , james r. reifsnyder , patricia j. nichol , tommy baril , steve boyles , and cheryl a. weissman were major contributors to this report . to determine the conditions of military training ranges and their consequent impact , we collected and analyzed training - range - related information from officials within the headquarters and selected major commands of the military services . we also visited eight major active component training ranges situated at various locations in the continental united states — fort hood , texas ; fort stewart , georgia ; southern california offshore range , california ; fallon range training complex , nevada ; camp lejeune , north carolina ; camp pendleton , california ; nellis test and training range , nevada ; and the barry m. goldwater range , arizona — to observe training range conditions and discuss consequential impacts . these ranges were selected by identifying the major training ranges for each service and seeking input from service range officials as to which ranges could best address our audit objectives . during our visits we met with installation officials , range managers , and units that use the ranges . we also reviewed relevant dod studies and audit reports identifying the conditions of military training ranges . to assess the progress the department has made in improving training range conditions , we discussed and reviewed information relating to training range initiatives from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint forces command , the special operations command , and the headquarters and selected major commands of the military services . we also examined key documents related to the funding of training ranges including associated funding requirements and funding allocations . in addition , we reviewed prior gao reports and internal service audits addressing funding issues for military facilities , including training ranges . we also obtained and reviewed range - related information from range officials of each of the eight installations that we visited . further , we toured the training areas or support facilities at each of the ranges we visited to observe initiatives implemented by local range offices to improve the condition or capability of their ranges . although we found limitations in the availability of certain data , we believe the available data gathered are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report based on our discussions with osd and military service officials and our review of the prior gao reports and internal service audits .