procurement . on october 1 , 2015 , hud employees were provided access to arc's procurement system for activities including contract writing and procurement tracking ; electronic routing , review , and approval of invoices ; and the reporting of procurement data to a federal procurement data system . the department also gained access to a system for reconciliation and approval of purchase card transactions , and to a government - wide invoice processing platform of approved federal government suppliers . a notable feature of arc's procurement system is that it is integrated with the core accounting system to provide real - time contract processing , which is intended to support the timely recording of commitments and obligations and prevent the department from creating contract obligations when funding is not available . the migration to arc's invoice processing platform also allowed the department to adopt new controls and a new electronic payment process for managing contracts and payments to commercial vendors . in addition , the department shifted to arc - managed processes for purchase cards , including issuing cards to hud employees , and to an electronic process for receiving , approving , and paying invoices . nevertheless , the features of arc's procurement system did not offer all of the features that existed in the department's legacy system ; and to fill these gaps , employees devised and adopted manual processes . for example , hud agreed to adopt arc's standard procurement system with the understanding that a requirement for processing contracts that are funded by more than one entity within the department would not be met . this agreement was made because of the costly and lengthy system enhancement that would be needed to add the feature . to address the requirement , the department adopted arc's standard business process change that , according to hud and arc officials , has increased the level of effort and complexity of creating and managing these contracts . moreover , challenges with converting data from hud's legacy procurement system to arc's system were encountered . these challenges continue to adversely impact the department's ability to process and manage contracts . between october 2015 and january 2016 , hud users of arc's procurement system reported instances in which data were missing or inaccurate . according to senior officials , this required procurement actions to be processed manually outside of the system and then entered into the system after data issues were resolved . in june 2016 , hud officials reported that , although progress had been made toward resolving these issues , additional work is needed to ensure that contract data are correct . on november 4 , 2015 , hud's deputy secretary stated that the department would not develop additional capabilities as part of the new core program . according to the new core executive director , this decision allowed the department to refocus its efforts on evaluating options and identifying the optimal solution for modernizing its approach to grants management . the department's decision to end further implementation of the program was made prior to , but was consistent with , a december 2015 directive to have no other new core releases in fiscal year 2016 .