gao - 13-286 . to review the support for the technical approach presented in proposal submissions , including information on trls . we previously reported that early project endorsement from intended users and other key stakeholders in the acquisition community is important for project transition . rip officials also agreed that having a transition partner , such as a specific program of record , identified prior to the beginning of the project contributes to transition success . other rip officials said user participation in ongoing project reviews further ensures the final product is aligned with user requirements . this technology is also available commercially . enhanced ground moving target indicator ( gmti ) - based intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance: this air force project provides software applications to be used by joint surveillance target attack radar system operators . the applications are intended to interact with gmti data to facilitate pattern recognition , automatically identify targets and perform analyses over any set period of time . for example , instead of a dot on the water , a target could be automatically identified as a carrier or a person in a rowboat so the analyst can determine if they need to send a camera to the area to investigate further . rip officials reported the air force research laboratory has installed the software suite on a data repository that can be used by a wide variety of intelligence analysts . multi - missile common launch tube: this united states special operations command project increases the number of munitions that can be carried and launched from a single common launch tube . selection preference is also given to small business proposals . selection of large businesses is allowed , but only if their offers for the same requirement are superior to those of the small businesses . once all proposals are evaluated and ranked , the source selection authority makes the final decisions on contract awards . the number of proposals selected for contract award will depend on the level of rip funding appropriated and the proposed project costs . the businesses are notified of the results and the military departments and defense components then negotiate and complete all contracting and award procedures with the businesses . contracts establish the cost , schedule , and key performance parameters , and deliverables required for projects . from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , the military departments and defense components awarded $760 million for 365 projects , with 89 percent of the awards going to small businesses . program officials said that rip attracted some new small businesses that had not worked with dod previously . see appendix i for additional details on the scope and methodology used for this work . we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to may 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the air force and navy , in particular , incorporate them in rip projects and , as a result , appear to be realizing significantly higher transition rates for their projects , even in the program's early years . without a more consistent focus on these factors during project selection , opportunities to achieve higher levels of transition success for rip may remain limited .