( app . i summarizes the plan termination processes in more detail. ) as shown in figure 1 , pbgc's major expenditures include benefit payments , financial assistance payments , and “operational and administrative” expenses . under the single - employer program , pbgc makes guaranteed benefit payments to retirees or their dependents for underfunded terminated plans . under the multiemployer program , pbgc provides financial assistance payments to pension plans that become insolvent . this allows the plans to continue paying participants their guaranteed benefits . pbgc's operational and administrative expenses include expenses incurred in carrying out its responsibilities as trustee of plans and its administrative expenses . congress has included a limitation on administrative expenses in each annual appropriations act since fiscal year 1985 . however , in subsequent years , congress excluded expenses from the “administrative expenses” that had been included under the original limitation in fiscal year 1985 . for fiscal year 1989 , pbgc requested that congress exclude certain contractual expenses from the administrative expense limitation . pbgc's budget director stated that the request was in response to several major plan terminations . he stated that pbgc needed flexibility to react quickly to the sizable cost and the unpredictable nature of pension plan terminations . the statutory administrative expense limitation in fiscal year 1989 limited pbgc's appropriations for “administrative expenses” to $44.2 million and allowed pbgc to exclude from the limitation its “contractual expenses” for legal and financial service contracts in connection with the termination benefits administration services . in late fiscal year 1991 , pbgc requested that congress further expand its operational and administrative budget flexibility because of its rising workloads . pbgc requested that , for the last 2 months of fiscal year 1991 and thereafter , the exclusions from the expense limitation be expanded to include all expenses related to termination of pension plans , asset management , and benefits administration . congress modified the administrative expense limitation as requested and has excluded these expenses from the limitation in subsequent appropriations acts . subsequent to fiscal year 1991 , pbgc made changes in its approach to applying the statutory limitations , which resulted in a further reduction in the proportion of expenses falling under the limitation . after we provided a draft of our report to pbgc , the president's proposed budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2004 was released on february 3 , 2003 . the fiscal year 2004 budget includes a proposal to eliminate the limit on pbgc's administrative expenditures . during our review , we found significant problems with the way pbgc developed its budget estimates for its administrative expense limitation . as a result , pbgc's estimate for activities covered by the budget limitation is not meaningful or reliable . pbgc's budget director could not demonstrate that pbgc had conducted any analysis of expense classifications for pbgc's operational and administrative budget since pbgc last reviewed its activities in 1993 . we identified flaws in the concepts supporting pbgc's budget estimates for expenses subject to the limitation . for example , pbgc did not identify any direct costs of activities falling under the expense limitation , and based its estimated budget only on the amount of indirect expenses not allocated to activities pbgc attributes to plan terminations .