svhs . states own and operate svhs and , as a result , in most cases svhs are inspected by state agencies to determine the extent of their compliance with state requirements . about two - thirds of svhs are inspected by cms ; however , va is the only entity that conducts annual inspections for all svhs . although , va does not exercise any supervision or control over the administration , personnel , maintenance , or operation of any state home , va conducts these annual reviews for all svhs and is prohibited from making payments to svhs until it determines that they meet applicable quality standards . va central office contracts with ascellon to conduct these inspections and reviews the results of the inspections . the inspections first occur when an svh initially seeks to become eligible for va payments , and , once the svh is eligible , unannounced inspections occur on an annual basis to verify that an svh is eligible to continue to receive va payments . for these annual inspections , the contractor generally cites deficiencies when svhs are not in compliance with applicable quality standards . svhs develop and implement corrective action plans for each deficiency identified , and the vamc director approves the plan . va should monitor the contractor's performance annually , for example , to ensure that inspections are conducted within certain timeframes . va's office of geriatrics and extended care maintains a database of all corrective action plans , and visn and vamc staff monitor the svhs' actions until each deficiency is addressed . va also collects va prescribed quality measure and staffing data from svhs as part of its survey process . va projects that vietnam veterans will increasingly rely on va's health care system for care and will use more health care services , including nursing home care . as figure 1 shows , svhs accounted for the largest percentage ( 53 percent ) of the average number of veterans who received nursing home care each day in fiscal year 2017 . however , the number of veterans in cnhs has increased and is projected to continue to increase . for example , the average number of veterans receiving nursing home care in cnhs increased 35 percent from fiscal year 2012 to 2017 , from an average of 6,875 to 9,251 per day . over the same period , the number of veterans in clcs fell 9 percent , and in svhs it fell 1 percent . va officials told us that they are prioritizing the use of clcs for short - term care , and that cnhs have the greatest capacity to meet the future long - term needs of veterans . va projects that by 2034 the number of veterans receiving nursing care in these homes will exceed 17,000 . in addition , va projects that demand for nursing home care in clcs and cnhs will decrease after 2034 , and va has not projected care in svhs beyond 2022 . va officials also said that va has limited flexibility to expand the number of beds in clcs and svhs to accommodate the projected number of veterans needing care .