specific examples follow . in 2011 , a private citizen requested the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , which operates within commerce , to modify information about the location where tropical storm kirsten made landfall in 1966 in mexico . noaa responded that the information in question was not subject to the requirements of iqa as the data were considered to be archival ( data disseminated by noaa before october 1 , 2002 , are considered to be archival information ) . on march 30 , 2011 , an advocacy organization submitted a request to the national park service , which operates within interior , to correct information that the requestor deemed as “unfounded scientific conclusions” in a report on allegations of scientific misconduct at point reyes national seashore . on june 6 , 2011 , interior responded that the document in question was a report of an investigation undertaken by the office of the solicitor . the investigation looked to resolve allegations of scientific misconduct on the part of employees . also , the “report was generated as part of the adjudicative process of this personnel matter ; it is not subject to review under the iqa. omb staff told us they rely heavily on their own website to disseminate iqa , omb - specific , and government - wide guidance . omb's information quality website includes guidelines from omb that describe its policy for ensuring the quality of information that it disseminates to the public . the guidelines also establish the administrative procedure by which an affected person may obtain correction of information disseminated by omb . in addition , omb includes links the public and other interested parties can use to locate individual agency information quality guidelines , government - wide information quality guidelines , and omb's annual reports to congress . omb's reports to congress , included on a separate omb web page from iqa guidelines , include brief updates on agency reporting under the government - wide information quality guidelines . as we previously stated , agencies are required by iqa to report to omb annually on the number and type of correction requests received , as well as their respective responses . although not required , since 2003 omb has published agency - reported iqa data from the previous fiscal year in an annual report to congress . omb also makes this information available on its website but the data are dispersed across multiple web pages which could make the information hard to find and could contribute to user confusion . for example , omb provides links to the annual reports on its website where the public and interested parties may access the information ( see figure 1 ) . however , there is no central location on omb's website where the iqa data are located , for example , in a table or some other format by year or agency . instead , interested parties would need to go to each separate annual report link , search for iqa data , collect the data , and create their own table to review iqa data government - wide from year to year . enabling the public to better access information is one of the principles of the president's digital government strategy .