iii. ) dhs agreed with the six recommended actions to enhance collaboration at the dhs multi - agency operations centers and said it planned to take action to implement the practices . in the draft report , we said that the operations directorate had not yet taken actions to fulfill its leadership role and that a lack of leadership by the operations directorate to support consistent reporting of operations centers' budgets and staffing limits collaborative actions . dhs did not agree that leadership provided by the operation directorate to support collaboration is lacking and provided a number of examples of leadership efforts . among other things , dhs noted plans to conduct an independent study , initiated in september 2006 , to leverage technical and analytical expertise to support expanding the capabilities of the operations directorate . to what extent has dhs implemented key practices for enhancing and sustaining collaboration at these multi - agency centers ? to answer our first objective , we analyzed information obtained from the responsible component agencies and the operations directorate on the mission and functions of all of the 24 / 7 / 365 activities in dhs . we visited all 4 multi - agency centers , as well as centers operated by other component agencies including the federal emergency management agency , the u.s. coast guard , and the u.s. secret service to observe their operations , interview officials responsible for managing the centers , and identify centers that employed staff from multiple dhs agencies . from the 4 national operations centers that employed staff from multiple dhs component agencies - - the air and marine operations center ( amoc ) , the national targeting center ( ntc ) , the transportation security operations center ( tsoc ) , and the national operations center - interagency watch ( noc - watch ) — we obtained additional information on both the products the centers regularly developed and their primary customers . we also interviewed several staff assigned to centers from participating dhs component agencies — referred to as watchstanders — to discuss their roles and responsibilities at the centers and the overall mission of the centers to which they had been assigned . to answer our second objective , we met with the acting director and other responsible officials from the operations directorate to discuss its role and responsibilities . we reviewed transition , management integration , and planning and policy documents as well as strategic plans and annual performance reports and planning documents from dhs and its component agencies . we also reviewed and analyzed the results of studies undertaken by dhs to assess and improve coordination and collaboration at the multi - agency centers as well as reports from gao , the congressional research service , the dhs office of inspector general , and others that addressed the integration , coordination , and collaboration of departmentwide program functions . we then assessed dhs's efforts related to integration , coordination , and collaboration at the multi - agency centers to determine the extent to which they reflect dhs's application of the key practices we have found can help enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies and found to be at the center of successful mergers and transformations .