we found that there were 1,544 such cases in the database . to assess the timeliness of state's responses , we used state's foreign affairs handbook's timeliness goal of 21 business days and analyzed data on 4,804 cases . we defined business days as every official working day of the week for the u.s. federal government ( we excluded weekend days and federal holidays ) . for constituent - related correspondence , we could not calculate timeliness for the 1,544 cases discussed above because the “task closed” dates in the database were inaccurate . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also interviewed cognizant state officials in washington , d.c. we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . state receives correspondence from members of congress that includes requests for specific information , requests for documents , and requests that the secretary of state direct his or her attention to various matters . more than half of the correspondence that state received and responded to from april 2011 through june 2013 involved what state refers to as constituent concerns . according to state officials , this correspondence covered a variety of topics of interest to members' constituents , ranging from the status of visa applications to employment possibilities with state . we hereafter refer to such correspondence as constituent - related correspondence . the remaining correspondence involved what state refers to as substantive concerns . state officials said this correspondence sought information concerning foreign policy matters , such as human rights in vietnam ; the attack on the u.s. consulate in benghazi , libya ; arms sales to foreign nations ; state management issues ; and bilateral relations with other governments . specifically , they said that they use the database to track the status of state's response letters as they move through the following stages of state's process: congressional correspondence unit initiates case in database: when state receives a piece of congressional correspondence , the congressional correspondence unit scans a copy of the correspondence and records information about it — such as the date received , the member's name , and subject — into the database . the congressional correspondence unit then prepares a tasking slip , tasks the state bureau or office with the appropriate subject matter expertise to draft the response letter , and establishes an interim deadline for that bureau or office to prepare the draft response letter ( 2 days for substantive correspondence , 7 days for constituent - related correspondence ) . it also inputs the tasking information into the database . when it has done so , the congressional correspondence unit transmits the tasking slip and congressional correspondence to a point of contact in the tasked bureau or office .