gao - 18-359 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2018 . these aircraft have been in service for decades . in april 2002 , the navy began development of a replacement helicopter later identified as the vh - 71 program . by 2009 , schedule delays , performance issues , and a doubling of cost estimates , from $6.5 billion in 2005 to $13 billion in 2009 , prompted the navy to terminate the program . the need for a replacement helicopter remained , and by april 2012 , the office of the secretary of defense approved the navy's current acquisition approach . the navy's approach is based on the modification of an in - production aircraft to replace the legacy aircraft , by incorporating an executive cabin interior and unique mission equipment such as communications and mission systems , and limiting modifications to the aircraft to avoid a costly airworthiness recertification . in may 2014 , the navy awarded a fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) contract to sikorsky aircraft corporation , a lockheed martin company , for an engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase . the contract includes options for production quantities . the vh - 92a presidential helicopter is based on sikorsky's s - 92a commercial helicopter . the fixed - price incentive contract includes a ceiling price of $1.3 billion that limits the maximum amount that the navy may have to pay the contractor under the contract subject to other contract terms . the vh - 92a is expected to provide improved performance , survivability , and communications capabilities , while offering increased passenger capacity when compared to the current helicopters . sikorsky is taking s - 92a aircraft from an active production line ( at the sikorsky plant in coatesville , pennsylvania ) to a dedicated vh - 92a modification facility for subsystem integration at its plant in stratford , connecticut . when the aircraft arrives from coatesville , some components , such as circuit breaker panels , engines , and main and tail rotor blades are removed . after airframe modifications are done , the aircraft is then transferred to the sikorsky facility in owego , new york , where integration of the mission communications system , painting , and contractor - led testing , installation of the executive cabin interior , and the delivery of the aircraft will take place . see figure 1 for a depiction of modification of the commercial s - 92a aircraft to the vh - 92a presidential helicopter . the vh - 92a development program includes delivery of two engineering development model ( edm ) test aircraft and four system demonstration test article ( sdta ) aircraft . the first flight of the first edm aircraft took place in july 2017 and the second edm aircraft's first flight occurred in november 2017 . the two edm aircraft are currently undergoing government - led integrated testing , at naval air station patuxent river , maryland , and were used to conduct an operational assessment in march 2019 to support a decision on whether to enter low - rate initial production . the four sdta aircraft , now in the modification stages , are production representative aircraft being built under the development contract .