the impact of u.s. activities is challenged by numerous factors . industry representatives report that the situation may be worsening overall for some intellectual property sectors . the efforts of u.s. agencies have contributed to the establishment of strengthened intellectual property legislation in many foreign countries , however , the enforcement of intellectual property rights remains weak in many countries , and u.s. government and industry sources note that improving enforcement overseas is now a key priority . ustr's most recent special 301 report states that “although several countries have taken positive steps to improve their ipr regimes , the lack of ipr protection and enforcement continues to be a global problem.” for example , although the chinese government has improved its statutory ipr regime , ustr remains concerned about enforcement in that country . according to ustr , counterfeiting and piracy remain rampant in china and increasing amounts of counterfeit and pirated products are being exported from china . although u.s. law enforcement does undertake international cooperative activities to enforce intellectual property rights overseas , executing these efforts can prove difficult . for example , according to dhs and justice officials , u.s. efforts to investigate ipr violations overseas are complicated by a lack of jurisdiction as well as by the fact that u.s. officials must convince foreign officials to take action . further , a dhs official noted that in some cases , activities defined as criminal in the united states are not viewed as an infringement by other countries and that u.s. law enforcement agencies can therefore do nothing . in addition , u.s. efforts confront numerous challenges . because intellectual property protection is one of many u.s. government objectives pursued overseas , it is viewed internally in the context of broader u.s. foreign policy objectives that may receive higher priority at certain times in certain countries . industry officials with whom we met noted , for example , their belief that policy priorities related to national security were limiting the extent to which the united states undertook activities or applied diplomatic pressure related to ipr issues in some countries . further , the impact of u.s. activities is affected by a country's own domestic policy objectives and economic interests , which may complement or conflict with u.s. objectives . a centerpiece of policy activities is the annual special 301 process . “special 301” refers to certain provisions of the trade act of 1974 , as amended , that require ustr to annually identify foreign countries that deny adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights or fair and equitable market access for u.s. persons who rely on intellectual property protection . ustr identifies these countries with substantial assistance from industry and u.s. agencies and publishes the results of its reviews in an annual report . once a pool of such countries has been determined , the ustr , in coordination with other agencies , is required to decide which , if any , of these countries should be designated as a priority foreign country ( pfc ) . if a trading partner is identified as a pfc , ustr must decide within 30 days whether to initiate an investigation of those acts , policies , and practices that were the basis for identifying the country as a pfc .