resources retained for network initiatives . the new model requires networks to report the amounts and purposes of all resources they do not allocate to medical centers at the beginning of the fiscal year . networks retain and manage resources for network - level initiatives that are allocated to medical centers throughout the fiscal year , such as to offset start - up costs for new medical centers or clinics or for the network's consolidation of services shared across medical centers including contracting services , accounting , and laundry . additionally , networks retain resources for the administrative costs associated with operating the network , such as salaries for network employees . historically , va had asked networks to identify the amount of resources retained at the network level , but they did not ask networks to report the purposes of these resources . resources retained for the network's emergency reserve . networks may retain resources in an emergency reserve to respond to medical center emergencies throughout the year . the new model limits the amount of resources retained by each network to respond to medical center emergencies to 1.5 percent of the total allocation amount . ( see fig . networks do not provide resources directly to medical centers ; rather va headquarters retains responsibility for providing these resources based on network allocation decisions . prior to fiscal year 2011 , va permitted networks to develop and use their own methodologies for determining how to allocate general purpose resources to medical centers . va headquarters provided general guidance to networks on the principles they should use when determining their allocation methodologies . for fiscal year 2010 , for example , va's guidance stated that networks were expected to allocate resources to medical centers in a manner that must , among other things , be readily understandable and result in predictable allocations , and support the goal of improving equitable access to care and ensure appropriate allocation of resources to facilities to meet that goal . given the relative autonomy that the 21 networks have under va's decentralized health care system , they developed varying allocation methodologies . for example , networks varied in the factors they considered in determining medical center allocations . these factors included prior year funding , patient workload , performance , and facility square footage . nonetheless , va headquarters required networks to report descriptions of their allocation methodologies , including a description of how the methodology met va's guiding principles for network allocation . each network was also required to report the total amount of resources it retained at the network level — the portion of network general purpose resources set aside before allocations were made to medical centers at the beginning of the fiscal year — such as resources for network operations , network initiatives , and emergencies . in fiscal year 2011 , va implemented a new resource allocation process that includes a standardized model for networks to use in allocating general purpose resources to their medical centers . the model was designed to provide consistency in the allocation process across networks and still allow networks the flexibility to make adjustments to medical center allocations .