bilateral market outreach . to reach a broader range of investors , treasury officials and staff also communicate directly — via email , telephone , conferences , and in - person meetings — with other market participants , such as foreign central banks , asset managers , investment banks , life insurance companies , pension funds , hedge funds , principal trading firms , and trading platforms . according to treasury , staff use this bilateral outreach to discuss new products or distribution channels ; assess investor needs ; determine the drivers of market demand ; and guide market perception about treasury policy . treasury officials said they select individuals for bilateral outreach using a combination of qualitative and quantitative information , such as data on specific investors' participation in the treasury market . according to treasury , the bilateral market outreach helps mitigate an over - reliance on a subset of market participants that might not represent the full spectrum of views of treasury market investors . however , we found that treasury does not have an official policy to ensure that its bilateral market outreach is conducted or documented in a systematic manner . this is consistent with our reporting from 2010 . in may 2010 , treasury officials told us that one of treasury's priorities was to improve investor outreach and collect information more systematically . treasury acquired a customer relationship management tool , but treasury officials said they only use it to store contact information . treasury also drafted a policy document in november 2017 for office of debt management staff that specifies the nature , restrictions on , and expectations for bilateral discussions with market contacts , but the policy is not final . while treasury's 2017 draft policy includes some guidance on documenting the bilateral outreach , treasury officials told us they did not systematically produce formal documentation of these meetings . treasury officials said that one reason treasury did not have formal documentation of market outreach is because the staff who conduct the outreach also make the policy recommendations . treasury officials also said direct outreach can sometimes cover market - sensitive information and that confidentiality is important to ensure candid exchange of information . in august 2019 , treasury announced that it was conducting broad market outreach to update its understanding of market demand for an ultra - long bond . federal standards for internal control direct agencies to design and implement control activities — policies , procedures , and mechanisms — to achieve program objectives and respond to risks . a policy governing the selection of individuals for bilateral outreach could help treasury ensure it is systematically obtaining market views from investors across various sectors . a policy for documenting bilateral outreach would also ensure that the information that treasury staff obtains is available to help inform future deliberations . treasury officials said that they are considering updating and finalizing the 2017 draft outreach guidance based on our review . in addition to market outreach , treasury calculates and monitors metrics that summarize important aspects of the debt portfolio , treasury auctions , and the secondary market .