this problem is about more than finances . it is also about maintaining an adequate safety net for american workers against loss of income from retirement , disability , or death ; social security provides a foundation of retirement income for millions of americans , and has prevented many former workers from living their retirement years in poverty . as the congress considers proposals to restore the long - term financial stability and viability of the social security system , it also needs to consider the impact of the potential changes on different types of beneficiaries . moreover , while addressing social security reform is important and will not be easy , medicare presents a much greater , more complex , and more urgent fiscal challenge . to assist the congress in its deliberations , gao has developed criteria for evaluating social security reform proposals . these criteria aim to balance financial and economic considerations with benefit adequacy and equity issues and the administrative challenges associated with various proposals . the use of these criteria can help facilitate fair consideration and informed debate of social security reform proposals . although making policy decisions of this importance requires appropriate deliberation , the time to act is now . waiting only makes the problem larger , the magnitude of the required changes greater , and the time available to phase in changes shorter . waiting also may serve to further delay the really hard decisions on medicare and medicaid . today the social security program does not face an immediate crisis but rather a long - range and more fundamental financing problem driven largely by known demographic trends . the lack of an immediate solvency crisis affects the nature of the challenge , but it does not eliminate the need for action . acting soon reduces the likelihood that the congress will have to choose between imposing severe benefit cuts and unfairly burdening future generations with the program's rising costs . acting soon would allow changes to be phased in so the individuals who are most likely to be affected , namely younger and future workers , will have time to adjust their retirement planning while helping to avoid related “expectation gaps.” mr. chairman , as you heard earlier this month while hosting the second annual oecd international conference of chairpersons of parliamentary budget committees , we are not alone in facing long - term budget challenges due to an aging population . our counterparts in many european countries are debating these same issues , and a number of developed and developing countries have already engaged in fundamental reform of their systems to deal with their long - range challenges . it is precisely because the program is so deeply woven into the fabric of our nation that any proposed reform must consider the program in its entirety , rather than one aspect alone . thus , gao has developed a broad framework for evaluating reform proposals that considers not only solvency but other aspects of the program as well .