how would it be measured ? what should be the relationship between the amount of debt reduction required and the amount of surplus reduction ( i.e. , tax cut or direct spending increase ) permitted ? what , if any , relationship should there be between this calculation and the discretionary caps ? while paygo constrained the creation or legislative expansion of direct spending programs and tax cuts , it accepted the existing provisions of law as given . it was not designed to trigger — and it did not trigger — any examination of “the base.” cost increases in existing mandatory programs are exempt from control under paygo and could be ignored . however , constraining changes that increase the cost of entitlements and mandatories is not enough . our long - term budget simulations show that as more and more of the baby boom generation retires , spending for social security , medicare , and medicaid will demand correspondingly larger shares of federal revenues . the growth in these programs will increasingly restrict budgetary flexibility . even if the social security surpluses are saved and used for debt reduction , unified deficits are projected to emerge in about two decades , and by 2030 social security , medicare , and medicaid would require more than three - fourths of federal revenues . previously we suggested some sort of “lookback” procedure to prompt a reexamination of “the base.” under such a process , the congress could specify spending targets for paygo programs for several years . the president could be required to report in his budget whether these targets either had been exceeded in the prior year or were likely to be exceeded in the current or budget years . he could then be required to recommend whether any or all of this overage should be recouped — and if so , to propose a way to do so . the congress could be required to act on the president's proposal . while the current budget process contains a similar point of order against worsening the financial condition of the social security trust funds , it would be possible to link “tripwires” or triggers to measures related to overall budgetary flexibility or to specific program measures . for example , if the congress were concerned about declining budgetary flexibility , it could design a tripwire tied to the share of the budget devoted to mandatory spending or to the share devoted to a major program . other variations of this type of tripwire approach have been suggested . the 1999 breaux - frist proposal ( s. 1895 ) for structural and substantive changes to medicare financing contained a new concept for measuring “programmatic insolvency” and required congressional approval of additional financing if that point was reached . other specified actions could be coupled with reaching a tripwire , such as requiring the congress or the president to propose alternatives to address reforms or , by using the congressional budget process , requiring the congress to deal with unanticipated cost growth beyond a specified tripwire by establishing a point of order against a budget resolution with a spending path exceeding the specified amount . one example of a threshold might be the percentage of gdp devoted to medicare .