connell , linda . battelle memorial institute . naoms reference report: concepts , methods , and development roadmap . “ in what order should the events be asked about in the questionnaire ? ” as a result of the 600 air carrier pilot interviews conducted for the field trial , the researchers decided that telephone interviewing was sufficiently cost - effective and had a high enough response rate to use in the final survey . the field trial had tested question content that derived from previous research and had experimented with the order of different sections of the survey . the field trial gave the team confidence that the naoms survey was a viable means of monitoring safety information . however , the field trial did not fully resolve questions about the period of time that would best accommodate pilots' ability to recall their experiences or about the best data collection strategy . the team had decided before the field trial that the naoms questionnaire content and structure were to be governed by ( 1 ) measures of respondent risk exposure , such as the numbers of flight hours and flight legs flown ; ( 2 ) estimates of the numbers of safety incidents and related unwanted events respondents experienced during the recall period ; ( 3 ) answers to questions on special focus topics stakeholders requested ; and ( 4 ) feedback on the quality of the questions and the overall survey process . after the team analyzed the data from the field trial and conducted further extensive research , it decided that the naoms survey should address as many safety events identified during its preliminary research as practical , that its questions should be ordered to match clusters from the field trial based on causes and phases of flight , and that a sample size of approximately 8,000 to 9,000 interviews per year would provide sufficient sensitivity to detect changes in rates . the team structured the survey in four sections in accordance with their original expectations of what the survey should cover . naoms's project managers explained the rationale for this structure , shown in figure 3 , in a 2004 presentation to faa's air traffic organization ( ato ) . nasa's contractors began computer - assisted telephone interviewing ( cati ) data collection for the full air carrier pilot survey in march 2001 . using a sample that was drawn quarterly from a subset of a publicly available faa database , interviewers surveyed pilots regularly over approximately 45 months of data collection . the survey methodology changed during the first few months of the survey: that is , researchers settled on which recall period to use and a cross - sectional data collection strategy approximately 1 year after the operational survey began . interviewing ended in december 2004 , by which time more than 25,000 air carrier pilot interviews had been completed . in addition to the air carrier pilot survey , naoms researchers explored elements of the original action plan for the project . they conducted focus groups with air traffic controllers and drafted preliminary survey questions .