although most contracts included bonds , some did not . receipts are to be applied only to stewardship contracting projects . less than full and open competition exempts the agency from the requirement under the national forest management act that all sales of timber having an appraised value of $10,000 or more be advertised . this allows the forest service to favor local contractors when soliciting contract bids . supervision of marking and harvesting of timber sales exempts the agency from the requirement that usda employees supervise the harvesting of trees on forest service lands . this has allowed the forest service to use one state agency to assist in stewardship contracting . best - value contracting requires the agency to consider other factors — such as past performance or work quality — in addition to price when making stewardship contract award decisions . the law authorized 28 stewardship contracts by the forest service , of which 9 were to be in the forest service's northern region . the authority of the forest service to enter into these contracts was to end on september 30 , 2002 . contracts were to “achieve land management goals for the national forests that meet local and rural community needs.” the goals listed in the legislation included , but were not limited to , maintaining or obliterating roads and trails to restore or maintain water maintaining soil productivity , habitat for wildlife and fisheries , or other setting prescribed fires to improve the composition , structure , condition , and health of stands or to improve wildlife habitat ; noncommercially cutting or removing trees or other activities to promote healthy forest stands , reduce fire hazards , or achieve other noncommercial objectives ; restoring and maintaining watersheds ; restoring and maintaining wildlife and fish habitat ; and controlling noxious and exotic weeds and reestablishing native plant species . the law also required that the forest service establish a multiparty monitoring and evaluation process to assess each stewardship contract . several subsequent laws modified the requirements of the initial stewardship contracting authority . the consolidated appropriations act of 2000 changed the requirement from 28 stewardship contracts to 28 stewardship projects , allowing for the possibility that individual projects may involve more than one contract . two projects we visited , the clearwater and fernow experimental forest projects , had expended retained receipts on additional stewardship contracting activities . at these projects , we examined payment vouchers , receipts , and other expenditure - related documentation to ensure that retained funds had been spent on stewardship - related activities , as required , and the funds appeared to have been spent appropriately . when the team pointed out that decommissioning the road would be unnecessary and would add sediment to a nearby creek , the forest service accepted the team's suggestion and withdrew the plan to decommission the road . the hcpc member pointed out that if the forest service had involved the community up front , this oversight would not have occurred . the hcpc member also told us that the project focused on timber harvest activities and did not address the issue of high road density , which jeopardizes wildlife security .