iv. ) cms provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies to the administrator and interested congressional committees . ( 3 ) what information does cms have on the number of beneficiaries affected by inappropriate marketing ? to determine the extent to which cms has taken compliance and enforcement actions against ma organizations for inappropriate marketing , we analyzed cms data on compliance and enforcement actions cms took against ma organizations for inappropriate marketing for the period january 2006 through february 2009 . to determine how cms helped beneficiaries affected by inappropriate marketing and the types of problems beneficiaries encountered , we interviewed officials from cms's central office and all 10 regional offices , 6 state dois , and 6 state health insurance assistance programs ( ship ) and reviewed relevant documentation . we also visited three cms regional offices to conduct more detailed interviews . we chose one of the regional offices because it had conducted detailed compilations of complaint data ; another regional office because it housed the division that coordinated regional office oversight and monitoring activities ; and a third regional office because it had responsibilities for ma organizations with a high concentration of pffs plans . we interviewed doi officials and ship officials in the three states where we conducted site visits . in addition , we interviewed doi and ship officials from another three states because in one of the states , the doi took an enforcement action against an ma organization for inappropriate marketing and in the other two states , doi officials testified before naic on inappropriate ma marketing and sales practices . to obtain information about the number of beneficiaries affected by inappropriate marketing , we used june 2007 through october 2008 data from cms's complaint tracking module on the number of beneficiaries who claimed they were affected by inappropriate marketing and requested cms assistance to disenroll from their ma plan . we interviewed officials in cms's central office and all regional offices about their use of the complaint tracking module data . we also reviewed a february 2008 study conducted by one cms regional office that analyzed cms and ma organizations' resolution of cases entered into the complaint tracking module . in addition , we interviewed officials from cms's central office about plans to collect information on beneficiaries' reasons for disenrollment from their ma plan . to determine the reliability of the data we used , we reviewed documentation , examined the internal consistency and other aspects of the data , interviewed cms officials about reliability issues , or some combination of the three . based on our review , we determined that the cms regional office study of complaint tracking and the compliance and enforcement data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we determined that the complaint tracking module data had significant limitations . as a result , we reported total complaints from the inappropriate marketing categories because this is an indicator that cms uses , but did not include any additional analyses of the complaint tracking module data .