( see table 1. ) the officials stated that ops is taking a long - term , strategic approach to address safety goals by improving pipeline integrity and preventing damage to pipelines . many of these recommendations address the same issues as the statutory requirements . ops has made progress in implementing some of the 22 statutory requirements that it reported as open in our may 2000 report but has not fully implemented some significant , long - standing requirements . as of september 1 , 2001 , 6 of the 22 requirements have been closed as a result of ops' actions , 11 requirements are still open , and the remaining 5 have been closed because ops now considers them to be superseded by or amendments to other requirements or because the agency does not believe it is required to take further action . the agency has fully implemented 6 of the 22 statutory requirements that it classified as open in may 2000 . three of these six requirements were implemented in the last 16 months ; ops issued a final rule to define underwater abandoned pipeline facilities that present a hazard to navigation and specify how operators shall report these facilities , issued a report on its risk management demonstration program , and conducted activities to address population encroachment near pipelines . ops had completed action on the other three requirements prior to may 2000 , but did not report these actions to us at that time . while the safety board is encouraged by ops' recent efforts , it is reserving final judgment on ops' progress until the agency demonstrates that it can follow through with actions to fully implement the recommendations . ( appendix i provides the status of ops' actions to implement all 22 requirements as of september 1 , 2001. ) ops still needs to issue similar integrity management rules for hazardous liquid pipelines that are less than 500 miles long , expected in late fall 2001 , and for natural gas transmission pipelines . the agency expects to issue a proposed rule for transmission pipelines by the end of 2001 and a final rule in fall 2002 . to facilitate the natural gas transmission rule , ops officials have been meeting with representatives of the pipeline industry , research institutions , state pipeline safety agencies , and public interest groups to understand how integrity management principles can best be applied to improve the safety of gas pipelines . ops also requested information and clarification in june 2001 and plans to hold a public meeting with its natural gas technical advisory committee on this subject . according to ops officials , they are close to reaching consensus with the pipeline industry and state agencies on safety standards for natural gas transmission pipelines . in addition , in response to a 1988 requirement to establish standards to complete and maintain a pipeline inventory , ops is establishing multiple methods of collecting this information , such as annual reports , the integrity management process , and a national pipeline mapping system.according to ops officials , they are collecting the necessary information for hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines , but still need to establish methods to collect additional information for gas distribution pipelines .