pub . since fil yer 2002 , $2.22 illion has een pproprited for us - visit . thi the eventh legitively - mndted us - visit expenditre pln . 4 control requirements and reviews established by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , including circular a - 11 , part 7 ; a certification by the dhs chief information officer ( cio ) that an independent verification and validation agent is currently under contract for the project ; a certification by the dhs cio that the system architecture of the program is sufficiently aligned with the department's information systems enterprise architecture to minimize future rework , including a description of all aspects of the architectures that were and were not assessed in making the alignment determination , the date of the alignment determination , and any known areas of misalignment , along with the associated risks and corrective actions to address any such areas ; a certification by the dhs cpo that the plans for the program comply with federal acquisition rules , requirements , guidelines , and practices , and a description of the actions being taken to address any areas of noncompliance , the risks associated with them , along with any plans for addressing these risks and the status of their implementation ; a certification by the dhs cio that the program has a risk management process that regularly identifies , evaluates , mitigates , and monitors risks throughout the system life cycle , and communicates high - risk conditions to agency and dhs investment decision makers , as well as a listing of all the program's high risks , and a status of efforts to address them ; 5 a certification by the dhs chief human capital officer ( chco ) that the human capital needs of the program are being strategically and proactively managed , and that current human capital capabilities are sufficient to execute the plans discussed in the report ; a complete schedule for the full implementation of a biometric exit program or a certification that such a program is not possible within 5 years ; a detailed accounting of operations and maintenance , contractor services , and program management costs associated with the program . the act also requires that we review this plan . dhs submitted its fiscal year 2008 us - visit expenditure plan to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on homeland security on june 12 , 2008 . as agreed , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine whether the plan satisfies the legislative conditions and ( 2 ) provide observations about the plan and management of the program . a diussed in the cope nd methodology ection of thi riefing ( ttchment 1 ) , we ght clrifiction from ff with the housnd sente approprition committee , subcommittee on homelnd secrity , on thi condition . a result , the wording of thi condition has een modified lightly from tht in the ct. 6 to accomplish the first objective , we compared the information provided in the plan with each aspect of the eleven conditions .