murder . making any threat , or maliciously conveying false information kno the same to be false , concerning the deliverance , placement , or detonation of an explosive or other lethal device in or against a place of public use , a state or government facility , a public transportations system , or an infrastructure facility . violations of the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations a 18 u.s.c . § 1961 , et seq . , or a comparable state law , where one of the predicate acts found by a jury or admitted by the defendant , consists one of the crimes listed in paragraph 49 c.f.r . attempt to commit the crimes in paragraphs listed under 49 c.f.r . conspiracy or attempt to commit the crimes in 49 c.f.r . the interim disqualifying felonies . unlawful possession , use , sale , manufacture , pu receipt , transfer , shipping , transporting , delivery dealing in a firearm or other weapon . a firea includes , but is not limited to , firearms as defined in 18 u.s.c . § 5845 ( a ) , or items contained on the united states munitions import list at 27 cfr § 447.21. rchase , distribution , , import , export of , or . extortion . dishonesty , fraud , or misrepresentation , including identity fraud and money laundering where the money laundering is related to a crime described bad checks do not constitute dishonesty , fraud , or misrepresentation for purposes of this paragraph . § 1572.103 ( a ) or ( b ) . welfare fraud and passing 4 . bribery . smuggling . to what extent has dhs assessed the effectiveness of twic , and does the coast guard have effective systems in place to measure compliance ? this report is a public version of a related sensitive report that we issued to you in may 2011 . dhs and tsa deemed some of the information in the prior report as sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about the twic program , including techniques used to enroll and conduct a background check on individuals and assess an individual's eligibility for a twic , and the technologies that support twic security threat assessment determinations and coast guard inspections . rape or aggravated sexual abuse . in addition , at tsa's request , we have redacted data on specific enrollment center ( s ) and maritime ports where our investigators conducted covert testing . robbery . fraudulent entry into a seaport as described in 18 u.s.c . § 1036 , or a comparable state law . violations of the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act , 18 u.s.c . § 1961 , et seq. , or a comparable state law , other than the violations listed in paragraph 49 c.f.r . conspiracy or attempt to commit the interim disqualifying felonies . appendix vii: gao contact and staff acknowledgments error ! no text of specified style in document .