technology development funding . the august 2013 upf independent peer review report recommended that the upf project fund more technology development activities from project funds instead of pdrd funds . in october 2013 , the upf contractor issued a corrective action plan to address the recommendations from the august 2013 upf independent peer review . this corrective action plan: ( 1 ) lists planned and ongoing actions that the contractor and nnsa will take to address each recommendation , ( 2 ) provides an estimated date by which planned actions are to be completed , and ( 3 ) identifies which upf contractor representative or nnsa official is responsible for completing the planned action . as part of this corrective action plan , the upf assistant project manager for technology is responsible for determining which technology development activities should be funded directly with upf project funds and is to prepare a cost estimate for those activities . the upf assistant project manager for technology told us that he expects to complete the planned corrective action by the end of march 2014 . adding required technology development activities to the upf's cost estimate may increase the project's cost estimate , but it may also improve the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the estimate . if nnsa completes these planned actions , we believe that the agency may have taken appropriate actions to address this risk . enriched uranium operations at the y - 12 plant play a vital role in the national security of the united states by producing critical components for the nuclear weapons stockpile and by supplying fuel for the navy . there is a clear need for nnsa to replace the old , deteriorating , and high - maintenance facilities at the y - 12 plant . nnsa is currently reevaluating the upf project and may decide to construct a facility that is smaller and contains only select enriched uranium processing capabilities . the upf is to modernize and consolidate all enriched uranium operations at the y - 12 plant in three phases . agile machining — a system that combines multiple machining operations for fabricating metal into various shapes into a single process — is the key technology planned for upf phase ii . cd 4: approve the start of operations . in august 2007 , the deputy secretary of energy originally approved cd 1 for the upf with a cost range of $1.4 to $3.5 billion . nnsa is currently evaluating alternatives to the upf , and the outcome of this evaluation may require different agency actions to address this risk . in june 2012 , the deputy secretary of energy reaffirmed cd 1 for the upf with a cost range of $4.2 to $6.5 billion and approved a phased approach to the project , which deferred significant portions of the facility's original scope . according to nnsa documents , this deferral was due , in part , to the project's multibillion dollar increased cost estimate and to accelerate the completion of the highest priority scope . in july 2013 , nnsa decided to table 1 shows the combine cd 2 and cd 3 for the first phase of upf.upf's phases , scope of work , cost estimate , as of june 2012 , and proposed start of operations .