the drawdown effort has already begun . it is , however , one of several tasks u.s. forces in iraq are conducting concurrently in a continuously evolving environment during a period of iraqi political uncertainty . for example , besides overseeing operations in iraq , mnf - i and its subordinate headquarters are also merging into a single headquarters , called united states forces - iraq , which is scheduled to become mission capable on january 1 , 2010 , and includes a 40 percent reduction of headquarters personnel . moreover , brigade combat teams are being replaced by relatively new advise and assist brigades that will focus primarily on training iraqi security forces while retaining the capability to conduct full - spectrum operations . finally , although dod has reported that enemy activity has decreased markedly since its highest point in june 2007 , the insurgency in iraq remains dangerous . as of august 31 , 2009 , there were approximately 128,700 u.s. military personnel in iraq , spread among 295 bases throughout the country . additionally , there were over 3.3 million pieces of army equipment in iraq worth $45.8 billion , 18 percent of which is theater provided equipment , which is a pool of permanent , stay behind equipment that has accumulated in iraq and kuwait since combat operations began in 2003 . although much of this theater provided equipment has remained in theater as units rotate , the withdrawal timelines in the security agreement will compel dod to make critical decisions regarding the future of this equipment . figure 1 below provides a more detailed breakdown of the u.s. army equipment in iraq . it also generates theater and department of the army disposition guidance for all forces and materiel redeploying and retrograding out of iraq . finally , the department of the army , with army materiel command as the lead agency , created a responsible reset task force to facilitate the provision of disposition instructions for materiel retrograding out of iraq and synchronize those instructions to facilitate the reset of army equipment . dod organizations reported that their efforts to reduce personnel , retrograde equipment , and close bases in the initial months of the drawdown have exceeded targets . first , according to the mnf - i commanding general , u.s. forces have already begun drawing down in iraq without compromising security . for example , since may 2009 , the number of u.s. servicemembers in iraq has been reduced by 5,300 . furthermore , the mnf - i commander testified on september 30 , 2009 , that another 4,000 servicemembers will likely be drawn down in october 2009 — earlier than originally planned — due to improvements in anbar province . second , as of august 2009 , the army reported that it has exceeded its target figure for the retrograde of rolling stock by 1,800 pieces . finally , the army has reported that as of august 2009 , it had closed three more bases than originally planned . while dod's progress since may 2009 has exceeded its targets , a large amount of personnel , equipment , and bases remain to be drawn down within the established timelines .