tsa agreed with these recommendations . tsa — through a private contractor — tested the twic program from august 2004 to june 2005 at 28 transportation facilities around the nation . in august 2005 , the twic testing contractor submitted a report summarizing the results of the twic testing to tsa . third , workers immigration status is to be checked by the u.s . citizenship and immigration service . workers are to have the opportunity to appeal the results of the background check or request a waiver if they do not pass the check . twic card production: after tsa determines that a worker has passed the background checks , the agency provides transportation worker information to a federal card production facility where the twic card is to be personalized for the worker , manufactured , and then sent back to the enrollment center . card issuance: transportation workers are to be informed when their cards are ready to be picked up at enrollment centers . privilege granting: twic cards are to be activated at enrollment centers and workers will choose a personal identification number . transportation facility security officials will then grant workers access to secure areas on an individual basis . workers are to then use their twic cards to match the card to the card holder when accessing secure areas through biometric access control systems . card revocation: local facilities can download or receive real - time lists of workers deemed to pose a threat or whose cards have been lost or stolen from tsa . facilities can then remove these workers' access privileges to secure areas . twic cards are to be renewed and background checks repeated every 5 years . cards will be re - issued to workers if ever lost or stolen . in may 2006 , dhs issued a proposed rule that describes the requirements of the twic program that the owners and operators of maritime facilities and vessels would be required to implement . according to tsa and the coast guard's cost estimate , about 48 percent of the total cost of the twic program will be incurred by the owners and operators of port facilities and vessels . tsa and the coast guard estimate that the total cost to these facilities and vessel owners and operators will be about $467 million over 10 years , mostly for the installation of access control systems and other technology to operate these systems . in addition to these costs , tsa and the coast guard estimate that they will charge a fee of $149 to produce and issue each twic card for the estimated 750,000 workers that will need to receive a card . according to tsa , this fee will cover the cost of the background checks and card production and issuance . this fee is to be collected from the applicant at the enrollment center when applying for a twic . in august 2006 , dhs decided that the twic program would be implemented in the maritime sector using two separate rules , one for enrolling workers and issuing cards and the second for implementing twic access control technologies , such as biometric card readers .