facilities in poor condition . we observed maintenance issues at a number of postal stations that do not appear critical to the postal service's mission based on their low revenue and proximity to other retail facilities . for example , the postal service recently renewed the lease for the wilkinsburg station in pittsburgh , pennsylvania , even though the facility's façade is starting to pull loose from the building , the roof has numerous leaks , and sewage backs up throughout the facility's plumbing system . both of these systems feed information directly into fdb . the postal service's vice president for facilities oversees the maintenance of facilities nationwide in conjunction with eight regionally based facilities service offices , which manage the maintenance activities in the postal service's areas . the postal service's vice president for delivery and retail — in conjunction with the nine area vice presidents , 80 district managers , and almost 24,000 local postmasters throughout the country — has nationwide responsibility for aligning the postal service's retail network with customer needs ( see fig . the district managers are responsible for making recommendations to open or close a postal retail facility , while the vice president for delivery and retail is responsible for acting on the recommendations . in 2001 , we placed the postal service on our list of agencies and programs designated as high risk due to , among other factors , financial and operational challenges . the postal service responded by issuing a plan to “transform” its operations — the 2002 transformation plan . specific strategies outlined in the plan called for the postal service to align its retail network with customer needs by promoting alternative access to retail services and closing “low - value , redundant” postal retail facilities in overserved areas . to obtain information needed to align access to retail services with customer needs , the postal service indicated that it would establish a national facility database and develop a criteria - based methodology to determine which facilities to close . the criteria were to include factors , such as a facility's proximity to other postal facilities , the number of households and delivery points in a community , and indicators of retail productivity . in 2004 , we reported that the postal service had not yet developed criteria for making changes to its retail facility network , including facility closures and consolidations . the postal service updated its transformation plan in 2005 for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 , indicating that it intended to reduce its long - term facility repair costs by doing more focused , routine facility assessments and preventive maintenance . the postal reform legislation enacted in december 2006 provided additional opportunities to address the challenges the postal service faces in adapting to an increasingly competitive environment . the act provides tools and mechanisms to help control costs , including the costs of aligning its facility network with its customer needs . postal officials also said several years of underfunding have caused postal facilities to deteriorate and many are in need of repairs . evidence supporting the officials' statements includes a 2005 assessment conducted by a contractor of 651 randomly selected owned and leased postal facilities .