research studies . to help estimate the burden of applying for snap benefits , usda's food and nutrition service relied , in part , on a program research study . specifically , a 2004 food stamp program access study estimated that applicants spend , on average , 2.2 hours travelling for face - to - face interviews during the application process . food and nutrition service staff incorporated this information in its burden hour estimates to determine the average burden time per response for the snap icr . in cases where data did not exist to inform burden hour estimates , such as for average burden time per response , the selected agencies relied on their professional judgment to develop estimates , informed in some instances by internal consultation or public input . for example , hhs's office for civil rights ( ocr ) did not have data for the average burden time per response for some health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy , security , and breach notification rules information collection activities . the information collection addresses hipaa requirements related to the use , disclosure , and safeguarding of individually identifiable health information . for example , in a centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) icr , we found that the agency correctly stated its assumptions in the supporting statement but , due to a math error that was not detected during the review process , incorrectly calculated the respondent time cost in the second year of the collection based on these assumptions . because it did not detect this error , hhs underestimated respondent time costs by approximately $14.4 million or about 40 percent of the published total respondent time costs in the second year for that icr , as shown in table 5 . in another icr , published in july 2013 , cms overestimated the public's burden by approximately 12.8 million hours . according to hhs officials , some of the reporting or recordkeeping activities required by hipaa may be conducted by security experts . to help estimate the average burden time for these particular activities , ocr officials stated that they consulted with internal hhs security experts to determine the time it might take a security expert to complete the applicable information collection activities . when available , public input helped some agencies refine their burden hour estimates . for example , as part of its prescription drug labeling information collection , hhs's food and drug administration had originally estimated that it would take approximately 5 seconds for a pharmacist to provide a patient with a medication guide . during the 2001 renewal of the icr , however , the agency received a comment from a distributor stating that such disclosure could take additional time , especially if the pharmacist did not already receive the medication guides and had to print them on - site , according to agency officials . after receiving this comment , agency officials considered that some distributions of medication guides to patients may take longer than others , and revised its previous estimate from 5 seconds to 3 minutes . the desk officers also check that the estimates are properly and consistently calculated .