internal controls . dhs has established a system of twic - related processes and controls to assist in implementation of the program . in may 2011 , we reported that internal control weaknesses governing the enrollment , background checking , and use of twic potentially limit the program's ability to meet the program's stated mission needs or provide reasonable assurance that access to secure areas of mtsa - regulated facilities is restricted to qualified individuals . key program weaknesses included an inability to provide reasonable assurance that only qualified individuals can acquire twics or that once issued a twic , twic holders have continued to meet eligibility requirements . as we reported in may 2011 , to meet the stated program purpose , tsa's focus in designing the twic program was on facilitating the issuance of twics to maritime workers . however , tsa did not assess the internal controls in place to determine whether they provided reasonable assurance that the program could meet defined mission needs for limiting access to only qualified individuals . for example , controls that the twic program had in place to identify the use of potentially counterfeit identity documents were not used to routinely inform background checking processes . additionally , controls were not in place to determine whether an applicant has a need for a twic . further , twic program controls were not designed to provide reasonable assurance that twic holders maintained their eligibility once issued twics . for example , controls were not designed to determine whether twic holders have committed disqualifying crimes at the federal or state levels after being granted a twic . we further reported that internal control weaknesses in twic enrollment , background checking , and use could have contributed to the breach of selected mtsa - regulated facilities during covert tests conducted by our investigators . during these tests at several selected ports , our investigators were successful in accessing port facilities using counterfeit twics , authentic twics acquired through fraudulent means , and false business cases ( i.e. , reasons for requesting access ) . performance measures . our work on tsa's behavior detection program has underscored the importance of developing sound measures to evaluate the effectiveness of tsa security programs . the office of management and budget ( omb ) encourages the use of outcome measures — which track progress toward a strategic goal by documenting the beneficial results of programs — because they are more meaningful than output measures , which tend to be more process oriented or a means to an end . congress also needs information on whether and in what respects a program is working well or poorly to support its oversight of agencies and their budgets . as we reported in may 2010 , tsa had established output - based performance measuresprogram , such as the number of spot referrals to law enforcement officers and subsequent arrests ; however , it had not fielded outcome - oriented performance measures , such as identifying individuals who may pose a threat to the transportation system , to evaluate the effectiveness of the spot program . with such outcome measures , tsa could more fully assess spot's contribution to improving aviation security .