commission credits . the commission credit is a percentage of the total commission that goes back to the federal tenant agency in the form of a reduction in rent . as part of the total commission , brokers have negotiated over $340 million in commission credits . gsa estimates that its future gls plus program will generate $129 million in commission credits throughout the duration of the program . lessors and real estate economists we interviewed highlighted various issues about gsa's commission structure , including commissions paid to the broker and commission credits paid back to the tenant agency . the interviewees had different perspectives on whether gsa's broker program and the current commission structure are beneficial to the federal government . some questioned whether the use of brokers saves the federal government money . as previously noted , according to gsa officials , lessors , through the commission , pay the brokers , which is customary in commercial real estate . although gsa does incur some costs from appropriated funds because gsa officials oversee the work of brokers , gsa officials noted that gsa does not currently use its own appropriated funds to compensate brokers for services performed as a part of the broker program . however , four lessors that we interviewed said that broker commission costs are passed through to federal tenants in their leases . these lessors questioned the benefits of using brokers for federal leases . in contrast , two real estate economists we interviewed said that gsa could potentially be missing cost - saving opportunities when brokers are not used because rental rates are generally set by competitive market forces , also gsa's in - house staff may not negotiate commission credits . gsa officials , however , disagreed with this statement , saying in - house staff generally seek to receive credit or concessions for leases they negotiate since there is no commission to be paid to a broker . another real estate economist we interviewed indicated that paying brokers based on a fixed price basis , versus a commission basis , could result in lower costs to the government because this type of payment structure could involve gsa brokers' bidding for lease acquisition assignments in fixed - price terms only . this real estate economist also said that this approach could potentially address past concerns involving gsa's commission structure . over the years and with different iterations of the program , gsa has established various goals for the broker program ; most of these goals pertain to cost savings . during our review , gsa officials also said that the main purpose of the program is to serve as a workforce multiplier for the regional offices — providing needed personnel to complete leases that gsa does not have enough staff to complete on its own . our review of gsa documents and interviews with gsa staff identified various program goals as shown in table 4 . for gls plus , the fourth iteration of the broker program , which gsa plans to start in mid - 2020 , the proposed goals include achieving taxpayer savings , improving the customer experience , and leveraging broker expertise . gsa officials also said that maximized productivity would be a goal of the program .