not planned . agency does not plan to migrate this service to an external provider . table 5 summarizes the results of the 24 cfo act agency responses related to 46 current core financial systems , including 45 civilian systems and 1 defense system , that agency officials identified as being fully deployed as of september 30 , 2009 . of these , 12 agencies reported that they have already migrated , or plan to migrate , it hosting or application management core financial system support services to external providers for 16 systems . further , 4 agencies reported that they rely on external providers for transaction processing services supporting 4 systems . how will system requirements and standard business processes be updated and maintained ? what criteria will be used to determine whether a performance - based approach for compliance with financial system requirements reduces the cost , risk , and complexity of financial system modernizations ? what actions will be taken to help ensure that discontinuing fsio's software testing and certification program does not result in lack of interoperability across agency systems ? what steps will be taken to ensure that vendor self - certifications comply with applicable provisions of the federal acquisition regulation ? what guidance will be provided to agencies to clarify any changes in agency responsibilities for testing and validating software functionality ? how will the new approach be implemented and what governance structure will be established to fully realize the benefits of common solutions and new technologies ? how will new governmentwide shared solutions that are intended to perform functions currently performed at agencies work with current core financial systems and solutions ? what guidance will be provided to agencies to encourage their participation in , and adoption of , the new solutions envisioned in the new approach ? previous efforts to realize the benefits associated with shared services have been challenging , in part because of the lack of a governance structure that ensures agency adoption of shared service solutions . agency participation in the new solutions being developed by fit is voluntary and omb's previous policy regarding migrations to external providers is no longer mandated . therefore , the potential benefits that will actually be realized through shared services are uncertain . according to the institute of electrical and electronic engineers , a concept of operations is normally one of the first documents produced during a disciplined development effort . omb officials stated that they are developing an overall concept of operations but did not provide us an estimated timeframe for its completion . we previously reported on the need for this critical tool to provide an overall road map for describing the interrelationships among financial management systems and how information is to flow from and through them and within and across agencies , and ensuring the validity of each agency's implementation approach . in addition , a concept of operations can be used to communicate overall quantitative and qualitative system characteristics to users , developers , and other organizational elements and would allow stakeholders to understand the user organizations , missions , and organizational objectives from an integrated systems point of view . we recognize that omb's new approach is in an early implementation stage and guidance is still being developed .