v ) . state concurred with our recommendations and indicated that a policy coordination committee formed by the under secretary of state for public diplomacy in the national security council plans to develop a governmentwide strategic communications plan that will address assessment of marking and publicity programs and will develop governmentwide marking and publicity guidance . we also received technical comments on this draft from usaid , state , dod , and mcc , which we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , usaid , the departments of state , agriculture , defense , health and human services , justice , the treasury , and millennium challenge corporation . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4268 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . conduct pre - and post - tracking studies to benchmark attitudes and behaviors . while other governments' donor organizations and the german agency for technical cooperation ( gtz ) generally mark and publicize their assistance , none of these organizations have undertaken a campaign to develop a mark for their foreign assistance abroad on the scale that usaid has to date . like the united states , other governments' organizations generally use marking to gain recipient recognition for their contributions . we found that the six donors and the gtz generally had some form of marking implementing policies and procedures . however , unlike most u.s. foreign assistance publicizing efforts , other government organizations' efforts to communicate about foreign assistance were more targeted toward their own constituents rather than host country citizens . these organizations generally do not formally monitor or measure their marking or publicity efforts . other governments' donor organizations and the gtz that we studied generally use marking to gain recognition or maintain domestic support for their contributions . donor organizations and the gtz that we contacted identified a number of practices for marking , including adapting such efforts for each host country , and ensuring high - level stakeholder cooperation to facilitate implementation of these marking efforts . additionally , in some countries , to ensure marking consistency , governments require all organizations , including bilateral donors , to use the national symbol along with the organization's logo . for example , the australian government's overseas aid program ( ausaid ) and the canadian international development agency ( cida ) marks include the national symbols of australia and canada , respectively , and assistance provided by the european union ( eu ) are generally marked with the eu logo . other organizations , including the department for international development ( dfid ) of the united kingdom , gtz , the icelandic international development agency ( iceida ) , and the japan international cooperation agency ( jica ) have their own unique organization logos . in addition , some donors are more flexible than others with their marking requirements .