gao - 09-3sp . to engage in a full effort to develop a life - cycle cost estimate in accordance with the gao cost estimating guide ahead of ade - 2a , but were directed by the department to proceed with the best point estimate they could derive . additionally , both biowatch program and parm officials described a climate before ade - 2a in which the department's business processes — including acquisition practices — were maturing and thus were less rigorous in their adherence to best practices for cost and schedule estimating . the biowatch program has revised the cost estimate using more reliable methods since the ade - 2a estimate was prepared in 2009 . it is an example of an environmental monitoring activity . what remains to be done before gen - 3 technology can be produced and deployed ? to address our objectives and to determine the specific requirements and the broader intent of the department's acquisition management processes , we reviewed dhs's acquisition life - cycle framework — the department's four - phased template for planning and executing acquisitions that is described in dhs's acquisition management directive ( amd ) 102-01 and associated instructional guidebook.activities related to the acquisition of gen - 3 since fiscal year 2007 — when dhs's office of health affairs ( oha ) began to manage the biowatch program . to determine the extent to which dhs used the acquisition life - cycle framework processes to help ensure the decision to invest in gen - 3 was informed by analyses of alternatives ; costs and benefits ; and reliable performance , schedule , and cost expectations , we reviewed dhs's acquisition life - cycle framework guidance for the first two acquisition phases — identifying a capability need and analyzing and selecting the means to provide that capability . this included guidance for engaging in acquisition processes and preparing related acquisition documents such as the mission needs statements , analyses of alternatives , operational requirement documents , life - cycle cost estimates , and acquisition program baselines . we compared documentation prepared for the gen - 3 acquisition with the guidance . where appropriate , we also consulted external guidance to assess the extent to which key acquisition documents were produced in a reliable we focused on manner , including the gao cost estimating and assessment guide.provide the appropriate historical context to our assessment of the 2009 documentation set for the gen - 3 acquisition , we consulted with dhs officials in a variety of offices , including the oha biowatch program office — the group sponsoring the gen - 3 acquisition — the science and technology directorate , the dhs office of policy , and the program accountability and risk management ( parm ) office , which manages the oversight of acquisition programs and implements dhs acquisitions guidance and reports directly to the dhs undersecretary for management . to understand the challenges the program faced in preparing the 2009 documentation set , we consulted with biowatch and parm officials and reviewed external reviews of the program , including a 2011 national academies of science report and a 2012 report from sandia national laboratories .