guidance . sec staff addressed some of the issues discussed above through guidance . after the concept release and the roundtable , sec staff took steps to address issues in the proxy system in a 2014 staff legal bulletin . sec staff stated the bulletin summarized the staff's views on laws and sec regulations related to proxy advisory firms . for example , sec staff provided guidance that spelled out various responsibilities for disclosure of conflicts of interest . the guidance made it clear that proxy advisory firms must provide notice of the presence of a significant relationship or a material interest . overboarding . proxy advisory firms and some institutional investors have policies on overboarding , but the exchanges do not . in 2016 , both iss and glass lewis updated their director overboarding policies to reflect concerns about directors overcommitting themselves . specifically , a few institutional investors expressed the position that if directors served on too many boards , they would not have sufficient time to focus on the issues related to any one company . the institutional investor policy we reviewed — which had a lower threshold than that of the proxy advisory firms — explained that generally it is unlikely that a director will be able to commit sufficient focus to a particular company when a director commits himself or herself to a large number of boards . both iss and glass lewis's policies outline a phased transition to a lower board membership threshold for directors . iss policy states , for example , that it will recommend that shareholders vote against directors who sit on more than six boards , but beginning in 2017 , iss policy states that it plans to make negative recommendations for directors sitting on more than five . glass lewis policy also states that it plans to note a concern for these directors in its report , thus providing a transition period before putting the full policy into effect . the current policy cites six boards , but in 2017 glass lewis' policy also recommends voting against a director who serves on more than five boards . further , a couple of the firms have changed their policy on the number of boards that a ceo should serve on . for example , in 2016 , egan - jones changed its overboarding policy limiting the number of outside boards a ceo may serve on to one . glass lewis plans to make a similar adjustment in 2017 . institutional ownership . as discussed , proxy advisory firms that are registered investment advisers under the advisers act are subject to examination by sec . according to sec staff , proxy voting issues and proxy advisory firms may not be examined on a regularly scheduled basis because sec uses a risk - based approach to identifying examination priorities each year . as noted previously , all entities , including proxy advisory firms , that meet the statutory definition of an investment adviser ( where no exclusion from the definition is available ) , regardless of whether they are registered with sec , are subject to the advisers act's antifraud provisions .