others did not . registered voters cast their ballots using one of five voting methods in the november 2000 election: hand - counted paper ballots and lever , punch card , optical scan , and direct recording electronic ( dre ) voting equipment . punch card and optical scan equipment was most widely used by registered voters , as figure 4 shows . although the states have traditionally had broad authority to regulate and conduct elections , congress also has broad authority to regulate federal elections , and , in particular , congressional elections . state and local election officials generally use the same people , processes , and technology to conduct local , state , and federal elections . for example , congress has prohibited discrimination based on certain voter characteristics , such as race or age for both state and federal elections . in addition , congress has broad authority to establish requirements for congressional elections that are binding on the states . as a practical matter , such requirements may also affect state and local elections held in conjunction with elections to federal office . congress has enacted legislation affecting the timing of federal elections , voter registration , absentee voting for military and overseas civilian citizens of the united states , and voting accessibility for the elderly and the disabled in federal elections . these statutes have basically focused on facilitating the opportunity for voters to participate in the voting process and ensuring fair and equitable treatment of voters . aside from direct regulation of election administration , congress may also , in exercising its spending power , encourage state action by attaching conditions to the receipt of federal funds . the scope of congressional authority in election administration is discussed in our march 2001 report . this constitutionally - derived authority notwithstanding , election administration has principally been the responsibility of state and local jurisdictions that conduct elections for local , state , and federal offices . as discussed elsewhere in this report , states and local jurisdictions have determined voter qualifications , types of voting equipment to be used , ballot design , selection of poll workers , and what constitutes a vote . this historical balance between congress' constitutional authority to prescribe change and the states' and localities' traditional roles in defining the terms of election administration raises fundamental policy issues that must be confronted in the debate about the federal government's efforts to pursue election reform . various reform proposals offered to date differ in the role envisioned for the federal government . these can be categorized into essentially four distinct options for federal action that fall along a continuum of low - to high - federal involvement . the first option , falling on the low end of the continuum , calls for the federal government to provide information , guidance , and encouragement to states and local jurisdictions to take action in specific areas . at the second point on the continuum , a reform proposal may envision a more involved federal role that calls for the federal government to provide funds to states and localities to improve election administration , allowing each jurisdiction to use the funds where it believes they are most needed .