gao - 05-99 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2004 . va concurred with our recommendation . because the new rba 2000 data system had been recently implemented , we acknowledged that va could not implement such a plan until it accumulated a sufficiently large body of data under the new system . in our judgment , at least one year of data would be needed to begin such a study . while we believe the studies recently begun by the office of inspector general and vba are positive steps forward in addressing consistency issues , the rba 2000 data system , if found to be reliable , can provide va with the data needed to proactively and systematically target specific impairments that have the widest variations in decision - making outcomes among the regional offices and focus va's efforts to study reasons for variations on those impairments . building in such analytical capability to augment its quality assurance program would help enhance program integrity and better assure that veterans' disability decisions are made fairly and equitably . mr. chairman , this concludes my remarks . i would be happy to answer any questions you or the members of the subcommittee may have . for further information , please contact cynthia a. bascetta at ( 202 ) 512- 7101 . also contributing to this statement were irene chu , ira spears , martin scire , and tovah rom . veterans benefits: va needs plan for assessing consistency of decisions . high - risk series: an update . gao - 03-119 . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . veterans' benefits: quality assurance for disability claims and appeals processing can be further improved . gao - 02-806 . washington , d.c.: august 16 , 2002 . ssa and va disability programs: re - examination of disability criteria needed to help ensure program integrity . gao - 02-597 . washington , d.c.: august 9 , 2002 . veterans benefits administration: problems and challenges facing disability claims processing . gao / t - hehs / aimd - 00-146 . washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2000 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . we did our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards in april 2005 . in summary , we found that the board has taken action to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its own decisions , but va still lacks a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision - making within va as a whole . with respect to the board , it has taken steps to improve the sampling and accuracy rate calculation methods of its quality review system and also to assure that serious errors are not obscured by mixing them with less significant deficiencies . regarding consistency , va still lacks a plan for an ongoing , systematic assessment of decision - making consistency at all levels of adjudication within va. as we concluded in 2002 , such an assessment is needed to provide a foundation for determining acceptable levels of decision - making variation and to reduce variations found to be unacceptable .