gao - 11-367r . washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2011 . we also interviewed officials from treasury . to update the status of the american international group , inc. ( aig ) investment program ( formerly the systemically significant failing institutions program ) , we reviewed relevant documents from treasury and other parties . for the aig investment program , these documents included emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) monthly 105 ( a ) reports provided periodically to congress by treasury , public information made available by the federal reserve bank of new york , and other relevant documentation such as aig's financial disclosures and treasury's press releases . we also interviewed officials from treasury . for the term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) , we reviewed program terms and requested data from treasury about loan prepayments and talf llc activity . additionally , we interviewed ofs officials about their role in the program as it continues to unwind . to update the status of the public - private investment program , we analyzed program quarterly reports , term sheets , and other documentation related to the public - private investment funds . we also interviewed ofs staff responsible for the program to determine the status of the program while it remains in active investment status . to obtain the final status for small business administration ( sba ) 7 ( a ) securities purchase program that treasury exited and for which treasury no longer holds assets that it must manage , we reviewed treasury's recent reports and leveraged our past work . to assess the status of tarp - funded mortgage programs and treasury's efforts to ensure servicers are implementing the making home affordable ( mha ) single point of contact and resolution of escalated cases requirements , we reviewed treasury reports , guidance , and documentation and interviewed treasury officials . specifically , to determine the status of treasury's tarp - funded housing programs , we obtained and reviewed treasury's published reports on the programs and servicer performance , as well as guidelines and related updates issued by treasury for each of the programs . in addition , we obtained information from and interviewed treasury officials about the status of the tarp - funded mortgage programs , including the actions treasury had taken to address our prior recommendations . to assess the status of treasury's efforts to ensure servicers are implementing the mha single point of contact requirement , we reviewed treasury's compliance review procedures and review findings related to single point of contact for several of the largest mha servicers . to assess treasury's oversight of the escalated case resolution process , we obtained documentation from treasury of its process for monitoring the mha borrower support centers — mha help and the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) solution center — and reviewed monthly performance reports . we also interviewed treasury officials about their oversight of the single point of contact requirement and case escalation process . we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 to january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .