( see app . iii for individual state governments' and large local governments' aggregate opeb liabilities , assets , unfunded opeb liabilities. ) however , the significance of each government's unfunded opeb liability is relative to its ability to fund those benefits through currently available assets , future revenues , or a combination of the two . in addition , reported liabilities may vary based on various factors , including differing plan benefits , assumptions , and government contributions . most state and local governments for which we reviewed cafrs have not set aside assets to fund opeb liabilities ( see fig . approximately 35 percent of the governments for which we reviewed cafrs — 18 of 50 states and 13 of 39 local governments — reported having set aside at least some assets for opeb liabilities for one or more entities in the government , as of their actuarial valuation . setting aside assets for opeb indicates that a government may have prefunded at least a portion of its liability associated with retiree health benefits . in total , the state and local government cafrs we reviewed reported having set aside at least $25 billion in assets to fund their opeb liabilities , constituting less than 5 percent of the $559 billion total opeb liabilities reported . thus , most state and local governments included in our review are paying for their opeb liabilities for active and retired workers in a given year from their current revenues . the total unfunded opeb liability for state and local governments is larger than the roughly $530 billion because we reviewed opeb data in select governmentwide cafrs . although we reviewed cafrs for all the states and focused our review on cafrs for the 39 largest local governments , and included some of the largest unfunded liabilities , we did not review opeb data for all governments . thus , a review of all local government cafrs would show a higher total unfunded opeb liability than what we found . in addition , we reviewed governmentwide cafrs and not information for component entities or cost - sharing multiple - employer plans that is reported in separate financial statements and not in the cafrs . for example , in fiscal year 2008 , $2 billion in unfunded opeb liabilities for one state's public employees' retiree health and life insurance plans was reported in the plans' own financial statements and not in the state's cafr . consequently , the $2 billion is not included in our total for states' unfunded opeb liability . in addition , the ultimate cost of opeb may significantly differ from estimated opeb liabilities because ( 1 ) the cafrs we reviewed report data that predate the market downturn and ( 2 ) significant uncertainties affect the estimation of opeb liabilities . we reviewed the most recently issued cafrs , as of june 30 , 2009 , which reported opeb assets valued and liabilities based on discount rate assumptions set before the market downturn . in most cases , the most recently issued cafr was for fiscal year 2008 .