femastat . in 2012 and 2013 , the agency's femastat team collected and analyzed data on administrative costs associated with managing disasters . the femastat team found that fema ( 1 ) did not leverage benchmarks and information about past deployments to inform staffing decisions ; ( 2 ) cost drivers , such as workload forecasts and local capacity , were not accessible for its analytical purposes ; and ( 3 ) had not defined when the less costly virtual jfos should be used . it also found that there is little predictability in the number of fema pa staff deployed to disasters — for instance , one disaster had roughly three times as many pa staff as another similar - sized disaster . the femastat team concluded that while it had demonstrated that data from past disasters could be used to control costs , fema had to determine who has the authority and responsibility to monitor and question these staffing levels , as well as put into place a process to formalize this practice . as of september 2014 , fema officials said that the agency was working to implement the femastat recommendations . as a result , it is too early to assess whether this effort will reduce administrative costs . strategic plan goal . in july 2014 , fema issued its strategic plan for 2014-2018 , which includes a goal to reduce its average annual percentage of administrative costs , as compared with total program costs , by 5 percentage points , by the end of 2018 . according to fema officials , the goal to reduce fema's administrative costs reflects its importance to fema . fema officials stated that the agency determined that a 5 percentage point reduction was aggressive , but reasonable based on its review of administrative costs for previous disasters . in conjunction with this goal , fema officials also told us that they revised their definition of administrative costs as of october 1 , 2014 . for example , according to fema officials , the previous definition of administrative costs included the cost associated with urban search and rescue operations ; however , they said these costs would be better defined as operational . as of october 2014 , fema had yet to determine the starting percentage from which it will reduce 5 percentage points . according to fema officials , the agency will identify this starting point during fiscal year 2015 using the new definition of administrative costs . other ongoing steps to reduce administrative costs . fema has several other ongoing actions that have helped , or could eventually help , to reduce administrative costs , as follows: placing greater scrutiny on the amount of overtime worked by disaster assistance personnel . for example , according to fema , since 2011 , fema has decreased the average overtime per person from almost 16 hours per pay period to 7.5 hours per pay period . eliminating unnecessary or duplicative telecommunication services . for example , according to fema , since april 2013 , fema has reduced monthly telecommunication costs by more than $1 million per month . implementing new flexibilities and pilot programs authorized by the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 that could help reduce its administrative costs .