we focused on these 742 census tract areas . to identify the number of new mortgage loans that would be covered by nfip regulations in the flood - prone census areas , we used home mortgage disclosure act ( hmda ) data that regulators collected for the 1999 calendar year . what are the bases for the differing perspectives on lender noncompliance ? what does other readily available data indicate about the extent of noncompliance ? what data would be needed to fully measure noncompliance ? to address these objectives , we spoke with and obtained information from fema , federal regulators of lending institutions , gses , flood zone determination companies , mortgage companies , and others to obtain perspectives and to collect readily available data on lender noncompliance . we also obtained and analyzed home mortgage origination data and flood insurance policy data for certain flood - prone areas to obtain an independent perspective on the extent of noncompliance at the time mortgages are made . however , this analysis could not match specific mortgages with insurance policies to determine a compliance level . moreover , data were not available to determine whether insurance was in force at loan origination for all geographic areas or during the life of the mortgage loan ; therefore , we could not analyze all aspects of noncompliance with the mandatory purchase requirements . this report focuses on the activities of the following regulatory agencies that have regulatory authority over most of the pertinent mortgage market: the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the federal reserve board ( frb ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) . we also focused on the two gses that have direct responsibility for compliance — the federal national mortgage association ( fannie mae ) and the federal home loan mortgage corporation ( freddie mac ) . our work focused only on compliance with mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements for residential properties . no analysis is provided in this report about participation rates in the nfip , a measure that encompasses homeowners in flood - prone areas who are not required to obtain flood insurance . we testified about participation rates in may 2001 . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . we conducted our review from april 2001 through april 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . created by the national flood insurance act of 1968 , the nfip is designed to protect homeowners from flood losses while also minimizing the exposure of property to flood damage . to participate in the program , communities must adopt and enforce floodplain management ordinances to mitigate the effects of flooding on new or existing homes in special flood hazard areas ( sfha ) . flood insurance is available in communities participating in the nfip and is offered to eligible homeowners for homes and their contents . fema , through its federal insurance and mitigation administration , manages the federal flood insurance program and floodplain mitigation programs . when the program was created , the purchase of flood insurance was voluntary .