we are not endorsing them . our recommendation is for dod to fully consider the panel on contracting integrity's recommendation and the subsequent 2012 study recommendations . if dod does not believe such a program or the actions recommended by the 2012 study are warranted , then it should demonstrate why additional actions are unwarranted . without fully considering the panel's recommendation , including the 2012 study recommendations , dod will not have assurance that it is doing enough to promote an ethical culture . in addition , dod voiced concern that the statement in the draft report that soco officials “do not plan to take any further action” with respect to the remaining 13 recommendations from the phase ii study could be misunderstood to imply that soco is unwilling to consider additional values - based ethics program initiatives . dod elaborated that soco embraces values - based ethics training and other initiatives . dod added that , as noted elsewhere in the report , dod has practices in place that are consistent with a number of the recommendations in the phase ii study , and that soco is most receptive to assessing and recommending implementation of additional measures where appropriate and feasible . as noted in our report , in 2013 , soco partially implemented 1 of the study's 14 recommendations by annually delivering values - based ethics training to select military and civilian personnel . in addition , soco cited existing practices as being consistent with some of the study's remaining 13 recommendations . however , soco officials told us that they do not plan to take further action , and that the panel and 2012 study recommendations were not binding . these officials also stated that implementing all of the study's remaining 13 recommendations was neither feasible nor advisable . we continue to believe that without identifying actions dod intends to take , with timeframes , to address the panel's recommendation , including the study's other 13 recommendations , or demonstrating that further action is unwarranted , the department does not have assurance that the identified need for a values - based ethics program has been addressed . dod partially concurred with our fourth recommendation , that the air force , the army , the navy , and the marine corps modify existing guidance or develop new guidance to comply with requirements set forth in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 and internal dod guidance , to increase assurance that commanders are conducting command climate assessments in accordance with these statutory requirements and departmental guidance . in its comments , dod stated that the army's performance evaluation process requires that raters assess a commander's performance in fostering a climate of dignity and respect , thereby in dod's view satisfying the national defense authorization act's requirement that commanders must include a statement in their performance evaluations as to whether or not they conducted an assessment .