faa agreed with our recommendations . in addition , dot's inspector general reported in january 2003 that faa needs to contain increases in its operating costs and improve its internal controls over costs . over the past 6 years , faa's operations budget , which is 73 percent personnel costs , increased by over 41 percent , from $5.3 billion in fiscal year 1998 to $7.5 billion in fiscal year 2003 . the inspector general noted that faa has made extensive use of its human capital flexibilities to substantially increase salaries , but has done little to reduce operating costs . faa has improved its ability to track its costs by partially implementing a new cost accounting system that the congress directed it to develop in 1996 . the new system , which faa expects to be fully operational by the end of 2003 , now tracks 70 percent of the personnel , overhead , and other costs related to air traffic services . however , dot's inspector general has reported problems with the labor distribution system , which is part of the cost accounting system and is used to account for and distribute air traffic controller labor costs of about $3.1 billion annually to specific facilities and functions . the inspector general noted that the system omitted important internal controls needed to ensure that the time worked by air traffic controllers would be accurately recorded in the accounting system and paid from the proper account . the inspector general brought these deficiencies to the attention of faa , and the administrator agreed to correct them . the inspector general further noted that the system as designed could provide workforce data that would help determine how many controllers are needed and where . these data would assist faa in planning for the anticipated retirement of large numbers of air traffic controllers in the near and long term . congressional oversight is important to ensure that faa follows through and corrects the problems that we and the inspector general have identified so that faa can spend its resources on projects and services that will provide the greatest return on the public's investment . this statement is based primarily on issued reports that are listed under related gao products . however , the sections on the airport and airway trust fund and the air traffic services subcommittee reflect our ongoing work for this committee . as a result , the results of this work that we discuss in this testimony are still preliminary . to assess the current and projected financial status of the airport and airway trust fund , we obtained financial data from faa and interviewed faa officials familiar with the information . to assess the status of efforts to implement the new structure established under air - 21 to improve the oversight , management , and operation of the air traffic control system , we analyzed the legislation and related executive order , the administration's reauthorization proposal , and the first report of the air traffic services subcommittee . we also interviewed officials from faa , the air traffic services subcommittee , and aviation industry organizations . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .