, pnr data ) . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2007 . the tecs sorn does not “facilitate the exercise of the rights of individuals” under the act , as required by omb's privacy act guidance . while omb guidance states that agencies are granted considerable discretion in preparing sorns , the guidance stresses the importance of appropriately identifying the purpose ( s ) of a system and ensuring that any associated notices have “information value to the public.” according to omb , a major purpose of the act is “the publicizing of what those systems are and how they are used.” the tecs sorn has virtually no information value to the public and cannot be said to meet the requirements of the act . aligning international and domestic passenger prescreening programs . if these two prescreening efforts are not effectively coordinated with each other , air carriers and other stakeholders could be unnecessarily inconvenienced and experience potentially avoidable costs . the u.s. government could incur avoidable costs as well , if the programs are not properly coordinated and aligned . so far , cbp and tsa have taken some steps to coordinate their efforts — for example , they have announced their intention to develop a single portal for prescreening passengers on domestic and international flights . however , cbp and tsa have not yet made all of the key decisions necessary to align the two processes nor have they completed a timetable for completing this process . attaining full compliance with privacy laws . it is important that cbp completes reports that fully describe the agency's use and protection of personal data during the international passenger prescreening process to ensure that it is complying with all applicable privacy laws . cbp's current disclosures do not fully inform the public about all of its systems for prescreening aviation passenger information nor do they explain how cbp combines data in the prescreening process , as required by law . as a result , passengers are not assured that their privacy is protected during the international passenger prescreening process . to strengthen cbp's international aviation passenger prescreening process , in our november 2006 report we recommended that the secretary of the department of homeland security take or direct the commissioner of customs and border protection to take the following three actions: to more fully incorporate risk management principles into the planning , implementation , and evaluation of the iap pilot , cbp should ( 1 ) prepare a strategic plan that identifies the risks , goals , objectives , and performance measures for the iap pilot , and ( 2 ) conduct program evaluations that measure the performance of the pilot iap sites against predetermined goals and performance measures . to more fully align cbp's international aviation passenger prescreening program with tsa's prospective domestic aviation passenger prescreening program , take additional steps necessary to identify the remaining impediments to alignment , make the key policy and technical decisions needed to more fully coordinate these programs ( including a determination of the data and identity matching technologies that will be used ) , and set time frames for when these efforts will be completed . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v .