app . iii provides information on the anti - retaliation provisions that other labor agencies administer. ) as with osha's enforcement programs , the whistleblower program operates within the decentralized structure of the agency's regional and area offices , and the 10 regional administrators are responsible for administering the program in their regions ( see fig . each region generally employs a supervisory investigator or program manager and a number of investigators to review claims filed under the whistleblower program . the program's national director , located in washington , d.c. , is responsible for developing policy and procedures , providing training , and offering technical assistance and guidance . ( 2 ) what are the outcomes from complaints filed with the whistleblower protection program ? ( 3 ) what are the key challenges osha faces in administering the whistleblower program ? to answer these questions , we obtained and tested the reliability of databases on key information about whistleblowers' cases from osha , oalj , and arb . we found that the osha and arb data on processing times were not reliable , so we conducted case file reviews in 5 of the 10 osha regions to provide examples of processing times for investigating these cases . we selected these regions to give us a mix of case volumes ( high and low ) and to provide geographic dispersion . in addition , we requested case file documents on all cases the arb closed in fiscal year 2007 and were able to obtain and analyze 109 of the 120 cases that were closed . with regard to outcomes , we found that elements in osha's database related to cases dismissed and withdrawn were sufficiently reliable for our purposes , but the data related to settlements were not ; therefore , we reviewed and analyzed all available settlement documents completed in fiscal year 2007 . the oalj and the arb databases did not contain outcome information . because we had to rely largely on reviewing whistleblower case decisions to gather these data , we focused our efforts on cases closed in fiscal year 2007 . we also reviewed pertinent documents and interviewed agency officials from osha , oalj , and arb . in addition , we surveyed all osha investigators to gather information about their views of the whistleblower program , and we received an 86 percent response rate . during our site visits to the five osha regional offices , we interviewed key officials and , to supplement these site visits , we interviewed officials in the other five regions by phone to obtain their views of the whistleblower program . in our work , we did not review the adequacy of labor's human capital strategies for meeting its current and future investigation workload . in addition , we did not assess the quality of the investigations or the appropriateness of whistleblower outcomes because these aspects were beyond the scope of the engagement . appendix i contains a detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from october 2007 to january 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .