insurers have stated that this deadline is too late . insurers need to make underwriting , price , and coverage decisions for these policies in mid - 2004 . however , treasury has yet to make a decision about the “make available” requirement for policies issued or renewed in 2005 . if treasury did not extend the requirements through 2005 , insurers would have to evaluate and possibly revise prices and terms for newly issued and renewing policies , according to an insurance official . moreover , regulatory approval for these changes might take longer than the time it took to approve the changes to policies and procedures that insurers initially made to implement tria . tria allowed for federal preemption of the states' authority to approve insurance policy rates and conditions , but the preemption expired on december 31 , 2003 — returning insurers to the previous regulatory scheme in which they must obtain regulatory approvals from each state that has these requirements to sell insurance . thus , the timing of treasury's announcement on the extension may cost both companies and policyholders money if policy changes cannot be implemented in time to issue or renew policies . insurers also are concerned that a delay in treasury's certification of a terrorist event as eligible for federal reimbursement , in conjunction with state regulations requiring prompt payment of claims , could create cash flow problems or even lead to insolvency for some insurers . while tria does not specify the length of time available for determining whether an event meets the criteria for certification , insurers are bound by law and regulations in most states to pay claims in a timely manner , which means they may have to pay policyholder claims in full without waiting for treasury to certify an event , said an naic official . because of this requirement to pay claims in a timely manner , insurers face potentially negative financial consequences under two possible scenarios: if treasury made the certification decision after an extended period of time or if treasury ultimately made the decision not to certify an event after an extended period of time . under the first scenario , insurance industry observers have said that they could potentially experience a cash flow problem while awaiting a certification decision , and thus for reimbursement of the 90 percent federal share , because they have already paid 100 percent of the claimed losses . insurers brought up the anthrax letter incidents as an example of their concerns about certification time frames , because law enforcement officials still have not identified the source , whether foreign or domestic , more than 2 years after the incidents . under the second scenario , insurers could become insolvent if treasury decided not to certify an event ( i.e. , decided the act was not the work of terrorists working on behalf of foreign interests ) after insurers had already paid policyholder claims . unless the policyholder had paid for coverage of all terrorist events — including those caused by domestic terrorists , which would be excluded from reimbursement under tria — insurers would have paid for losses for which they had collected no premium .