we found that state programs varied in their objectives . all states used monitoring programs primarily to assist law enforcement in detecting and preventing drug diversion , and but some also used the programs for educational purposes . programs assisted law enforcement authorities both by providing information in response to requests for assistance on specific investigations and by referring matters to law enforcement officials when evaluations of program data revealed atypical prescribing or dispensing patterns that suggested possible illegal diversion . monitoring program officials from kentucky , nevada , and utah told us in 2002 that they estimated 3- to 4- hour turnaround times for program data requests , and all mainly used faxing , rather than more costly mailing , to send reports to requesters . same - day responses may be preferable for physicians who want the prescription drug history for a patient being seen that day and for law enforcement users who need immediate data for investigations of suspected illegal activity . as users become more familiar with the benefits of monitoring program report data , requests for information and other demands on the programs may increase . in kentucky , nevada , and utah , use had increased substantially , mostly because of an increase in the number of requests by physicians to check patients' prescription drug histories . in kentucky , these physician requests increased from 28,307 in 2000 , the first full year of operation , to 56,367 in 2001 , an increase of nearly 100 percent . law enforcement requests increased from 4,567 in 2000 to 5,797 in 2001 , an increase of 27 percent . similarly , nevada's requests from all authorized users also increased — from 480 in 1997 , its first full year , to 6,896 in 2001 , an increase of about 1,300 percent . additionally , as drug marketing practices change and monitoring programs mature , the operational needs may shift as well . for example , states face new challenges with the advent of internet pharmacies , because they enable pharmacies and physicians to anonymously reach across state borders to prescribe , sell , and dispense prescription drugs without complying with state requirements . in addition , if users want program reports to reflect more timely information , dispensing entities would have to report their data at the time of sale , rather than submitting data biweekly or monthly , to capture the most recent prescription dispensing . if users want to be alerted if a certain drug , practitioner , or pharmacy may be involved in a developing diversion problem , programs would have to initiate periodic data analysis to determine trends or patterns . such program enhancements would entail additional costs , however , including costs for computer programming , and data analysis . states that are considering establishing or expanding a monitoring program face a variety of other challenges . one challenge is the lack of awareness of the extent to which prescription drug abuse and diversion is a significant public health and law enforcement problem . states also face concerns about the confidentiality of the information gathered by the program , voiced by patients who are legitimately using prescription drugs and by physicians and pharmacists who are legitimately prescribing and dispensing them .