workforce planning model . this agencywide management tool projects the number , type , and location of staff needed to accomplish the agency's mission , based on expectations for future program funds as well as the size and location of overseas missions . the model does not , however , incorporate data on either the current a&a staffing levels or the competencies of existing a&a staff . taken together , these efforts do not constitute a strategic a&a workforce plan that takes into account the entire a&a workforce . usaid has yet to take an integrated approach to developing and implementing such a workforce plan . development leadership initiative . this agencywide , multiyear effort is intended to recruit u.s. staff to be placed overseas . under this initiative , usaid plans to hire 120 staff , including 15 cos , in fiscal year 2008 . however , this initiative only seeks to increase the levels of overseas cos , not the levels of a&a specialists . a&a workforce capability assessment . as mentioned earlier , this was a may 2008 effort to identify and assess the competencies of all cos , as well as a&a specialists in headquarters . competency assessments of a&a specialists overseas are not expected to begin until fiscal year 2011 at the earliest . usaid has not implemented an evaluation mechanism to provide oversight of its a&a function . oaa's evaluation division is responsible for providing this oversight to ensure that a&a operations follow usaid policies , primarily by assessing the agency's a&a operations worldwide . in 2006 , usaid's oig found that the division had not met its previously set target of conducting on - site evaluations of a&a operations at all missions within a 3-year period , due to resource constraints within the division . the division has since developed a new evaluation mechanism , the scorecard evaluation , that relies on cos' annual self - assessments of a&a operations and is followed by on - site reviews at selected missions , conducted by division staff . however , the division has yet to implement this evaluation mechanism . among other responsibilities , oaa's evaluation division is to conduct evaluations of worldwide a&a operations to ensure usaid's compliance with an executive order and certify the effectiveness of usaid's a&a function . gao's internal control standards state that evaluations — whether in the form of self - assessments or other means — are necessary to ensure an agency's operational effectiveness and compliance with applicable policies . furthermore , the president's fiscal year 1995 executive order on federal procurement reform included a requirement that every u.s. agency evaluates its a&a function against the agency's approved criteria . to comply with the order , oaa developed an evaluation program to assess usaid's a&a function . this evaluation program was also designed to enable usaid's management bureau to annually certify the adequacy and effectiveness of management controls for the a&a function , as required by usaid directives . prior to fiscal year 2007 , the evaluation program required evaluation division staff to make on - site visits to assess a&a operations at oaa offices in headquarters and missions .