, mislisted ) . my testimony today highlights the key findings of our two reports on secure flight . my statement will address the extent to which ( 1 ) tsa's performance measures appropriately assess progress toward achieving the secure flight program goals , ( 2 ) tsa ensures that secure flight screening determinations for passengers are fully implemented at airport security checkpoints , ( 3 ) dhs's redress process addresses the delays and inconveniences that result from secure flight screening , and ( 4 ) tsa has implemented privacy oversight mechanisms to address secure flight privacy requirements . for the september 2014 reports , we analyzed documentation of tsa's program goals and performance measures for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 and assessed these measures against provisions of the government performance and results act ( gpra ) . we also analyzed a list that tsa compiled at our request of missed passengers on two high - risk lists ( including the reasons for these matching errors ) that occurred from november 2010 through july 2013 . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we analyzed certain tsa data on screener performance at airport security checkpoints from may 2012 , when tsa began tracking these data , through february 2014 , when we conducted the analysis . we also reviewed relevant dhs trip redress and appeals data for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 . we interviewed tsa and other dhs officials who are responsible for aspects of secure flight and dhs trip , as well as tsa officials at nine airports , which we selected based on a variety of factors , such as volume of passengers screened and geographic dispersion . secure flight has matched passengers against the no fly list since 2009 . the selectee list is a subset of the tsdb containing records of individuals who must undergo enhanced security screening before being permitted to enter the sterile area or board an aircraft . secure flight has matched against the selectee list since 2009 . the expanded selectee list includes terrorist records in the tsdb with a complete name and date of birth that meet the reasonable suspicion standard to be considered a known or suspected terrorist , but that do not meet the criteria to be placed on the no fly or selectee lists . secure flight began matching against the expanded selectee list in april 2011 . the high - risk rules - based lists include two lists of passengers who may not be known or suspected terrorists , but who , according to intelligence - driven , scenario - based rules developed by tsa in consultation with u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , may pose an increased risk to transportation or national security . the cdc do not board list is managed by cdc . it includes individuals who pose a significant health risk to other travelers and are not allowed to fly .