v ) . in their comments , nasa and noaa agreed with our findings and recommendations and identified plans to implement them . for example , nasa noted that it would work closely with dod and noaa to ensure that a realistic time frame was established for cost and schedule baselines and to develop plans to mitigate program risks . noaa noted that it planned to mitigate risk , in part by accelerating the development of environmental products — and planned to use more data from npp than it had originally planned . regarding our recommendations to track executive committee actions and ensure successful outcomes by identifying the desired outcome associated with each action as well as time frames and responsible parties , both nasa and noaa noted that they would work with the program executive officer to ensure that these actions happen in a timely and effective manner . finally , regarding our recommendation to improve the executive committee's efficiency by establishing time frames for escalating risks to the committee , both nasa and noaa noted that they would work with the program executive officer to ensure that this was done . noaa also provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its written comments , dod concurred with one and partially concurred with our other recommendations . regarding our recommendation to have the appropriate official attend executive committee meetings , the agency partially concurred and noted that the under secretary of acquisition , technology , and logistics would evaluate the necessity of attending future executive committee meetings . dod also reiterated that the under secretary of the air force was delegated the authority to attend the meetings . while we acknowledge that the under secretary delegated responsibility for attending these meetings , it is an inefficient way to make decisions and achieve outcomes . in the past , agreements between executive committee members have been overturned by the under secretary , leading to significant delays in key decisions . in addition , dod partially concurred with our recommendations that the executive committee establish a realistic time frame for revising the program's cost and schedule baselines , and develop plans to mitigate the risk of data gaps . for both recommendations , dod noted that the program office should develop the plans , which would then be reviewed by the executive committee . we agree that the program is responsible for revising the cost and schedule baselines and developing risk mitigation plans , and that the executive committee is responsible for approving these plans . however , our recommendations focused on implementing these activities . until the committee establishes a time frame for making decisions on the program's cost and schedule baseline and endorses risk mitigation plans , there is a continued risk that the program will encounter further delays or gaps in satellite data continuity . dod concurred with our recommendation that the executive committee track action items and noted that it will recommend that the program executive officer establish a web - based tracking system so that all agencies can review the action items and their status .