for example , u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) estimated that it had reduced its backlog of immigration benefits applications from a peak of 3.8 million cases to 1.2 million cases from january 2004 to june 2005 . uscis has also established a focal point for immigration fraud , outlined a fraud control strategy that relies on the use of automation to detect fraud , and is performing fraud assessments to identify the extent and nature of fraud for certain benefits . however , dhs still faces significant challenges in its ability to effectively provide immigration services while at the same time protecting the immigration system from fraud and mismanagement . implementation of many of our recommendations has been slow . until dhs fully establishes and consistently implements the full range of it management disciplines embodied in its framework and related to federal guidance and best practices , it will be challenged in its ability to effectively manage and deliver programs . dhs has made some progress in transforming its human capital systems , but more work remains . some of the most pressing human capital challenges at dhs include ( 1 ) successfully completing its ongoing transformation ; ( 2 ) forging a unified results - oriented culture across the department ( line of sight ) ; ( 3 ) linking daily operations to strategic outcomes ; ( 4 ) rewarding individuals based on individual , team , unit , and organizational results ; ( 5 ) obtaining , developing , providing incentives to , and retaining needed talent ; and most importantly , ( 6 ) leadership at the top , to include a chief operating officer or chief management officer . moreover , employee morale is low , as measured by recent results in the 2006 federal human capital survey , which can have an impact on the progress of dhs's transformation and integration . dhs scored at the bottom or near the bottom of all federal agencies in the four areas which provide the standards of success for agencies to measure their progress and achievements in managing their workforces . these four areas include ( 1 ) leadership and knowledge management , ( 2 ) results - oriented performance culture , ( 3 ) talent management , and ( 4 ) job satisfaction . as we have reported , people are at the center of any serious change management initiative , and addressing the “people” element and employee morale issues is the key to a successful merger and transformation . strategic human capital management is the centerpiece of any transformation effort . in 2005 , we reported that dhs had initiated strategic human capital planning efforts and published proposed regulations for a modern human capital management system . we also reported that dhs's leadership was committed to the human capital system design process and had formed teams to implement the resulting regulations . since our report , dhs has finalized its human capital regulations and it is vital that dhs implement its human capital system effectively .