resident vacates a unit . these refunds represent substantial financial obligations that ccrcs must meet and can significantly affect operations because fees are used to maintain a certain level of liquidity , or cash on hand . ccrc officials said that refunds were usually contingent on having a new resident move into the vacated unit and that a recent reduction in occupancy levels has meant former residents and their families have had to wait longer for refunds . for example , some ccrc officials noted that due to real estate market and other factors , refunds are taking several months longer than during stronger market conditions . erickon , however , filed for bankrptcy in 2009 . like mny ccrc , erickon used contrction lo nd other finncing intrment to meet the coniderable cot of building ccrc fcilitie nd redy them for occncy y older americ . according to erickon offici , er of condition contributed to their finncil chllenge nd bankrptcy filing . declining economic nd rel ete condition lowed the demnd for nd prchase of ccrc nit nd chllenged erickon' ability to re revene needed to develop ccrc . simltneously , tightening credit mrket redced or eliminted erickon' ability to ccess new rce of cpitl or to retrctre or refinnce exiting lorrngement . thee condition prevented erickon from meeting deervice nd other ccrc expen nd led to it bankrptcy filing . ultimtely , erickon emerged from bankrptcy with new owner , redwood llc , in my 2010 . depite the ownerhip chnge , erickon offici do not expect ny ccrc reident' contrct or living condition to e impcted , as thoe contrct were with the ccrc themelve , which were not prt of the bankrptcy filing . ccrcs also face risks from external economic factors that are out of their control and could adversely affect occupancy levels and financial condition . first , slow real estate markets , such as those of the last several years , can make it very difficult for older americans to sell their homes to pay ccrc entrance fees . as a result , according to ccrc providers , occupancy levels at many ccrcs have fallen over the past several years . in addition , because older americans may be staying in their homes longer and thus moving into ccrcs at a higher age , residents may spend less time in independent living units than they had in the past . this can negatively affect ccrcs' long - term financial condition because residents in independent living may help subsidize those living in assisted living or nursing care . second , declining equity and credit markets , which have also been a feature of the recent financial crisis , can also affect occupancy and financial condition . during the development phase , ccrcs often depend on access to credit in order to complete construction , and reduced access to funds can be problematic . for example , ccrc and state regulatory officials suggested that tightening credit and real estate markets , combined with erickson retirement communities' reliance on borrowed funds , were the primary financial challenges that resulted in erickson's 2009 filing for bankruptcy protection ( see sidebar on erickson retirement communities ) .