offshore . boem and bsee oversee all offshore oil and gas activities on federal leases in the united states . through its three regional offices — in alaska , the gulf of mexico , and the pacific – – interior manages more than 1.7 billion offshore acres . the vast majority of interior's offshore oil and gas development and production occurs in the gulf of mexico ; accordingly , the majority of boem's and bsee's workforces are located in the gulf of mexico outer continental shelf region . boem and bsee also have offices in the pacific and alaska outer continental shelf regions ( see fig . boem employs petroleum engineers , geoscientists , and other specialists who are responsible for leasing and resource management , and bsee employs petroleum and other engineers , inspectors , and other specialists who are responsible for reviewing and approving apds and conducting drilling and production inspections to ensure that operators comply with all regulatory requirements . over the last decade , we have reported on interior's persistent challenges hiring and retaining sufficient staff to provide efficient and effective oversight of oil and gas activities on federal lands and waters , and we have made a number of recommendations to interior to address these challenges . in june 2005 , we reported that blm did not have sufficient staff to manage the increasing demand for onshore oil and gas drilling permits while fulfilling its environmental protection responsibilities . we recommended that blm ensure that its staffing needs are accurately reflected in its workforce plans . in response to this recommendation , blm analyzed the staffing levels needed to process drilling permits and used this analysis to fill additional inspection and environmental monitoring positions . in march 2010 , among other things , we reported that blm field offices were unable to hire and retain sufficient numbers of staff to complete all required inspections . we reported that , according to blm officials , low pay when compared with industry salaries and the high housing costs in energy boom towns were major factors affecting their ability to hire sufficient numbers of staff . we recommended that interior determine what additional policies or incentives were necessary , if any , to attract and retain staff . interior agreed with our recommendation , and we are evaluating the actions they have taken , including developing a workforce strategy and issuing guidance for the use of recruitment and retention incentives . in june 2012 , we reported that salaries for some key oil and gas oversight positions — which are generally set by the federal salary schedule — were significantly lower than salaries offered by industry for candidates with similar skills , and that top applicants are typically hired by the petroleum industry , leaving interior with less - skilled applicants . to improve interior's oversight of oil and gas activities in the gulf of mexico , we recommended that interior assess how the number of inspectors affects the agency's ability to conduct monthly inspections and whether the monthly inspection goals were appropriate . interior agreed with our recommendation but has not fully taken action to address it .