( app . i provides more - detailed information on our methodology. ) we performed our work from march 2005 through march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . long - term care services assist people who need help in performing activities of daily living ( adls ) , such as eating , bathing , and dressing . as some of these services can be expensive , especially services provided in a nursing home , long - term care insurance helps people pay for the cost of care . however , relatively few people have obtained long - term care insurance through products sold in the individual and group markets . to help federal employees , retirees , and others obtain coverage , the federal government began offering the opportunity to apply for long - term care insurance in 2002 through an employer - sponsored group program in which enrollees pay the entire cost of their premium . how does the early claims experience of the federal long term care insurance program compare with initial expectations ? to obtain data on benefits , premiums , enrollment , and enrollee characteristics , we surveyed partners , the california public employees' retirement system ( calpers ) , and five of the largest long - term care insurance carriers . the five insurance carriers were aegon usa , bankers life and casualty company , genworth financial , john hancock life insurance company , and metropolitan life insurance company . all five carriers sold products in the individual market , and two of the five carriers — john hancock life insurance company and metropolitan life insurance company — were also among the five largest carriers that sold products in the group market . we requested data from partners on new policies sold during two time periods: ( 1 ) from march 25 , 2002 , through february 7 , 2003 , to correspond to the federal early enrollment and open enrollment periods and ( 2 ) from march 25 , 2002 , though march 31 , 2005 , to capture the full experience of the program's first 3 years . we asked calpers and the five carriers to provide data for policies sold from july 1 , 2002 , through march 31 , 2005 . we then compared the benefits offered , enrollment , and enrollee characteristics of the federal program , calpers , and the five carriers . to compare premiums , we asked calpers and the carriers to price the benefit packages offered in the federal program . in addition , we obtained data from partners on the expected and early claims experience of the federal program to provide an early indicator of financial performance . because of the proprietary nature of the data provided by the five carriers , we aggregated data across the individual and group carriers for reporting purposes . while we aggregated the calpers data with the private market group data in all cases , we also separately reported publicly available calpers data in two places because its experience in managing benefits for large numbers of public employees , retirees , and their families is most comparable to the federal program .