communication . useful management practices include seeking and monitoring employee attitudes , encouraging two - way communication between employees and management , and incorporating employee feedback into new policies and procedures . this type of communication and collaboration across offices at all levels can improve an agency's ability to carry out its mission by providing opportunities to share best practices and helping to ensure that any needed input is provided in a timely manner . to this end , ntsb managers and board members began holding periodic meetings with staff , conducting outreach to regional offices , and surveying staff about the effectiveness of communication techniques . diversity management . similarly , there was little change in the proportion of positive responses reported by federal employees from small agencies from 50 percent in 2004 and 49 percent in 2012 . ntsb officials stated that their internal communication surveys , which the agency administered 2009 through 2011 , provided information that helped them identify continuing barriers to employee and management communication . in 2012 , ntsb developed an action plan in this area that included detailed activities , target dates , and regular status reports . furthermore , because of lingering concerns , ntsb continues to monitor employees' views about employee and management communication to address any remaining weaknesses . our analysis of outcomes associated with ntsb's efforts to improve its diversity management program indicated uneven results , with indications of improvements in some measures but not all . we reviewed ntsb employees' responses to the three federal survey questions that we determined related to employees' perceptions about managers' diversity and inclusiveness efforts , as described below: my supervisor / team leader is committed to a workforce representative of all segments of society . the federal survey of ntsb employees indicated an increase in the positive responses , from 54 percent to about 71 percent . ( see fig . we compared ntsb employees' responses to those of employees in a group of small federal and independent agencies and found that ntsb employees were more positive in 2012 than the employees from small agencies , whose positive responses rose from 57 percent in 2004 to 69 percent in 2012 . policies and programs promote diversity in the workplace . again , ntsb employees' responses to this question indicated an increase from 2004 to 2012 , from 55 percent to 73 percent . ntsb employees' satisfaction level exceeded that of employees from small agencies , whose positive responses to this question stayed about the same , from 56 percent in 2004 to 57 percent in 2012 . managers / supervisors / team leaders work well with employees of different backgrounds . the proportion of ntsb employees reporting positive responses on this survey question from 2004 to 2012 declined from 66 percent to 60 percent . the decline in ntsb employees' level of satisfaction was greater than that shown by employees from small agencies , whose positive responses also declined from 66 percent in 2004 to 63 percent in 2012 . one of the potential outcomes of a robust diversity management program is an increase in the diversity of the workforce .