uired to obtain . these states did not have any ms4s that were reuired to obtain phase i permits . in california , three ms4s are the lead permittees for multiple permits ; however , we counted each of these permittees only once in table 3 . also , one ms4 received a phase i permit and later obtained coverage under a phase ii permit , while another ms4 is the lead permittee under both a phase i and a phase ii permit . we included these ms4s in table 3 rather than table 4 because they first received coverage under a phase i permit . in addition , four ms4s received coverage as both phase i co - permittees and phase ii lead permittees . we included the data for these four ms4s in table 4 since that is the phase of the program under which they are lead permittees . one oregon ms4 has received coverage as a co - permittee under two different permits ; however , we counted this ms4 only once in table 3 . two of washington's phase i ms4s are lead permittees that received coverage under multiple permits ; however , these permittees are counted only once . also , one washington ms4 received coverage as both a lead permittee , and a co - permittee with a different ms4 . we counted this ms4 only once in table 3 . delaware's phase i co - permittees include four ms4s that volunteered to implement the program , but which were never officially reuired to obtain permit coverage under phase i or ii . number of ms4s that have not received a permit or a waiver1 number of ms4s that have not received a permit or a waiver809 lead permittees include ms4s reported by epa and state permitting authorities as being a co - permittee with one or more ms4s and having lead responsibility for coordinating or implementing activities for those co - permittees . some ms4s cooperate with other ms4s without becoming co - permittees ; however , with some exceptions , the number of ms4s with these cooperative relationships are not represented in the table . uirements by epa and state permitting authorities because they met certain conditions , such as they did not own or operate any roads or drains that discharged into local waterways . in some cases , phase ii ms4s were exempted , but not officially waived , from phase ii reuirements . for consistency , we counted these ms4s as being waived . uired to obtain permit coverage . the totals shown are estimates provided by these officials . in these states , some ms4s are covered under multiple permits: one california ms4 received coverage under the state's phase ii general permit twice ; however , we counted this ms4 only once in table 4 . also , one ms4 received a phase i permit and later obtained coverage under a phase ii permit , while another ms4 is the lead permittee under both a phase i and a phase ii permit . we included these ms4s in table 3 rather than table 4 because they first received coverage under a phase i permit .