component repairs . some repairs were counted twice in the 50-50 data , once when a component was repaired and the second time when it was installed into a weapon system or subsystem . available data for fiscal year 2001 indicate that the amounts double counted were about $67 million and $33 million , respectively , for the public and private sectors . to estimate the overstatements in fiscal year 2000 , we assumed the same magnitude of the double count relative to the total reported workload that year . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod officials argued that the repair of components and use of those components during system overhaul are separate and distinct transactions , and both should be reported as consistent with title 10 . we continue to believe that reporting both distorts the actual amount of depot work and that an adjustment should be made in these situations to give a more accurate accounting for 50-50 purposes . this issue is discussed further in the agency comments section of this report . public and private workloads wrongly reported . several commands wrongly reported private - sector work as public sector or vice versa . for example , a spreadsheet formula error caused one command to misreport $29 million of contract work as public . another command's clerical error in compiling its submission had the same effect . an official discovered the error when preparing for our visit . a more rigorous up - front review and data validation effort might have corrected these mistakes before their inclusion in the annual report to the congress . software maintenance . officials did not report $42 million of depot - level software maintenance for the aegis program . government employees accomplished $29.8 million of the total workload — about three - fourths — while the private sector did the remaining $12.2 million . we assumed the same amount of work for both years . modification installations . the navy's report did not include $23 million in funding for installing two major upgrades . although they had received 50-50 guidance , officials did not know that major upgrades accomplished with procurement funds were defined as depot maintenance for reporting purposes . carrier overhauls . the navy apparently underreported the costs of depot maintenance work on nuclear aircraft carriers when that work was done in the private sector in conjunction with the nuclear refueling of the carriers . section 2460 excludes from depot maintenance the nuclear refueling of an aircraft carrier . however , nuclear refueling work typically is done under contracts that include other , separately priced work that does not appear to relate to nuclear refueling . for example , one of those contracts called for work on the underwater part of the carrier hull and on catapults and arresting gear , which are used for launching and landing aircraft . although this work often has been done during the same time frame and under the same contract as nuclear refueling work , in some cases , this work has been done separately from the nuclear refueling . in this latter case , the nonnuclear work has been counted as depot maintenance .