staffing concerns . while state's guidance states that the department must identify its language needs irrespective of the number of likely bidders , embassy section heads at the posts we visited said staffing concerns affect their decisions about designating positions as ldps and requiring certain proficiency levels . for example , embassy managers in countries where super - hard or hard languages , such as arabic and russian , are spoken said that certain positions have been designated as not requiring language proficiency or designated at a lower proficiency level to increase the likelihood of filling the positions . managers also said that , while they would prefer to require higher levels of language proficiency , they sometimes require lower levels to avoid delaying the arrival of fsos at posts who would otherwise have to spend longer periods in language training . some state geographic bureau officials spoke of significant tension between quickly filling a vacant position with an officer who lacks language skills versus waiting to fill the position with an officer who is trained and fully proficient . our interviews with state officials suggest that such staffing concerns particularly affect the eap , nea , and sca bureaus . one geographic bureau official said that the bureau had lowered reading requirements for ldps at one of its posts because of difficulties in filling the positions . further , according to a 2014 state memorandum , the office of overseas building operations does not support ldps for any of its employees , citing a critical staffing shortage . moreover , a december 2010 memorandum from state's m / dghr acknowledged that the designation of ldps is often influenced by staffing realities and stated that posts usually adjust language levels down on the basis of the likelihood of finding language - qualified bidders . cost concerns . while guidance from state's m / dghr , including memorandums issued in december 2010 and april 2016 , states that the department should assess its language needs in a “resource neutral” environment , geographic bureau and post officials said that the ldp review process is tempered by cost considerations . for example , some embassy managers said that they generally review the existing ldp numbers and levels and make minor adjustments . in addition , some geographic bureau officials said that they provide limited substantive review of posts' submissions of ldp numbers and levels . further , comments from post officials suggest that posts have generally applied a “blanket” approach in determining ldp proficiency requirements , despite state guidance that instructs posts to conduct more targeted assessments of their needs . state cables providing posts with guidance for the 2017 and 2014 ldp reviews stated that posts should not automatically assume that a 3 / 3 proficiency level is required for every ldp in a particular section or embassy and instructed posts to examine the specific language needs for each position . post managers and staff we interviewed also said that language needs vary by position and portfolio within an embassy section . however , according to state data , most generalist ldps are designated at a 3 / 3 level . in a 2013 report examining state's ldp review process , the state oig identified deficiencies in state's process for developing language requirements .