some of the pay problems we identified included the following . forty - seven soldiers deployed overseas with the 824th quartermaster company from north carolina improperly received hardship duty pay , totaling about $30,000 , for up to 5 months after departing from their overseas duty locations . nine soldiers of the 824th quartermaster company improperly received family separation allowance payments totaling an estimated $6,250 while serving at ft. bragg , their unit's home station . forty - nine soldiers with the 824th quartermaster company did not receive the hardship duty pay they were entitled to receive when they arrived at their designated duty locations overseas until about 3 months after their arrival . ten soldiers with the 443rd military police company had problems with their overseas housing allowance associated with their deployment in iraq , including five soldiers who were underpaid about $2,700 and seven who did not receive their last allowance until more than 2 months after their active duty tour ended . a soldier with the 443rd mp company who demobilized from an active duty deployment in august 2002 , subsequently received erroneous active duty payments of about $52,000 through may 2004 . these erroneous payments were not detected and stopped by dod . the soldier contacted us to ask for our assistance in resolving this matter . nineteen soldiers continued to receive hardship duty pay for a period ranging from 1 to 5 months after leaving afghanistan . pay and allowance problems identified ( by phase ) overpayments identified ( number of soldiers affected ) : $25,000 ( 48 ) late payments identified ( number of soldiers affected ) : $20,000 ( 110 ) underpayments identified ( number of soldiers affected ) : $15,000 ( 114 ) combat zone tax exclusion benefit problems identified: one hundred twelve of the 114 unit soldiers deployed overseas received their combat zone tax exclusion benefits at least 1 month late , totaling an estimated $33,000 . in addition , we identified $600 in under - withholding and $400 over - withholdings . deficiencies in three key areas — process , human capital , and automated systems — were at the heart of the pay problems we identified . we also testified on this matter before the full committee in january 2004 . because of the severity of the problems identified for these mobilized army national guard soldiers , you , as well as other requestors , asked us to examine the accuracy and timeliness of payroll payments to mobilized army reserve soldiers . in response to the september 11 attacks , many army reserve soldiers were activated to federal duty . a reported 98,000 army reserve soldiers — almost half of the soldiers in the army's selected reserve — had been mobilized to active duty at some point since september 2001 . these forces were deployed on various important missions across the united states and overseas in support of operations noble eagle , enduring freedom , and iraqi freedom . their missions consisted mostly of combat support missions , such as supply , medical , and transportation operations , as well as military police and intelligence functions .