lockboxes . if diversion is suspected to be a risk or if there are children present in the patient's home , a hospice may choose to use a lockbox to store the patient's medications and limit access to only an alert patient or their caregivers . officials from five hospices and five state hospice associations mentioned that their employees and members use lockboxes for such purposes . one hospice official explained that lockboxes may also be used as an accountability tool so that those with access cannot accuse others of stealing if drugs are unaccounted for . pharmacy cooperation . a hospice may choose to have the pharmacy mail a prescribed controlled substance in smaller quantities and with greater frequency . for example , an official from one of the selected hospices explained that the pharmacy they use will deliver medications as often as daily if needed to reduce the risk of controlled substances being diverted . similarly , an official from a state hospice association explained that some pharmacy managers and benefits managers note when a refill for a prescription is requested sooner than it should have been and alert the hospice . witnessed disposal or assisted disposal . pursuant to some state disposal laws and according to officials from five hospices and four state hospice associations , controlled substance disposal and assisted disposal must or should be performed with a witness present . the state disposal laws may specify who the witness must be . for example , according to two state laws , a family member or a second hospice employee may witness disposal . in - home disposal products . hospices may have varying preferences for how they dispose of controlled substances ; officials from four of the selected hospices mentioned using in - home disposal products , and two specifically explained they believed these to be the safest disposal method , even though , according to the officials , it can be costly . officials from another hospice told us they receive their in - home disposal products through a grant program . documentation . officials from four selected hospices told us their employees document the completion of certain tasks , such as diversion risk assessments , drug counts , drug disposal , and the refusal of drug disposal . an official from one of these hospices told us their staff perform and document a diversion risk assessment of the patient's home . while officials from four hospices told us their employees perform drug counts , only one official specified that employees from their hospice document the drug counts . another hospice official explained that disposal documentation includes the name , dosage , form , and administration method of the medication . one hospice official told us that if a patient's family members refuse disposal , they must sign a form stating they declined to allow the nurse to dispose of the patient's remaining drugs . officials from selected hospices and state hospice associations in our review described various challenges associated with disposing of controlled substances in patients' homes . the challenges described by the selected hospices and state hospice associations include but are not limited to the following: certain disposal methods may be too costly .