( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for comment . on november 5 , 2019 , dhs also provided comments , reproduced in full in appendix iii . dhs concurred with one of our two recommendations , and described actions planned to address it , but did not concur with the other . dhs concurred with our first recommendation that the coast guard should conduct a comprehensive analysis of its specialized forces' workforce needs . dhs stated in its comments that the coast guard will conduct individual unit analyses , prioritizing for units that were not previously examined . our work has also identified retention and training as challenges . we found in 2010 that the coast guard was unable to retain qualified specialized forces personnel , in part because of additional training requirements . for example , while personnel working on a cutter may need a boat driver certification , an msst or msrt member would need an additional tactical boat driver course . the coast guard subsequently developed detailed guidance for specialized forces units that includes standardized training , requirements , and qualifications to be followed regardless of the unit location and to be applied consistently across organizational commands . during site visits to units in the pacific and atlantic areas , we observed that equipment was standardized across specialized forces , and officials we spoke with described the benefits of the standardized training and equipment . figure 5 shows coast guard msst personnel conducting standardized training , which officials said has the added benefit of providing potential deterrence of illegal activities , such as drug smuggling , in the geographic area of the training . coast guard officials also told us that , prior to the 2007 reorganization to the deployable operations group , coast guard personnel working in specialized forces units could not remain in those units and be competitive for promotions . coast guard officials told us that this was because the coast guard has certain requirements for career progression , including personnel working in various assignments within a given career path . in 2010 , we reported that the coast guard had developed a career path for maritime law enforcement personnel — who are part of operations that generally address the coast guard's homeland security missions . coast guard officials told us that this change was a response to challenges the agency faced retaining law enforcement personnel . officials said this change created a maritime law enforcement career path within the specialized forces community . coast guard officials we spoke with also told that us the career path has helped them retain qualified specialized forces personnel . coast guard partially applied two of five key practices for agency reorganization , including using data and evidence , and considering to some extent the possibility of fragmentation , duplication , and overlap . however , it has not used data and evidence to fully assess specialized forces workforce needs and has not comprehensively evaluated the potential for overlaps or gaps in the capabilities among them .