usace agreed to this recommendation . in technical comments , usace noted substantial discrepancies — amounting to millions of dollars and over 100 projects — between its financial and project data and itao's data that we included in our draft report . both itao and grd have staffing challenges . our review of itao documents found that itao's prdc point of contact , who coordinates and oversees the selection process for specific projects , changed six times since december 2006 . specifically , from january 2008 to september 2008 , itao had three different prdc managers . according to grd , these frequent changes in itao's prdc managers contributed to inconsistent information about program direction . for example , in january 2008 , when the prdc program shifted from building infrastructure to helping provincial governments in sustaining and planning essential services , itao failed to consult grd about developing a new program management plan until september 2008 . gulf region south officials stated that they have had difficulty obtaining staff with the skills and training to manage reconstruction projects . to address staffing shortages , gulf region south hired iraqi associates to inspect projects in the field . in addition , iraqi associates have been hired to contribute to a trained local work force , build local infrastructure , and ensure continued project sustainability , according to usace officials . during our site visits , we observed that the iraqi engineers were able to visit the sites more frequently , and because they spoke arabic , they could interact with the iraqi contractors . senior grd management stated that iraqi workers have been essential , particularly when security conditions deteriorated . standards for management control require performance measures and indicators to monitor progress in achieving program objectives . the prdc program has no performance measurement system to assess whether the program is achieving its objective of helping build provincial government capacity to deliver essential services , according to state officials . according to an october 2008 state report , prdc program accomplishments are measured by the number of projects completed and awarded and amount of funds disbursed . however , this is a measure of state's ability to obtain and use u.s. funds . the indicator does not provide information about the extent to which u.s. efforts build the capacity of provincial governments to deliver essential services , particularly since only u.s. funds are involved in program funding . further guidance for prdc states that the program's capacity building will be demonstrated when operations and maintenance services and provincial planning projects are identified and programmed into the provincial budgets for 2008 . however , at the time our review , itao and the office of provincial affairs ( opa ) could not provide us with this information . prt engineers are responsible for assisting prdc officials by teaching , mentoring , training , guiding , and supporting the preparation of all project scopes of work , bills of quantities , estimates , and project nomination forms . during site visits , we found that prt engineers conducted training through the local grd district offices to help iraqi contractors prepare technical contract proposals . similarly , opa provided anecdotal examples to show how prt engineers are building capacity in two provinces .