infrastructure . the council's chairman carries the authority of the chief of naval operations , and its first task was to develop a comprehensive plan to address the recommendations in the independent studies and concepts of operations ( conops ) and doctrine issues needed to help support the planned april 2013 deployment of lcs 1 to singapore . the first installment of the lcs council's plan was issued in january 2013 and the plan currently contains over 1,000 action items . in march 2013 , the chief of naval operations added the joint high speed vessel — also constructed at austal usa — to the lcs council's purview , citing the unique challenges facing both classes . one major activity identified in the lcs council's plan is for both seaframe variants to complete testing to demonstrate their performance . dod acquisition policy requires defense acquisition programs execute and complete developmental testing and operational testing . developmental testing is intended to assist in identifying system performance , capabilities , limitations , and safety issues to help reduce design and programmatic risks . operational testing is intended to assess a weapon system's capability in a realistic environment when maintained and operated by warfighters , subjected to routine wear - and - tear , and employed in combat conditions . operational testing also includes live - fire testing , which provides timely assessment of the survivability and lethality of a weapon system . survivability tests are another type of test , which demonstrate that the ship designs can safely absorb and control damage and includes a full ship shock trial , where a manned ship is subjected to a controlled , underwater explosion at sea . statute requires a program to complete realistic survivability tests and initial operational testing before proceeding beyond low - rate initial production . prior to acceptance , ships are also typically required to go through various trials to verify that requirements and specifications are met . an acceptance trial is first conducted by insurv to determine whether the ship has been completed in accordance with the contract specifications and is operationally ready . after further navy tests and evaluations , insurv conducts a final contract trial to operationally demonstrate that the ship's systems satisfy material readiness conditions before the contract period ends and it is delivered to the fleet . following acceptance and before initial deployment , the navy also has the opportunity to make any needed additional corrections or to fix any problems that may have emerged in testing during a repair period called a post - shakedown availability ( psa ) . lcs 1 has completed her trials and psa ; lcs 2 has completed one psa with a second one planned and has a remaining trial ; lcs 3 has had both trials and is now entering a psa period . the navy has made progress in addressing some of the early design and construction problems on lcs 1 and lcs 2 , and is obtaining better cost performance from the shipyards on follow - on seaframes now that the seaframes are in steady production . however , schedule delays persist . based on projected shipyard learning curve improvements , shipyard performance can be expected to continue to improve over time .