enhance financial capacity . the widespread destruction caused by major disasters can impose significant financial burdens on the state and local governments , such as creating unbudgeted expenses while at the same time decimating the local tax base . in addition , federal disaster programs often require state and local governments to match a portion of the assistance they receive . in the past , affected jurisdictions have used loans from a variety of sources to enhance local financial capacity . for example , after the 1997 red river flood , the bank of north dakota provided a line of credit of over $44 million to the city of grand forks . the city used this loan to meet fema matching requirements , provide cash flow for the city government's operating expenses , and fund recovery projects that commenced before the arrival of financial assistance . strengthen technical capacity . state and local governments face the challenge of implementing the wide range of federal disaster programs . some of these federal programs require a certain amount of technical know - how to navigate . for example , fema's public assistance grant program has complicated paperwork requirements and multistage application processes that can place considerable demands on applicants . to strengthen their technical capacity to implement this program after the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes , fema and mississippi state officials used federal funding to obtain an online accounting system that tracked and facilitated the sharing of operational documents . in doing so , fema and the state reduced the burden on applicants of meeting public assistance grant program requirements , gained immediate access to key documents that helped officials make project approvals , and relieved the documentation and resulting human capital responsibilities that applicants faced during project development . business recovery is a key element of a community's recovery after a major disaster . small businesses are vital to a community's economic health , yet are especially vulnerable to disasters because they often lack resources to sustain financial loss and have less capacity to withstand market changes . federal , state , and local governments have developed strategies to facilitate business recovery , including several targeted at small businesses . provide technical assistance to help businesses adapt to postdisaster market conditions . major disasters can change communities in ways that require businesses to adapt . the ability of business owners to recognize change and adapt to the postdisaster market for goods and services can help those firms attain long - term viability after a disaster . recognizing this after the 1994 northridge earthquake , los angeles officials assisted neighborhood businesses in adapting to short - and long - term changes , using a combination of federal , state , and local funds . specifically , a local nonprofit provided direct technical assistance to affected businesses such as counseling them on how to obtain government assistance and providing strategies for how to adapt to the changed business environment . this information was disseminated through door - to - door canvassing in affected areas to reach out to business owners and conferences to teach owners how to market their businesses given the changed demographics . create strategies to minimize business relocation and the loss of customer base .