this recommendation has not been implemented . we have found in the past that doe's cleanup strategy is not risk based and should be re - evaluated . doe's decisions are often driven by local stakeholders and certain requirements in federal facilities agreements and consent decrees . in 1995 , we recommended that doe set national priorities for cleaning up its contaminated sites using data gathered during ongoing risk evaluations . this recommendation has not been implemented . in 2003 , we recommended that doe ask congress to clarify its authority for designating certain waste with relatively low levels of radioactivity as waste incidental to reprocessing , and therefore not managed as high - level waste . in 2004 , doe received this specific authority from congress for the savannah river and idaho sites , thereby allowing doe to save billions of dollars in waste treatment costs . the law , however , excluded the hanford site . more recently , in 2015 , we found that doe is not comprehensively integrating risks posed by national nuclear security administration's ( nnsa ) nonoperational contaminated facilities with em's portfolio of cleanup work . by not integrating nonoperational facilities from nnsa , em is not providing congress with complete information about em's current and future cleanup obligations as congress deliberates annually about appropriating funds for cleanup activities . we recommended that doe integrate its lists of facilities prioritized for disposition with all nnsa facilities that meet em's transfer requirements , and that em should include this integrated list as part of the congressional budget justification for doe . doe neither agreed nor disagreed with this recommendation . see pages 232-247 of the high - risk report for additional details on what we found . one of the most important functions of the u.s. census bureau ( bureau ) is conducting the decennial census of the u.s. population , which is mandated by the constitution and provides vital data for the nation . this information is used to apportion the seats of the u.s. house of representatives ; realign the boundaries of the legislative districts of each state ; allocate billions of dollars in federal financial assistance ; and provide social , demographic , and economic profiles of the nation's people to guide policy decisions at each level of government . a complete count of the nation's population is an enormous challenge as the bureau seeks to control the cost of the census while it implements several new innovations and manages the processes of acquiring and developing new and modified it systems supporting them . over the past 3 years , we have made 30 recommendations to help the bureau design and implement a more cost - effective census for 2020 ; however , only 6 of them had been fully implemented as of january 2017 . the cost of the census , in terms of cost for counting each housing unit , has been escalating over the last several decennials . the 2010 census was the costliest u.s. census in history at about $12.3 billion , and was about 31 percent more costly than the $9.4 billion cost of the 2000 census ( in 2020 dollars ) .