industry . firms were assigned a north american industrial classification code . these six - digit codes begin with a two - digit sector code that we used to draw more general conclusions about industries . geographic information . the data provided the state where the borrower is located . in addition , we obtained information from sba on loan - and lender - level small business risk portfolio solution scores ( predictive scores ) provided by dunn & bradstreet and fair isaac company , for loans approved in fiscal year 2016 , the latest available . we were able to obtain predictive scores for approximately 81 percent of the loans for which sba had provided other information . according to sba , some loans may not have been disbursed at the time we obtained the predictive scores and , as a result , we do not have scores associated with these loans . we analyzed the information to determine the range of predictive scores and the range of average predictive scores by lender . to assess the reliability of loan - level data on borrower and loan characteristics and predictive scores we received from sba , we interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data and reviewed related documentation . we also conducted electronic testing , including checks for outliers , missing data , and erroneous values . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing the characteristics of borrowers who received 7 ( a ) loans and the distribution of predictive scores . to assess how sba monitors lenders' compliance with the credit elsewhere requirement and criteria , we reviewed sba's standard operating procedures and other guidance on 7 ( a ) program regulations and lender oversight . specifically , we reviewed sop 50 10 5 ( versions i and j ) on lender and development company loan programs , sop 50 53 ( a ) on lender supervision and enforcement , and sop 51 00 , on - site lender reviews / examinations , as well as information and policy notices related to the credit elsewhere requirement . additionally , we interviewed representatives including those at sba's office of capital access and office of credit risk management on lender oversight and lender review processes . we reviewed all the on - site lender review reports ( 40 reviews ) , including corrective actions or requirements related to the credit elsewhere requirement ( documentation for 11 lenders ) , and targeted review reports that had credit elsewhere findings ( 7 reviews ) that sba conducted in fiscal year 2016 . we also interviewed officials and reviewed recent reports from sba's office of inspector general . to assess the extent to which sba evaluates trends in lender practices related to the credit elsewhere requirement , we interviewed sba officials and reviewed documentation for sba's online portal for loan origination . we also incorporated information from interviews with a nongeneralizable , nonrepresentative sample of 7 ( a ) lenders , which we discuss below .