we have modified our recommendation accordingly . dod concurred with our recommendation that the navy revise inventory management practices to incorporate flexibility needed to minimize the impact of demand fluctuations . however , dod cited ongoing navy efforts to improve inventory management practices , including those related to initial provisioning and on - order inventory management , and estimated these corrective actions would be completed by september 30 , 2010 . while the ongoing navy efforts cited by dod in its comment may have a positive impact , its comment provided no indication that the navy plans any changes to the way it conducts business . therefore , the navy should establish an evaluation plan and interim milestones for assessing the impact of ongoing efforts and take additional corrective actions , if warranted . we have modified our recommendation accordingly . dod concurred with our recommendation that the navy perform and document required annual reviews validating methodologies used for making retention decisions . according to dod , the navy supply systems command will modify its management internal control program to assure this requirement is met and estimated this corrective action would be completed by may 31 , 2009 . we believe this planned action is responsive to our recommendation . dod concurred with our recommendation that the navy direct its chief management officer and deputy chief management officer to exercise appropriate oversight of navy inventory management improvement to align improvement efforts with overall business transformation and to reduce support costs . dod said the navy is developing a business transformation implementation strategy to align with office of the secretary of defense actions in this area . through this development process , the navy will determine the appropriate role the chief management officer should exercise in inventory management oversight . dod estimated that it would complete this corrective action by april 30 , 2009 . we believe this planned action is responsive to our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the navy ; the secretary of the air force ; the director , defense logistics agency ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov / . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine the extent to which the navy's on - order and on - hand secondary inventory reflected the amount needed to support current requirements , we obtained the navy's central secondary item stratification budget summary and item - specific reports for september 30 of each fiscal year from 2004 through 2007 . the stratification reports serve as a budget request preparation tool and a mechanism for matching assets to requirements .