according to naic , this form is now available for use in all states . naic has undertaken several initiatives designed to streamline these regulatory processes . additionally , the commission can establish product standards only after legislative enactment of the compact by 12 states , and can review products and render approvals or disapprovals on products only after legislative enactment of the compact by 26 states . the impetus for exploring the use of interstate compacts appears to be an increased sense of urgency to resolve current product approval issues and a realization among state officials that regulators have gone as far as they can to streamline product approval processes after the carfra trial setback . to overcome industry objections to state deviations beyond carfra's review criteria , state lawmakers would have had to change their states' product review and approval requirements to a common , uniform set of criteria . naic concluded that an interstate compact presented the best way to accomplish uniform product review and approval standards along with a single point of filing mechanism . licensing requirements waived or removed to satisfy the reciprocity requirements of glba could resurface as postlicensing requirements , undermining the benefits of regulatory streamlining . in our review of the checklists submitted to naic , we found that many states said they have the authority to waive requirements relating to nonresident licensing . a handful of states also reported having postlicensing requirements that could limit or place conditions on nonresident producer activities . for instance , one state reported that it could waive evidence of company appointments as an application requirement but would ask for this evidence as a postlicensing requirement before the producer could conduct any insurance activity . overall , we did not identify any significant use of additional postlicensing requirements , but such practices could inhibit the implementation of regulatory reciprocity among states . although naic may be close to certifying enough states to avoid the creation of narab , other efforts to achieve greater uniformity must be successful before nationwide reciprocity is realized . some states , often those with relatively large insurance markets , intend to maintain certain antifraud and consumer protection measures even though such requirements may be inconsistent with glba's reciprocity provisions . for instance , the california department of insurance did not support the adoption of naic's plma , designed to satisfy glba's reciprocity provision , because “the model act does not include several important enforcement tools that are contained in california law presently.” industry representatives have emphasized that the larger states need to reciprocate ( accept the licensing decision of other states ) before producers can fully benefit from improvements aimed at streamlining the licensing process to conduct business in multiple states . this system offers insurers the means to submit information such as rate and policy form data on proposed products electronically to regulators to help reduce the processing time associated with product filings . the group's areas of work include those related to background checks , prelicensing education , continuing education , and definitions for limited lines of insurance . the primary accomplishment of these improvement efforts to date has been the implementation of a common insurer license application form , the uniform certificate of authority application ( ucaa ) .