ark . s.c. miss . ala. ga. la . tex . fla . meth labs can have a significant impact on a community's health care system when labs catch on fire or explode , causing serious injuries and burns to meth cooks and other individuals that require costly medical treatment . mixing chemicals in meth labs creates substantial risks of explosions , fires , chemical burns , and toxic fume inhalation . these burns and related injuries resulting from these events can be more serious than burns and injuries sustained through non - meth - lab - related causes . for example , a 2008 study conducted of meth and non - meth burn patients that received treatment in one hospital burn unit in kalamazoo , michigan , from 2001 through 2005 , found that meth lab patients tended to have more frequent inhalation injuries , needed greater initial fluid resuscitation volume , required intubation more frequently , and were more likely to have the small size of the relatively complications than non - meth patients.new one pot or shake and bake method can be even more dangerous than larger meth labs , as drugmakers typically hold the one pot container up close , increasing the risk for severe burns from the waist to the face . according to the director of the vanderbilt university regional burn center in tennessee , meth lab injuries can also be more severe than burns resulting from just fires alone because patients often suffer thermal burns from the explosion , as well as chemical burns from exposure to caustic chemicals . he also noted that meth lab burn patients tend to be more difficult to treat because their addiction and overall poor physical health make it difficult for them to facilitate their own recovery as well as the fact that most attempt to hide the cause of their injury , which can hinder the administration of proper care . the treatment for meth lab - related burns and injuries can be very expensive . according to one provider , treatment costs for two meth lab burn patients exceeded $2 million per patient . although accurate estimates of the proportion of burn victims that received their burns from a meth lab are difficult , one estimate placed the percentage of meth lab burn patients at 25 to 35 percent of total burn patients . of those patients that are identified as receiving their injuries from meth labs , many are found either not to have health insurance or have publicly funded insurance such as medicaid . for example , the 2008 kalamazoo study also found that significantly fewer meth burn patients had private insurance , while more were on medicaid or had no insurance as compared with non - meth burn patients . as part of reporting a lab seizure to the dea's nss , law enforcement is required to report on the number of children affected by the lab , such as those living at the site as well as those that might have visited the site . damage the brain , liver , kidney , spleen , and immunologic system ; and result in birth defects .