such a change could have an impact on future exploration funding . in july 2006 , we reported that nasa's acquisition strategy for the cev placed the project at risk of significant cost overruns , schedule delays , and performance shortfalls because it committed the government to a long - term contract before establishing a sound business case . we found that the cev contract , as structured , committed the government to pay for design , development , production and sustainment upon contract award — with a period of performance through at least 2014 with the possibility of extending through 2019 . our report highlighted that nasa had yet to develop key elements of a sound business case , including well - defined requirements , mature technology , a preliminary design , and firm cost estimates that would support such a long - term commitment . without such knowledge , nasa cannot predict with any confidence how much the program will cost , what technologies will or will not be available to meet performance expectations , and when the vehicle will be ready for use . nasa has acknowledged that it will not have these elements in place until the project's preliminary design review scheduled for fiscal year 2008 . as a result , we recommended that the nasa administrator modify the current cev acquisition strategy to ensure that the agency does not commit itself , and in turn the federal government , to a long - term contractual obligation prior to establishing a sound business case at the project's preliminary design review . in response to our recommendation , nasa disagreed and stated that it had the appropriate level of knowledge to proceed with its current acquisition strategy . nasa also indicated that knowledge from the contractor is required in order to develop a validated set of requirements and , therefore , it was important to get the contractor on to the project as soon as possible . in addition , according to nasa officials , selection of a contractor for the cev would enable the agency to work with the contractor to attain knowledge about the project's required resources and , therefore , be better able to produce firm estimates of project cost . in our report , we highlighted that this is the type of information that should be obtained prior to committing to a long - term contract . to our knowledge , nasa did not explore the possibility of utilizing the contractor , through a shorter - term contract , to conduct work needed to develop valid requirements and establish higher - fidelity cost estimates — a far less risky and costly strategy . subsequent to our report , nasa did , however , take steps to address some of the concerns we raised . specifically , nasa modified its acquisition strategy for the cev and made the production and sustainment schedules of the contract — known as schedules b and c — contract options that the agency will decide whether to exercise after project's critical design review in 2009 . therefore , nasa will only be liable for the minimum quantities under schedules b and c when and if it chooses to exercise those options .