dcaa audits are governed by gagas . these standards require evaluation and testing of a company's overall internal controls including the work of the company's internal audit activity , specific controls , and business systems . they also require adherence to the standards when documenting and reviewing audit work . the documentation requirements were not applied consistently for the cases we reviewed , and without consistent application of the documentation requirements , the reason for asking for the audit and the connection to dcaa's work is unclear . in cases where the companies denied the requests , documentation is essential for determining the reason for the denial and perhaps following up with a stronger connection between dcaa's work and the request to the company . dcaa auditors we spoke with identified factors contributing to less than full documentation for the requests we reviewed . first , they said that the information they had on the internal audit reports was limited to only the title of the audit , and that while the title could provide some information , it might not contain enough information to provide a strong link between dcaa's work and the requested audit . second , they stated that the instruction about documenting the connection between dcaa's work and the requested audit or the benefit to dcaa was not clear . third , an official stated that the contents of the documents were not reviewed for completeness . finally , in the case of documentation of the company's response , some officials stated that they believed documentation , such as an email , was needed only if the request resulted in a denial of access . supervisory review of audit documentation is required by gagas.incomplete documents including the complete lack of some documents could have been remedied if supervisory review by field offices and / or contract audit coordinators were undertaken . however , it is unclear to what extent the data provided by the auditors for the semi - annual reports are consistently reviewed by the field offices , contract audit coordinators , or headquarters . one regional official stated that records were reviewed in that region to assure the completeness of the report , but officials from another region indicated that records were only reviewed if the request for a contractor internal audit resulted in a denial of access . appendix i has additional information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to november 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . both dcaa and company internal auditors have responsibility for assessing the quality of company internal controls . broadly speaking , internal controls refer to management processes designed to provide reasonable assurance about a company's ability to provide reliable financial reporting , promote effective and efficient operations , and comply with applicable laws , regulations , and contract provisions .