the results of these interviews are not generalizable . we also interviewed key officials in faa's headquarters , great lakes region , and southern region offices that oversaw the application process for luis munoz marin international airport ( luis munoz marin ) in san juan pr ; chicago midway international airport ( midway ) in chicago , il ; and airglades airport in hendry county , fl ; as well as gary - chicago airport in gary , in ; and branson airport in branson , mo ; that chose not to apply to the appp . we conducted site visits to chicago , illinois , and san juan , puerto rico , to interview faa and local community and airport stakeholders for the midway and the luis munoz marin appp applications and processes . we selected these two sites as they were the largest airports to have submitted final applications to the appp , with midway remaining under public sector operation while san juan luis munoz marin transferring to the private sector . ยง 40117. annually . all airports in the npias are eligible to receive apportionment grants , which are determined on an annual basis for primary airports by a formula based on the number of passengers and amount of cargo carried . for non - primary airports , the funding formula is based on the development needs at those airports as identified in the npias , with a minimum apportionment grant of $150,000 . these airports may also compete for aip discretionary grants , which fund national priorities and objectives that enhance capacity , safety , or environmental concerns . grants require a local match of 5 to 30 percent depending on airport size or type of project . pfc charges: the pfc program authorizes participating airports to collect up to $4.50 per boarded passenger , per flight segment . airports apply for participation in the program , and if approved , funds collected by airlines through fees placed on passenger tickets are remitted to airports to use for faa - approved development projects that preserve or enhance airports' safety , security , or capacity ; reduce noise ; or enhance airline competition . additionally , pfcs can also be used to pay interest costs on debt issued for faa - approved airport development projects . according to faa , 388 commercial service airports were approved to collect pfcs as of april 2014.pfc collections totaled about $2.8 billion in calendar year 2013 , with annual the most collections going to large and medium hub airports , proportionate to their number of passenger boardings . locally generated revenues: aeronautical revenue is generated from airlines and general aviation users of the airfield or terminal and includes charges for aircraft - landing fees and terminal rentals . while the faa ensures that airport rates and charges to airlines are reasonable , as required by federal law , through its grant agreements with airport owners , it does not set those rates . non - aeronautical revenue includes rents the public owner collects from restaurant and retail concessionaires , rental car concessions , and parking - garage fees .