however , no investigation has been conducted to date . specifically , of the 3,155 pieces of it equipment recorded in the records for ihs headquarters , we determined that about 1,140 items ( or about 36 percent ) were lost , stolen , or unaccounted for . these items , valued at around $2 million , included computers , computer servers , video projectors , and digital cameras . according to ihs records , 64 of the items we identified as missing during our physical inventory were “new” in april 2007 . furthermore , we found that some of the missing computers were assigned to the ihs human resources division . these computers likely contained sensitive employee data including names and social security numbers protected under the privacy act of 1974 . we are referring these cases where there was a potential release of sensitive data including employee social security numbers to the hhs oig for further investigation . during our investigation of the whistleblower's complaint , ihs made a concerted effort to obstruct our work . ihs officials made misrepresentations and fabricated documents to impede our work . specifically , the ihs director responsible for property claimed that ihs was able to find about 800 of the missing items from the whistleblower's complaint . however , based on our physical inventory testing at headquarters , we found that this statement was a misrepresentation and that only some of these items have been found . an ihs property specialist attempted to provide documentation confirming that 571 missing items were properly disposed of by ihs . however , we found that the documentation he provided was not dated and contained no signatures . when we questioned the official about these discrepancies , he admitted that he fabricated the documents . we are referring this individual to the hhs oig for further investigation . according to ihs policy , receiving reports are always signed by an authorized employee . as part of our inventory , we requested receiving reports for three recent purchase orders . furthermore , as stated in our report and hhs's response , ihs did not perform complete physical inventories of equipment for most of its regional offices . specifically we identified that 9 of the 12 regions did not perform a physical inventory in 2007 . in addition , we reported that ihs did not complete the investigations of about $11 million of inventory shortages where a physical inventory was performed . as such , our estimate does not include lost or stolen property where physical inventories were not performed or where ihs did not complete its investigation of inventory shortages . further , we do not believe that ihs's conversion to a new system should impact ihs's ability to maintain basic inventory documentation that is subject to audit . without such documentation , ihs has no accountability of equipment that the american taxpayers entrusted to the agency . thus , we believe that we likely underestimated , not overestimated , the amount of lost or stolen property . finally , in its written response to our draft report hhs states its belief that our report overstates the net worth of unaccounted for items by not taking into consideration the depreciation value of these items .