( see fig . most of the recent increase in modernization funding is necessary to provide increased ground attack capability . other modernization projects include upgrading avionics software , adding an improved short - range missile capability , upgrading instrumentation for testing , and incorporating a classified project . delays in testing have significant consequences . continuing to acquire aircraft before adequate testing is a high - risk strategy that could serve to further increase production costs . together , these problems have rippling effects on dod's ability to upgrade its aging tactical aircraft fleet . if the f / a - 22 program had met its original goals , the air force could have been replacing older aircraft with f / a - 22 aircraft over 7 years ago . now , however , it will not begin replacing aircraft until late 2005 at the earliest . moreover , the rate of replenishment will be substantially lower , due to the decrease in the number of new aircraft to be purchased . because the separations reduce tail strength , the air force restricted flight - testing of some aircraft until it had determined that this problem would not affect flight safety during testing . the air force and the contractor initially believed that improvements to the aircraft's manufacturing process would solve this problem . however , the air force has determined that it could only solve this problem by redesigning the aircraft's tail . the air force plans to conduct flight - testing of the redesigned tail between february 2004 and april 2004 . airlift support requirements: the air force estimates it will not meet the f / a - 22 airlift support requirement — a key performance parameter . the airlift support requirement is that 8 c - 141 aircraft or their equivalents would be sufficient to deploy a squadron of 24 f / a - 22s for 30 days without resupply . today , the air force estimates that 8.8 c - 141 equivalents will be necessary . impact of maintenance needs on performance: the f / a - 22's performance may also be affected by maintenance needs that exceed established objectives . the air force estimates that the f / a - 22 should , at this point in its development , be able to complete 1.67 flying hours between maintenance actions and 1.95 flying hours by the end of development . however , aircraft are requiring five times the maintenance actions expected at this point in development . as of november 2002 , the development test aircraft have been completing only .29 flying hours between maintenance actions . therefore , the development test aircraft are spending more time than planned on the ground undergoing maintenance . testing is instrumental to gauging the progress being made when an idea or a concept is translated into an actual product that people use . dod divides testing into two categories: developmental and operational . the goal of developmental tests is to determine whether the weapon system meets the technical specifications of the contract . the goal of operational testing is to evaluate the effectiveness and suitability of the weapon system in realistic combat conditions .