the impact is unclear because the relationships ( i.e. , interdependencies ) among the various projects under healthevet have not been determined . as described in va's budget submission for 2011 , healthevet is the most critical it development program for medical care , and is expected to enhance and supplement the legacy vista system using highly integrated health care applications , such as the capability to schedule outpatient appointments . however , the department's efforts have not yet resulted in a finalized plan that outlines what needs to be done and when . as of march 2010 , the department had not completed its comprehensive plan and integrated schedule to guide the development and integration of the many projects that make up this departmentwide initiative . according to officials in va's office of information and technology , the department plans to document the interdependencies , project milestones , and deliverables in an integrated master schedule as part of a project management plan that is expected to be completed by june 2010 . in the absence of an overall comprehensive plan for healthevet that incorporates critical areas of system development and considers all dependencies and subtasks and that can be used as a means of determining progress , it is difficult to determine how scheduling and other applications will be integrated into this larger healthevet system . likewise , without such a plan , the impact of the terminated scheduling project on the completion of the healthevet initiative cannot be determined . after almost a decade of effort , va has not accomplished what it set out to achieve in replacing its patient scheduling system . a broad range of managerial weaknesses plagued the project from beginning to end and increased the project's risk of failure . specifically , because the department did not develop and execute an acquisition plan , its acquisition activities were ad hoc and it did not seek to obtain the benefits of competition . additionally , in defining and managing system requirements , the department did not perform critically important activities such as ensuring that the requirements were complete and sufficiently detailed . the incomplete and insufficiently detailed requirements resulted in a system that did not function as intended . moreover , even though the department had a plan and process for managing project risks , it did not identify key risks mentioned or take steps to mitigate them . finally , although the department was aware of major issues with the project through several external reviews , the lack of effective institutional oversight allowed the project to continue unchecked and , ultimately , to fail . given this situation , the department is starting over and is in the process of analyzing alternative strategies , which will be the basis for a project plan that is to be developed . at the same time , the department is instituting a new approach that is intended to manage and control it system projects and avoid project failures , such as what has occurred with the scheduling replacement project .