closing and disbursement . for hurricane sandy loans , sba could make a maximum initial disbursement , in the absence of collateral , of up to $14,000 for physical disaster business loans and $5,000 for eidls , once the agency received signed closing documents from the applicant . sba could make a maximum initial disbursement of up to $50,000 for physical disaster loans and full disbursements for eidls , once all requirements were met . sba generally makes subsequent disbursements on physical disaster loans based on the applicant's needs and how they spent prior disbursements . sba procedures also generally require small businesses to arrange for and obtain all loan funds within 6 months from the date of the loan authorization and agreement . following hurricane sandy , sba received disaster loan applications from 9 states and puerto rico , with the majority of the 15,745 business disaster loan applications generated by businesses in new jersey and new york . see figure 2 below for a map of highly impacted counties in new jersey and new york and information on business disaster loan applications from these counties . congress enacted the small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 to expand steps taken by sba after hurricane katrina and require new measures to help ensure that sba would be prepared for future disasters . the act included three provisions requiring sba to issue regulations to establish new guaranteed disaster programs using private sector lenders: expedited disaster assistance loan program ( edalp ) . edalp would provide small businesses with expedited access to short - term guaranteed loans of up to $150,000 . immediate disaster assistance program ( idap ) . idap would provide small businesses with interim guaranteed loans of up to $25,000 with a loan decision within 36 hours . private disaster assistance program ( pdap ) . pdap would make guaranteed loans available to homeowners and small businesses in an amount up to $2 million . see table 2 for characteristics of these loan programs . following hurricane sandy , sba did not meet its timeliness goal of processing business loan applications from receipt to loan decision within 21 days for a number of reasons , and a backlog of applications developed rapidly . sba officials said the agency was challenged by a large , unanticipated volume of applications early in its response to the disaster . in addition , sba relied on inaccurate estimates of how quickly staff could process applications , which delayed its decision to increase the numbers of staff to process the applications . sba also faced challenges related to its information system , among others . according to sba , the agency is taking steps to address some of the challenges it faced after hurricane sandy . however , sba has not revised its disaster planning to reflect the unanticipated volume of early applications it received . as a result , sba risks continuing to be unprepared for a large number of disaster loan applications to be submitted at the beginning of a disaster response . following hurricane sandy , sba did not meet its goal to process business loan applications within 21 days from application receipt to loan decision .