online . irs authenticates taxpayers online for both high - risk and lower - risk interactions . for high - risk interactions such as requesting a tax transcript or looking up an identity protection personal identification number ( ip pin ) , taxpayers must pass a multi - factor authentication process using irs's secure access platform . irs launched secure access in june 2016 following the get transcript data breach and , as of april 2018 , was using it for 11 applications including authentication for get transcript , ip pin , and the online account . officials told us they plan to implement secure access for other irs applications in 2018 . taxpayers authenticating through secure access establish an account by providing irs with a valid e - mail address , basic personal information , and personal financial information . taxpayers then provide irs a mobile phone number and irs sends the phone an activation code that the taxpayer enters online . this step validates that the taxpayer possesses the mobile phone . irs authenticates returning users via a security code . for lower - risk interactions , taxpayers may authenticate online by answering several knowledge - based questions , such as questions about their current return to learn the status of their refund . correspondence . in some cases , taxpayers can submit documents or request tax information via correspondence , which are then reviewed by irs and authenticated by matching against information in irs's systems . this method can require that irs send the requested documents ( such as a tax transcript ) only to the taxpayer's address of record , or require the taxpayer to include a photocopy of identification . for example , in some instances , taxpayers who cannot authenticate via telephone and cannot travel to a taxpayer assistance center in person may be able to authenticate by mail . each authentication channel requires different irs resources . these resources include irs staff and overhead ; contracts with vendors that provide identity verification services ; and costs inherent to the specific channel , such as mailing costs . figure 1 summarizes irs's authentication channels and illustrates a number of the interactions that taxpayers or tax professionals can accomplish through one , or several , channels . it also illustrates the differences in costs per transaction . according to irs data , in - person authentication at a taxpayer assistance center is the most expensive way to authenticate taxpayers ( about $89 per interaction ) , followed by telephone ( about $54 per interaction ) . online authentication costs the least , at less than $1 per interaction . according to the national taxpayer advocate , while requiring the appropriate level of authentication is necessary to protect irs against fraudsters , the agency also needs to offer taxpayers a range of options for interacting with irs . in this report , we focus on four key irs programs and services that require authentication: taxpayer protection program ( tpp ) . through tpp , irs reviews tax returns that are flagged by irs's idt filters as potentially fraudulent , such as when a return includes characteristics of known fraud schemes .