we also interviewed representatives from boeing . we conducted this performance audit from july 2018 to june 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in february 2011 , boeing won the competition to develop the air force's next generation aerial refueling tanker aircraft , the kc - 46 . the kc - 46 is to be equipped with subsystems that allow for two types of refueling — ( 1 ) a refueling boom that is integrated with a computer - assisted control system , and ( 2 ) a permanent hose and drogue refueling system . this dual refueling capability is an enhancement over prior tanker aircraft because it enables the kc - 46 to use boom refueling for air force aircraft and drogue refueling for navy or allied aircraft on a single flight . the majority of legacy tankers , such as the kc - 135s , were configured for only one of these types of refueling and had to land and be reconfigured to use the other refueling system . during boom refueling , an operator on the kc - 46 tanker aircraft extends the boom — a rigid , telescoping tube — and inserts it into a receptacle on the aircraft being refueled . the kc - 46 also has a remote vision system , which consists of a display , cameras , and computer processors , in lieu of a window that legacy tankers use . the system allows operators to observe the position of the boom and the receiving aircraft , and to reposition the fuel delivery system to facilitate refueling . in contrast , during drogue refueling , an operator uses the hose and drogue system — comprised of a long , flexible refueling hose and a parachute - like metal basket that provides stability — to provide fuel to receiver aircraft . drogue refueling is available via the centerline drogue system in the middle of the tanker aircraft or via wing aerial refueling pods located on each wing . while refueling with the drogue or wing aerial refueling pods , the operator uses the remote vision system to identify when to extend or reel in the hoses . the wing aerial refueling pods can be used for simultaneous refueling of two navy or allied aircraft — an enhanced capability that only 20 of the 414 kc - 135 tankers currently have the capability to do . figure 1 shows the boom and drogue refueling subsystems on the kc - 46 . the kc - 46 tanker is a commercial derivative aircraft that is based on boeing's commercial 767 aircraft . to convert a 767 to a kc - 46 tanker , boeing modified the aircraft design in two phases . as of march 2019 , the air force has identified the three critical deficiencies that we discussed earlier in this report .