we incorporated their technical comments as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of cms , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at yocomc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were: tom conahan , assistant director ; matthew gever , drew long , jasleen modi , dawn nelson , and jennifer whitworth . the information we obtained from our selected states cannot be generalized to other states . states have primary responsibility for reducing , identifying , and recovering improper payments . federal entities typically provide oversight , as well as program and law enforcement support . figure 1 illustrates the various entities , both federal and non - federal , that are involved in medicaid program integrity . see , eg , 42 u.s.c . pi units for corrective action and potential fraud cases to the state's mfcu . officials from five mfcus said their states' pi units will provide education to mfcu staff on various aspects of , and changes to , the medicaid program . mfcu officials said that coordination helps with investigations because a pi unit pursuing a separate payment recovery action against a suspect provider could interfere with a criminal investigation . coordination among pi units and mfcus also allows the entities to share limited resources as the need arises . for example , mfcus typically do not have clinical staff on hand , but can rely on the clinical expertise of pi units' and state medicaid agencies' staff . mfcu officials from four states told us that coordination among entities helped improve their cases by better leveraging resources . officials from one mfcu said their coordination meetings allow the entities to decide who is best suited to handle specific cases . officials from two mfcus said that working with other entities allows the mfcu to give assistance to or receive assistance from these other entities on investigations and executing warrants . officials from another mfcu told us that other entities can take on cases that the mfcu would not have the authority to prosecute on their own . however , our previous work has shown that measuring the results of health care fraud investigations is difficult due to several factors . these factors include the difficulties of establishing a health care fraud baseline to determine whether the amount of fraud has changed over time , quantifying the effect of investigation and prosecution on deterring fraud , and establishing a causal link between the work and changes in health care fraud .