pub . l. 79-601 , tit . iii , 60 stat . see united states v. harriss , 347 u.s. 612 , 619 ( 1954 ) . pub . l. 104-65 , 109 stat . legislative and executive branch regarding legislation , regulations , policies , or the nomination or confirmation of a person for a position subject to confirmation by the senate . the act required lobbyists to file registrations with the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house and to report semiannually on their lobbying activities , which include both lobbying contacts and work done in preparation for lobbying contacts . in 2007 , hloga amended the act by requiring more frequent filings and lowering thresholds for disclosures , increasing penalties for noncompliance , and requiring new semiannual reports detailing certain political contributions . the sense of congress as stated in hloga was that the lobbying community should propose organizations to develop standards for the profession and provide training . hloga became effective in january 2008 . consistent with the audit and report requirements of hloga , our objectives were to: determine the extent to which lobbyists can demonstrate compliance by providing support for information on registrations and reports filed in response to requirements of the amended lobbying disclosure act ; identify the challenges lobbyists cite in complying with the act and suggestions for improving compliance ; and describe the resources and authorities available to effectively enforce the act including the efforts by the u.s. attorney's office for the district of columbia to implement a structured approach to focus limited resources on lobbyists who continually fail to comply with the act as recommended in gao's prior report . to respond to the requirements of the act , we: selected a random sample of 100 quarterly lobbying activity disclosure reports ( commonly referred to as the ld - 2 report ) filed by lobbyists during the first , second , and third quarters of calendar year 2008 . the randomly sampled reports were selected from the publicly downloadable database maintained by the secretary of the senate . contacted each lobbyist in our sample by sending a letter describing our review and asking them to provide supporting documentation for key elements of the disclosure report including the amount of money received for lobbying activities , the houses of congress or federal agencies lobbied , prior covered positions held by lobbyists , and whether the lobbyists filed a report of federal political contributions . two lobbying firms in our sample , duetto group , llc and snack food association , declined to meet with us following our initial letter , sent in january 2009 , and multiple follow - up contacts in february and march 2009 . in those follow - up contacts , we pointed out to both firms that in light of their unwillingness to meet , we would be identifying their firms' names to congress , as provided for in hloga . both acknowledged their understanding of this . following the march 13 , 2009 , completion of our audit work , we were contacted by a representative from each firm indicating they had reconsidered and would be available to meet .