in another example at the u.s . marshals service , the ceiling price on a contract for aircraft maintenance services increased from $250,000 to $400,000 through three successive modifications , and all the modifications included a detailed description of the need for additional funds . clear guidance and training are needed to successfully introduce and implement changes to regulations . the dod offices we visited were the only locations in our review that provided general training seminars or guidance on the changes to far part 12 permitting the use of t&m contracts for commercial services , but none provided written guidance or training on the more detailed d&f requirement . navy contracting officials recognized this omission during our visit and subsequently provided additional training to their contracting officials . army officials told us that they had discussed the new d&f requirement in a meeting with contracting officers but had not issued any written guidance . none of the civilian agencies in our review had provided formal guidance or training to their contracting officers on the safeguards . officials who were aware of the part 12 safeguards frequently found out through their own initiative . for example , in our sample of 17 hhs contracts subject to the far part 12 d&f requirement , 2 contained partial d&fs and 1 , issued by the program support center , contained all of the d&f elements . the contracting officer responsible for the complete d&f indicated that he became aware of the d&f requirement through his own far research and had not received guidance from headquarters . the other 2 partial part 12 d&fs were issued by another hhs component , the food and drug administration . the head of contracting who signed these d&fs said that she had also learned of the part 12 d&f requirement by researching the far . at doj , officials at the office of justice programs explained that they became aware of the far part 12 d&f requirement through a paid subscription for updates to a contract checklist from an outside vendor . when awarding a contract for consulting services , a contracting officer from that office prepared a part 12 d&f in the file , but it did not address all of the required elements . several contracting officials at different agencies noted that their contracting staff is very overworked or inexperienced , which may have contributed to the general lack of awareness of the new d&f requirement . internal controls , such as contract reviews , administered by informed agency personnel can also help ensure that policies and processes are translated into practice . in some cases , the contracts in our sample had been reviewed by staff , including legal officials , who did not detect that the required part 12 d&fs were missing . for example , while six of the eight contracts at the air force were reviewed by attorneys or contract management officials , five contract files still contained the incorrect part 16 d&f rather than the part 12 d&f for commercial acquisitions . at the navy , one attorney reviewing a contract file identified the need to include the part 12 d&f , but another attorney reviewing a different navy contract failed to do so .