yet , only $314 was deposited . when we asked about this , navy officials initially told us that the deposit amount was correct and consistent with original expectations . table 1 shows implementation status by service . also , appendix ii contains more detailed status information on the 12 projects at the installations we visited during this review . the survey asks 48 questions with responses requested on a 5-point scale , including the question on whether the occupant would recommend privatized housing . navy officials stated that the navy strives to survey each project once a year . however , surveys were not conducted at some navy and marine corps privatized housing projects in 2004 or 2005 , and for six projects , the navy reported no satisfaction information to osd for inclusion in the december 2004 privatization program evaluation report . air force officials stated that until 2005 each privatized project conducted a local survey of occupants . however , due to disparities in the ways the survey was administered from one installation to another and because of the difficulty in achieving statistically significant response rates ( for example , only nine responses were obtained from 382 tenants at the patrick air force base project in 2004 ) , the air force decided to adopt a centralized approach . in june 2005 , the air force used the same contractor as the navy and surveyed occupants at all air force privatized projects . the survey asked 54 questions — mostly the same questions that the navy asked — with responses requested on a 5- point scale , including the question on whether the occupant would recommend privatized housing . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . in the mid - 1990s , dod became concerned that inadequate housing allowances and poor quality military housing were negatively affecting quality of life and readiness by contributing to servicemember decisions to leave military service . dod noted that when living in private - sector housing in the local communities , servicemembers were paying about 19 percent of housing costs out of pocket , because housing allowances were inadequate . dod also noted that the quality of military - owned housing had been in decline for more than 30 years because military - owned housing was not considered a priority and because earlier attempts at solutions ran into regulatory or legislative roadblocks . dod officials stated that much of the military - owned family housing in the united states was old , lacked modern amenities , and required renovation or replacement . dod estimated that completing this work with historical funding levels and traditional military construction methods would take more than 20 years and cost about $16 billion . in response , and with the approval of congress , dod began two major initiatives . first , dod began an initiative to increase housing allowances to cover the average cost of housing and utilities in each of the nation's various geographic areas , thus eliminating the average out - of - pocket housing costs paid by servicemembers . this initiative was completed at the beginning of calendar year 2005 .