gao - 15-725t . june , 24 , 2015 . responding to breaches of pii . in december 2013 , we reported that eight federal agencies had inconsistently implemented policies and procedures for responding to data breaches involving pii . in addition , omb requirements for reporting pii - related data breaches were not always feasible or necessary . thus , we concluded that agencies may not be consistently taking actions to limit the risk to individuals from pii - related data breaches and may be expending resources to meet omb reporting requirements that provide little value . we recommended that omb revise its guidance to agencies on responding to a pii - related data breach and that the reviewed agencies take specific actions to improve their response to pii - related data breaches . omb neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation ; four of the reviewed agencies agreed , two partially agreed , and two neither agreed nor disagreed . implementing security programs at small agencies . in june 2014 , we reported that six small agencies ( i.e. , agencies with 6,000 or fewer employees ) had not implemented or not fully implemented their information security programs . for example , key elements of their plans , policies , and procedures were outdated , incomplete , or did not exist , and two of the agencies had not developed an information security program with the required elements . we recommended that omb include a list of agencies that did not report on the implementation of their information security programs in its annual report to congress on compliance with the requirements of fisma , and include information on small agencies' programs . omb generally concurred with our recommendations . we also recommended that dhs develop guidance and services targeted at small agencies . dhs agreed and has implemented this recommendation . until federal agencies take actions to address these challenges — including implementing the hundreds of recommendations we and inspectors general have made — federal systems and information will be at an increased risk of compromise from cyber - based attacks and other threats . in addition to the efforts of individual agencies , dhs and omb have several initiatives under way to enhance cybersecurity across the federal government . while these initiatives all have potential benefits , they also have limitations . personal identity verification: in august 2004 , homeland security presidential directive 12 ordered the establishment of a mandatory , government - wide standard for secure and reliable forms of identification for federal government employees and contractor personnel who access government - controlled facilities and information systems . subsequently , nist defined requirements for such personal identity verification ( piv ) credentials based on “smart cards” — plastic cards with integrated circuit chips to store and process data — and omb directed federal agencies to issue and use piv credentials to control access to federal facilities and systems . in september 2011 , we reported that omb and the eight agencies in our review had made mixed progress for using piv credentials for controlling access to federal facilities and information systems.mixed progress to a number of obstacles , including logistical problems in issuing piv credentials to all agency personnel and agencies not making this effort a priority .