for example , the u.s . ( see app . ii for a list of all the factors study members identified that may hinder progress. ) of the 17 study members we interviewed about factors that may hinder progress , 14 said that insufficient funding can , for example , hinder their ability to manage restoration efforts , mitigate the effects of development and population growth , implement new projects , or effectively conduct existing projects . one study member said that development and population growth can be overcome with mitigation activities , but that these require funding . another study member said that insufficient funding leads to vacant staff positions and that the study member's organization is strained with small staff numbers . to examine the goals of the 2015 plan and factors that may hinder progress according to study members , we analyzed the 2015 plan to obtain information about the goals to achieve four themes in the plan . in the interviews with the 17 study members described above , we asked them “what factors , if any , may hinder achievement of the 2015 plan's goals.” more than one study member representative was present in many of the interviews and each representative in the interviews could identify as many factors as they thought necessary . as a result , the number of times a factor was identified — 54 — was greater than number of study members . we narrowed the number of responses to 11 categories by grouping together factors that were the same or were similar . this limits the study's ability to coordinate among the many agencies and programs working on restoration . another study member identified the effects of insufficient funding on a restoration project . specifically , a town received a study grant for a green infrastructure project near the sound , but the town modified the project because the grant was smaller than what the project needed . the project plan included constructing the building with permeable parking surfaces and green features , such as rain gardens , to help improve water quality . according to a town official , the town wanted to do more green features but because it received a smaller grant , the number of permeable surfaces and green features the town could build were limited . nine of the 17 study members we interviewed said that climate change can hinder restoration progress . study members discussed different types of effects that may be possible , such as affecting water temperature , weather , and sea level . for example , two study members said that warmer waters caused by climate change could increase the sound's susceptibility to hypoxia by increasing the risk of potential harmful algal blooms and the length of time low - dissolved oxygen remained at hypoxic levels . another study member stated that warmer waters can cause outbreaks of the naturally occurring bacterium vibrio parahaemolyticus , which accumulates in shellfish and affects the shellfishing industry . in addition , two study members said that changes in weather caused by climate change could cause an increase in stormwater and therefore the amount of pathogens washed into the sound ; another study member said that increased storm activity could destroy marshes .