there are various types of form 5500 filers . filers are classified as either single - employer plans , multiemployer plans , multiple - employer plans , or direct filing entities ( dfes ) . in general , a separate form 5500 must be filed for each plan or dfe . single - employer plans are plans that are maintained by one employer or employee organization . multiemployer plans are established pursuant to collectively bargained pension agreements negotiated between labor unions representing employees and two or more employers , and are generally jointly administered by trustees from both labor and management . multiple - employer plans are plans maintained by more than one employer and are typically established without collective bargaining agreements . dfes are trusts , accounts , and other investment or insurance arrangements that plans participate in and that are required to or allowed to file the form 5500 . however , labor , irs , and pbgc officials told us that , to some extent , they use all of the information reported on the form 5500 . in addition , pension researchers told us that removing certain information from the form , such as plan financial information , may limit their ability to use the form for research and statistical purposes . the administration's pension reform proposal includes a provision that would advance the reporting date for the schedule b to february 15 for certain large defined benefit plans . filers have a normal deadline of 210 days after the end of the plan year to submit their form 5500 reports . irs specifically stated that , with electronic filing , efast can validate filings as received , reject filings with errors or incomplete responses , and minimize or eliminate error correction using electronic correspondence . irs also stated its support for our recommendations to require the electronic filing of form 5500 reports , evaluate ways to better identify and track plans from year to year , and to modify the form 5500 to collect additional information on multiemployer pension plans . the last major revision occurred in 1999 , as part of a multiyear project , and followed labor , irs , and pbgc's evaluation of public comments on their 1997 proposal from employer groups , employee representatives , financial institutions , service providers , and others . this resulted in these three agencies , in an effort to streamline the form , replacing the form 5500 , form 5500-c , and form 5500-r with one form 5500 ( the current form ) to be used by all filers as well as more detailed schedules customized to each filer's type of plan . in addition , the revisions eliminated duplicate or obsolete items . since 1999 , other annual revisions have included clarifying the form 5500 , its schedules , and instructions ; adding items on employee stock ownership plans , frozen plans , and floor offset plans ; removing items concerning delinquent participant contributions and fringe benefit plans ; and changing the small plan audit requirements . other changes have been proposed that relate to information associated with the form 5500 . in january 2005 , the secretary of labor announced the administration's proposal to improve retirement security .