this is incorrect . as stated in our report , we identified a potential weakness that could lead to releases of fraudulent refunds . irs also reported that it was aware that some refunds are released by assistors prior to the case being closed . further , irs maintains that its current methods are sufficient for detecting such errors and the problem is not widespread . however , as we noted , our review of both sets of data that irs provided do not include sufficient information for irs to determine the extent to which the problem exists or the total number of erroneous refunds . after several discussions with irs officials about the weaknesses we identified in the data , officials acknowledged these weaknesses and explained that they generated some of these data in response to our findings . nevertheless , officials maintained that their current methods are sufficient . we stand by our finding that the data irs provided are not sufficient to monitor how often and why assistors are releasing refunds before idt or duplicate return cases are closed , and we believe that the associated recommendation is warranted . in response to our draft report , in january 2017 officials provided another analysis of irs data that they said showed this type of error does occur but may not be as widespread as the discussion group participants suggested . we will continue to work with irs to determine if these additional data are sufficient to address our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the commissioner of internal revenue , the secretary of the treasury , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or lucasjudyj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . our objectives in this report were to assess how well the internal revenue service ( irs ) provided customer service compared to its performance in prior years and describe what is known about the cost of calls on selected irs telephone lines ; how well irs processed individual income tax returns compared to its performance in prior years ; and irs's efforts to improve customer service for ( idt ) victims , including selected internal control processes . in early february , irs experienced a major system failure that prevented it from processing returns and prevented taxpayers from accessing several online tools , including “where's my refund ? ” in mid - may , a number of critical systems used to process returns shut down shortly before a milestone date irs set for itself to complete return processing . irs returned these systems to full operation in time to meet its targets as planned . while still able to process returns and refunds smoothly , irs officials characterized some aspects of the filing season as challenging , noting they struggled to hire in certain processing sites and for specific seasonal jobs .