this care is provided at no cost . formerly deployed dod civilians with mental health conditions related to their deployment can also elect to get treatment outside an mtf and get their care reimbursed , or seek care through their regular health insurance if the health plan will cover the treatment . dod has established , in regulation and policy , tricare prime access standards related to various aspects of dod mental health care , including appointment wait times . in addition to the general dph role to assess and refer reservists to community mental health resources , air force reserve dphs can also provide some clinical services , according to an air force reserve official . the official told us that the air force reserve dphs are clinical social workers who are licensed , credentialed , and privileged to work in military hospitals and clinics . the same official stated that while these dphs provide referrals and are mostly engaged in prevention efforts , the dphs can provide some clinical services for reservists , which are then documented as such in the reservists' electronic medical records . an air force reserve official noted that as of august 2015 , there were 30 dphs embedded in wings where the air force reserve saw the greatest need , and the official said that the air force reserve is likely to get additional dphs in the future . a navy official stated that the navy and marine corps reserve psychological health outreach program teams , in their roles as dphs , have instituted a resiliency check - in program that provides navy and marine corps reservists with check - in screenings with a mental health provider , information on local community mental health resources , and case management as needed following the screening . the official , who is responsible for the psychological health of navy and marine reserve forces , credited the program with helping destigmatize mental health care . according to the official , these 12 regionally embedded psychological health outreach program teams are composed of 4-5 licensed mental health professionals led by regional dphs who service all of the navy and marine corps reserve sites using various forms of communication and annual site visits . for each resiliency check - in event , the teams typically schedule a minimum 15-minute appointment with each reservist to screen for psychological health and other needs . if a reservist is found to be in need of mental health care or have other needs that can impact the reservist's psychological health or unit , the teams provide the reservist with information detailing local health care resources ; the teams also follow - up with the reservist for as long as needed . data from dha's tricare operation center for april 2014 through august 2015 showed that mhs - wide , for appointments by active duty servicemembers in the direct care system , the mental health access to care standards were generally met for all domestic and overseas appointment types except routine appointments . the data come from access to care mental health summary reports , which measure access both in terms of the average percentage of appointments that met the relevant access standard and the average number of days to be seen .