it results in a shortfall of only 55,000 . finally , the third column shows a breakeven point . that is , we calculated that if the remaining commands' estimates turned out to be overstated by 17.7 percent , the shortfall would be completely eliminated . in general , the requirements data resulting from the manpower analysis agency's assessments were not available in time to be included in total army analysis 2007 . army force planners agreed that there were inaccuracies in the institutional requirements used in total army analysis 2007 , but the data were used because they were the best available . army planners told us that the requirements may be reduced in future analyses as the manpower analysis agency completes additional reviews of the major commands' requirements determination processes . although these officials expected these reviews to result in better data from the major commands in time for use in total army analysis 2009 , the army has no firm plans for adjusting requirements on the basis of these results . furthermore , the manpower analysis agency has made limited progress in reviewing the major commands . the army's original plan said it would complete all actions necessary to ensure valid institutional requirements by march 2000 . army officials determined that this goal was ambitious , and in the 1999 annual assurance statement the army revised the completion date for all manpower studies to march of 2002 . however , as of january 2001 , the manpower analysis agency had completed reviews of only two major commands , and army officials told us that because of staffing limitations and the volume of workload , they do not expect to complete their work by the scheduled date . in our 1998 report on the army's institutional forces , we noted that a lack of staff could delay the completion of the manpower analysis agency's quality assurance reviews . the total requirements ( 1.717 million positions ) and total resources ( 1.530 million ) reported in total army analysis 2007 do not accurately reflect the actual number of personnel needed by the army . this report addresses two questions: ( 1 ) does the army have a sound basis for its projected force requirements for fiscal year 2007 ? ( 2 ) what actions might the army take to further reduce or otherwise mitigate risks associated with any identified shortfalls in its war - fighting forces ? the total army analysis process has evolved from one that determined the requirements for and allocated authorized personnel to units involved in war - fighting to one that does this for the entire army . this analysis includes units required to fight two major - theater wars , forces needed to meet treaty requirements , and the institutional forces needed to augment and support these operations . the army's expanded analysis is an acknowledgment that its entire force structure supports its war - fighting element in one way or another . to quantify and communicate these requirements , total army analysis 2007 determined the forces it needs by summing its requirements in five categories: war - fighting — this category includes combat and support forces that would deploy to fight two nearly simultaneous major theater wars .