iv . labor disagreed with our recommendation to establish specific , measurable goals for industries in which most children work and in which they are most likely to be injured or killed . the agency noted that whd's draft fiscal year 2003 performance plan includes specific goals for the industries that employ the most children . one goal , for example , is to decrease the percentage of grocery stores and full - service restaurants with repeat child labor violations by 2 percent . we think these are positive steps and have revised our report to reflect these efforts . however , the draft performance plan does not include goals for other industries because labor does not believe there are sufficient numbers of children working in these industries to justify setting such goals . we believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children . for example , there are no specific goals for construction , which has high fatality and injury rates . labor also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods of measuring the success of its child labor compliance efforts . in this regard , labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores , full - service restaurants , and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004 . while we are encouraged by this step , labor has not developed methods of measuring the success of other child labor compliance efforts , particularly its education and outreach activities , which , admittedly , are difficult to evaluate . in addition , it has not conducted child labor compliance surveys of other industries . finally , labor took issue with our recommendation to routinely obtain data from bls and niosh on the industries , occupations , and locations in which children work and sustain injuries and use them to target whd's child labor compliance efforts . labor maintains that it does routinely use such data . however , we found that whd has no procedures for routinely collecting data from bls and niosh to plan its child labor enforcement efforts . moreover , the district offices we visited confirmed that they do not receive this information to use in planning their local child labor efforts . labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to take action on them . for example , it agreed to obtain and review data from the whisard database to better hold local offices accountable , explore the possibilities of collecting additional data through cps or nlsy , provide better guidance to whd's regional and district offices concerning penalty assessment , and provide training to whd staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database . labor also provided technical comments and clarifications , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of labor , the wage and hour administrator , the commissioner of the bureau of labor statistics , and other interested parties . copies will be made available to others upon request . this report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .