revenues . employers who did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap more frequently reported revenue declines than employers who received visas , according to our analysis of the questionnaire responses ( see fig . some employers reported that the loss of customers or contracts may have also contributed to these revenue declines . according to the questionnaire responses , 12 of the 14 employers who did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap reported losing customers and contracts in fiscal year 2018 . however , employers' experiences varied across industries , and other factors besides obtaining h - 2b visas may have also affected revenues . for example , seafood processing employers that did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap more frequently experienced revenue declines than construction employers that did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap , as the latter may have been better positioned to mitigate the loss of h - 2b workers . ( industry and location - specific factors from our case studies are discussed later in this report. ) purchases of goods and services . based on responses to our questionnaire , employers that did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap more frequently reported declines in purchases of goods and services than employers who received visas in 2018 ( see fig . employers' decisions to delay investments on their businesses may have contributed to declines in the purchases of goods and services . based on questionnaire responses , 11 of the 15 employers who did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap reported delayed investments in equipment or maintenance repairs . additionally , some also reported delayed investments in business expansion . corroborating what h - 2b employers reported , nine of the 12 supply companies we interviewed in our case studies said they experienced decreased demand for their services when h - 2b employers did not get visas or got them late . similar to their experiences with revenues , employers' reported experiences with purchases of goods and services varied across industries as other factors apart from obtaining h - 2b visas may have affected employers' purchases of goods and services . for example , more construction employers who did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap reported on their questionnaires that they could maintain their levels of purchasing goods and services than hospitality employers who did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap , possibly due to construction employers' ability to mitigate the impacts of not receiving h - 2b workers . employment of u.s. workers . based on our questionnaire responses , no clear pattern emerged among employers with regard to changes in the employment of u.s. workers ( see fig . mainly there is no evidence of a notable number of layoffs of u.s. workers among employers that did not receive all requested h - 2b visas under the standard cap .