the department agreed and did so . in 2008 and again in 2009 , congress mandated that defense and certain civilian agencies start providing annual reports on certain service contract actions . these inventories can improve agency insight into the number of contractor personnel providing services and the functions they are performing , among other things , and help agencies determine whether any of these functions require increased management attention . despite the increased reporting requirements , we have found that dod has not always used available inventory information to improve contractor oversight . in march 2018 , for example , we found that the military departments generally had not developed plans to use the inventory to inform management decisions as required . we did not make any new recommendations at the time , noting that seven of our 18 prior recommendations related to the inventory remained open , including a recommendation for dod to identify officials at the military departments responsible for developing plans and enforcement mechanisms to use the inventory . in its comments on our march 2018 report , dod stated it was committed to improving its inventory processes . a personal services contract is one that creates an employer - employee relationship between the government and contractor personnel . because such contracts could be used to circumvent the competitive hiring procedures of the civil service laws , the use of personal services contracts requires specific statutory authority . section 809 panel in its june 2018 report , the section 809 panel suggested eliminating statutory and regulatory distinctions between personal services contracts and non - personal services contracts to increase managerial flexibility in determining how to fulfill requirements . as of july 2017 , we could not verify how often dod awarded personal services contacts because more than one third ( 17 of 45 ) of the contracts we reviewed that had been designated personal services contracts in the government's primary acquisition - data repository ( the federal procurement data system - next generation ) were incorrectly recorded . dod concurred with our recommendation to address this issue and has taken steps to do so . as we found in 2017 , agencies need accurate information about their personal services contracts in order to ensure that they are supervising contractors work appropriately . we elaborate on these points below . the 2009 weapon systems acquisition reform act ( wsara ) included provisions related to requirements definition for major defense acquisition programs . in december 2012 , we found that wsara was helping program offices identify and mitigate requirements - related risks earlier in the acquisition process based on our analysis of 11 weapon acquisition programs . among these agencies , ofpp provides government - wide guidance on acquisition workforce issues , gsa's federal acquisition institute promotes the development of the civilian acquisition workforce , and the defense acquisition university provides training for dod's acquisition workforce . in 2007 , the panel found the federal acquisition workforce was understaffed , overworked , and undertrained . the panel also found that most agencies were not carrying out appropriate workforce planning activities and had not assessed the skills of their current acquisition workforce or the number of individuals with relevant skills that would be needed in the future .