we did not find these arguments convincing . every government agency involved determined that most of the work performed on the orders was out of scope . contrary to caci's assertion , our finding was not based merely on a comparison of the labor categories in caci's gsa contract and those in the orders' statements of work , but on the material differences between the services authorized by the gsa contract and the services actually ordered by interior and provided by caci . while some of the services involved information technology , that , by itself , does not mean that those services ( such as interrogation of detainees ) can be ordered from caci's gsa contract . the gsa contract is for the performance of certain commercial - type information technology services , not for any service that happens to involve the use of information technology . as noted in our report , the army officials we spoke with stated that the services were not information technology services . in addition , while caci's earlier orders from gsa's federal technology service may help explain how the services in iraq came to be ordered by interior , it is not determinative of the proper use of that contract in this situation . on the issue of the contractor playing an unusually large role in actions normally performed by government officials , caci defends its actions as being appropriate in the wartime environment . the intent of that section of our report is not to suggest that the contractor acted with malfeasance ; rather , we highlight the fact that , because the government officials did not exercise due diligence in carrying out their duties , the contractor was either allowed or encouraged to step in to fill the void . further , caci refers to our description of out - of - scope construction work and the drafting of the sole source justification as “incomplete and out of context.” based on our audit work with interior and caci officials , we found that caci intended to include the construction work on the order for intelligence services under the bpa . however , because subsequent decisions by caci contracting personnel and interior's contracting office led to a separate , sole source award , we revised the wording in our report to reflect this outcome . the contractor did — as caci's response confirms — draft a sole source justification for additional construction work . as stated above , we included this in our report to demonstrate how the contractor was encouraged to perform duties normally fulfilled by government personnel . caci questioned whether our findings on the lack of adequate contractor surveillance were well - founded . our findings are not based solely on our discussion with the contractor interrogator who had been located at abu ghraib prison ; rather , they are based on our file reviews and a number of discussions with dod officials . we are sending copies of this report to the director , office of management and budget , the secretaries of defense and the interior , and caci . we will make copies available to others on request .