in response , we conducted two projects . the first was a study that focused primarily on the data - sharing efforts of three programs as case examples.the second project , designed to provide a broader , governmentwide perspective , involved presenting a 2- day symposium on data sharing among benefit and loan programs . this report discusses the results of the symposium held june seventh and eighth , 2000 , in washington , d.c . the symposium focused on ( 1 ) how data sharing has improved the payment controls of benefit and loan programs , ( 2 ) how technologies are expanding data - sharing opportunities , ( 3 ) why privacy is a concern in a data - sharing environment , and ( 4 ) how data sharing can be advanced among benefit and loan programs governmentwide . the symposium speaker on this subject , david mintie , an automated systems manager with the connecticut department of social services , said that human services departments around the country have begun using this technology ( primarily finger imaging ) as it has become affordable and practical to reduce and deter fraud and abuse . mr. mintie explained that when the identity of an individual can be readily established and verified , benefit recipients are much less likely to obtain benefits under false or duplicate identities in more than one city or state . moreover , because the individual's identity can be verified before benefits are paid out , biometric identification can prevent improper payments from being made , not merely identify instances in which improper payments have already been made . in 3 years of operation , one type of biometric identification , finger imaging , prevented $23 million in improper payments in connecticut and $297 million in new york . ssa uses this network to electronically transfer data used in computer matches and to receive and respond to queries at periodic intervals . ssa is also using this network for on - line , direct access . ssa plans to have on - line access to ocse's ndnh data in january of 2001 and hopes to stop many ssi overpayments stemming from undisclosed wages by requiring its field staff to check the ndnh database for undisclosed wages before issuing the first check to newly eligible ssi recipients . ssa is also providing data on the recipients of its programs' benefits on - line to seven state human services departments that administer tanf benefits . according to an ssa official , some of these states are using ssa's data at the time of application to prevent overpayments to tanf recipients who failed to disclose that they were also receiving ssa benefits.ssa hopes to eventually expand on - line access to human services departments nationwide . we are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512- 7215 . see appendix ii for other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments .