change the organizational culture . while accountability is essential , agencies need to address managers' and supervisors' concerns that employees will view the use of some flexibilities , such as recruiting incentives or rewarding high performers , as unfair , and the belief that all employees must be treated essentially the same regardless of performance and agency needs . managers should be encouraged to selectively use flexibilities based on clearly defined , well documented , and transparent guidelines . while we will continue our work in this area , our preliminary view is that agencies need to employ these practices to effectively take advantage of the new authorities that are proposed in the legislation under consideration today . working with the subcommittee and agencies , we are doing additional work to validate the list of practices and to identify specific examples of where an agency has successfully developed and employed each listed practice . our hope is that this work will be helpful to agencies as they seek to maximize the use of personnel authorities — both those available under current law and regulation , and those additional authorities that may be granted in the future . key provisions of the federal human capital act represent an important next step to helping agencies address their human capital management challenges . i appreciate the opportunity that the subcommittee provided to my staff and me to offer input as the legislation was being initially crafted . streamline the administrative processes . agencies should streamline administrative processes for using flexibilities and review self - imposed constraints that may be excessively process - oriented . human resource directors said that managers often complain that complicated forms and multiple approval levels hamper the use of flexibilities . in the absence of a simple process , busy supervisors and managers may not make the effort to seek the approval to use a flexibility . reengineering self - imposed processes could yield substantial opportunities for the additional use of flexibilities . to the extent that agencies identify regulatory or statutory barriers to flexible human capital approaches , they should work with opm and omb to seek the necessary regulatory or statutory changes . build accountability into the system . while designating a chief human capital officer is a very positive step , it should not in any way be seen as reducing the responsibilities that the agency's highest leadership has for human capital issues . in knowledge - based organizations , including most federal agencies , where people are the organization's most important asset , attention to the organization's human capital is one of the primary responsibilities of the head of that organization . creating a chief human capital officer council , modeled on the chief financial officer and the chief information officer councils , also is a very good idea in my view . we have reported in the past that the use of councils to develop and implement initiatives to address federal management issues and to serve as “communities of interest” to , among other things , share best practices , was one of the major positive public management developments over the past decade .