this is true . we made no changes to the report because we had already described these schedules and dates . in making our recommendation , we recognized that progress had been made in ensuring that data would be available for monitoring compliance . however , we had not received schedules or documented plans for ensuring that the processes for monitoring compliance using data from these and other systems would be in place when needed . second , the cdfi fund also said that it and irs took steps to expedite investments in cdes and build investor confidence , such as irs incorporating a “look back provision” in its regulations so that investors could claim tax credits for certain investments made before the cde entered into an allocation agreement , and the cdfi fund releasing draft versions of the allocation agreement template so that potential investors in cdes could understand the terms and conditions before an allocation agreement was finalized . although we did not have evidence that investor confidence was built , we agree that both agencies took steps to offset the delays in finalizing allocation agreements . would the low - income communities have had more or less economic development due to business growth ? further , program effectiveness is difficult to measure when the program is small relative to total economic activity within the geographic area of interest . these challenges will be particularly problematic for the nmtc program because 36 percent of the u.s. population and 39 percent of the census tracts are eligible . many of the eligible communities would already have significant business activities that could mask the nmtc impacts . in part due to these challenges and the amount of expertise needed to deal with them , cdfi fund officials have decided to contract for evaluation services . cdfi fund officials expect to have a contractor design and implement an nmtc program evaluation . officials plan to issue a request for proposals in summer 2004 and hire a contractor in early fiscal year 2005 . cdfi fund officials have not yet developed the statement of work for the contract and do not have an expected completion date for the evaluation design or the study itself . cdfi fund officials note that since initial investments under the program will not likely begin until 2004 ( as described above ) , program results will not be available for evaluation until enough time elapses for the investments to generate an effect . to assist the contractor , the cdfi fund is collecting significant amounts of data that officials believe may be useful for the evaluation . additionally , the cdfi fund requires cdes to maintain additional records . according to cdfi fund officials , data on whether an investment recipient ( a qalicb ) is minority - or woman - owned are to be captured by the cdfi fund data systems for all cde allocatees specifically for evaluation purposes . in addition , cdfi fund officials said that some of the other data collected from cde allocatees through these data systems could be useful to future evaluators , for example , the location and type of investments made , the type of business receiving the investment , and the gross revenues of the business .