gao - 12-666t . washington , d.c.: april 24 , 2012 it supply chain: national security - related agencies need to better address risks . gao - 12-361 . washington , d.c.: march 23 , 2012 . critical infrastructure protection: cybersecurity guidance is available , but more can be done to promote its use . the threat of economic espionage is not new . in april 1992 , we testified that the theft of u.s. proprietary information or technology by foreign companies has long been a part of the competitive business environment . we also testified that the unauthorized acquisition of u.s. proprietary or other information by foreign governments to advance their countries' economic position was growing . today , this threat continues to grow . according to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the theft of intellectual property ( ip ) — products of human intelligence and creativity — is a growing threat which is heightened by the rise of the use of digital technologies . the increasing dependency upon information technology ( it ) systems and networked operations pervades nearly every aspect of our society . in particular , increasing computer interconnectivity — most notably growth in the use of the internet — has revolutionized the way that our government , our nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . while bringing significant benefits , this dependency can also create vulnerabilities to cyber - based threats . cyber attacks are one way that threat actors — whether nations , companies , or criminals — can target the intellectual property and other sensitive information of federal agencies and american businesses . according to the office of the national counterintelligence executive , sensitive u.s. economic information and technology are targeted by intelligence services , private sector companies , academic and research institutions , and citizens of dozens of countries . to help address this threat , federal agencies have a key role to play in law enforcement , deterrence , and information sharing . underscoring the importance of this issue , we have designated federal information security as a high - risk area since 1997 and in 2003 expanded this area to include protecting computerized systems supporting our nation's critical infrastructure . in my testimony today , i will describe ( 1 ) cyber threats facing the nation's systems , ( 2 ) reported cyber incidents and their impacts , ( 3 ) security controls and other techniques available for reducing risk , and ( 4 ) the responsibilities of key federal entities in support of improving the protection of intellectual property . in preparing this statement in june 2012 , we relied on our previous work in these areas . ( please see the related gao products in appendix ii. ) these products contain detailed overviews of the scope and methodology we used . we also reviewed relevant reports from the department of justice and office of the national counterintelligence executive , and information on security incidents , including those involving economic espionage , from the u.s. computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) , media reports , and other publicly available sources . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .