loans . these are funds that are borrowed and must be repaid , with interest . perkins loan . low interest — 5 percent — loans made through participating schools to undergraduate and graduate students . interest does not accrue while the student is enrolled at least half - time in an eligible program . priority is given to students who have exceptional federally defined need . undergraduate students can borrow up to $5,500 annually , and graduate students can borrow up to $8,000 annually . however , this question is not used to determine federal aid eligibility , and students do not have to make this decision until they decide to enroll in college . education has recently announced plans to make changes to the online fafsa that are designed to encourage applicants to complete the application process . for example , in january 2010 , education plans to begin providing status indicators throughout the application that will inform students of their progress in completing the fafsa . skip - logic design . several participants praised the online fafsa feature — known as skip - logic — which allows applicants to bypass some questions that are not relevant to their student aid eligibility , based on their answers to previous questions . education's recent expansion of skip - logic now allows applicants to bypass a selective service registration question unless they are male and younger most dependency questions if they are at least 24 years of age or married , three homeless determination questions unless they are 21 years of age or younger and answered yes to a question asking if they are homeless or at risk of being homeless , and all parental data for dependent applicants who only wish to apply for an unsubsidized loan if their parents refuse to provide their data on the fafsa and refuse to provide financial support to the applicant . in addition , upcoming enhancements planned for january 2010 will allow applicants to skip asset information if they have low incomes and assets are not required to drug conviction questions if they are first - time college students , as federal aid eligibility is not affected by drug convictions that occur prior to college enrollment ; and the state of legal residence and date of residency question if they confirm that , for at least the previous 5 years , their state of legal residence is the same as the state on their mailing address . two participants recommended improving the skip - logic for financial questions by grouping together all questions requiring applicants to reference their tax forms and reordering the fafsa questions to match the order in which data are collected on tax forms . another participant noted that while skip - logic may be helpful for online applicants , it does not benefit the approximately 2 percent of individuals who complete the paper fafsa . content . many participants offered recommendations to streamline the fafsa's contents . a few participants suggested it would be helpful to know the extent to which each question is used in determining eligibility for federal , state , and institutional aid , since the value of information gained from particular questions may be outweighed by the potential loss of applicants due to the form's length .