overreliance on the internet to recruit applicants . overreliance on noncompetitive hiring authorities . adequacy of responses to executive order 13171 , hispanic employment in the federal government ; specifically , in several components that there was no evidence of specific recruitment initiatives that were directed at hispanics . nondiverse interview panels ; specifically , interview panels that did not reflect the diversity of applicants . according to eeoc guidance , barrier elimination is vital to achieving the common goal of making the federal government a model employer . once an agency identifies a likely factor ( or combination of factors ) adversely affecting the employment opportunities of a particular group , it must decide how to respond . barrier elimination is the process by which an agency removes barriers to equal participation at all levels of its workforce . eeoc's instructions provide that in md - 715 reports , agencies are to articulate objectives accompanied by specific action plans and planned activities that the agency will take to eliminate or modify barriers to eeo . each action item must set a completion date and identify the one high - level agency official who is responsible for ensuring that the action item is completed on time . in addition , according to eeoc's instructions , agencies are to continuously monitor and adjust their action plans to ensure the effectiveness of the plans themselves , both in goal and execution . this will serve to determine the effectiveness of the action plan and objectives . figure 3 shows the barrier elimination and assessment steps under md - 715 . our analysis of dhs's md - 715 2007 and 2008 reports showed dhs articulated 12 different planned activities to address the identified barriers , including 1 new planned activity in 2008 . of the 12 planned activities , 2 relate to recruitment practices and strategies , specifically implementing a departmentwide recruitment strategy and targeting recruitment where there are low participation rates . two other planned activities relate to the development of additional guidance , specifically on composition of interview panels and increasing educational opportunities . for each barrier , dhs identifies at least one planned activity — eight in total — related to collecting and analyzing additional data . according to dhs's 2007 and 2008 md - 715 reports , dhs's primary objective is to capture and analyze the additional data needed to link the barriers to the relevant triggers . in addition , of the 12 different planned activities , 5 involve collaboration between crcl and ochco . one planned activity to address overreliance on the use of the internet to recruit applicants calls for the development of an applicant flow tool to gather data on applicants , which would enable crcl and ochco to analyze recruitment and hiring results . according to crcl , its staff collaborate with ochco by evaluating and providing feedback on development of the tool . we have previously reported on the benefits of coordination and collaboration between the eeo and the human capital offices within agencies .