claims are remanded for several reasons . at the first stage of appeal ( oalj ) , remands are made when evidence needs to be developed further or when the appeal is withdrawn by the litigant or dismissed by the judge . at the second stage of appeal ( brb ) , remands are made to either owcp for the resolution of issues , such as the proper development of evidence , or to the oalj for reconsideration . officials at dol offered divergent opinions on why cases were remanded . some administrative law judges said claims are sometimes remanded to owcp because medical evidence submitted by dol's approved doctors was incomplete and required clarification or further development . brb judges said claims are commonly remanded to oalj for reconsideration because of certain legal deficiencies , such as errors in weighing evidence . however , several administrative law judges said that they believed that brb sometimes remands claims for further review by the administrative law judge to avoid the potential review of a brb decision by a united states circuit court of appeals , and others said that in their view , certain remands are the result of brb reweighing evidence , which is beyond the narrow scope of brb review . in 2007 , an independent program reviewer examined the number of oalj remands to owcp and concluded that further study of the causes of remands could help dol identify policies and procedures that reduce this source of delays . no study has been conducted to determine the causes of remands by any of dol's adjudicators back to the prior review stage , whether from adjudicatory bodies back to owcp or from brb to oalj , according to dol officials . at dol , we interviewed officials with owcp , oalj , and brb and officials and experts with niosh , the centers for disease control and prevention , and the health resources and services administration . we interviewed representatives from national organizations , including the national mining association , the united mine workers of america , and the national coalition of black lung and respiratory disease clinics . at the regional and local levels , we interviewed representatives of federal grant - supported black lung clinics , washington and lee university's black lung legal clinic , as well as miner - claimants and a range of local black lung stakeholders , including doctors , outreach workers , lawyers , and lay representatives . in our interviews , we collected information about factors that facilitate and hinder miners' pursuit of federal black lung benefits , including the availability and adequacy of relevant medical and legal services to miners . our interviews with dol officials specifically focused on the department's policies , procedures , and guidance for providing or assisting claimants with identifying such services , as well as their views on the effectiveness of such services in assisting claimants to develop sound evidence for their cases . our interviews with miner - claimants and local black lung stakeholders , including black lung clinic personnel , were organized as site visits to southern west virginia and eastern kentucky . the structure of the black lung benefits program creates financial incentives for claimants to appeal denials of claims .