that is , they issue their own brand cards . the individual then prepays his credit card account by about $8,000 , by transferring funds from his checking account to his credit card account through the bank's atm machine , or through on - line banking in the united states , or both . when the bank's system flags the prepayment , the individual tells the bank that he is planning to go abroad and wants to ensure that he has sufficient credit for his purchases . nevertheless , he prepays his credit card account several times more and gives the same reason for the prepayments to the bank . when the individual goes abroad , he goes to the bank's affiliate in a country known for lax aml laws and withdraws at least $3,000 in cash . he also makes a number of credit purchases from merchants who do not have electronic registers . an issuer offering comments on this scenario said that it subjects an individual to separate due diligence procedures for opening a checking account versus a credit card account . further , the issuer said that the customer would also be subject to limitations on cash withdrawals . we received documentation from one association . the other association did not provide any documentation , citing , among other things , confidentiality laws in these offshore jurisdictions as a reason for not providing us with the documentation . they also told us that they could not locate the paperwork with respect to the reviews they conducted on these offshore banks . we also interviewed law enforcement officials and asked the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) of the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) to analyze the government's database on suspicious activity reports ( sar ) and identify and quantify reports related to potential money laundering through credit cards . the actual examination of these entities focuses on the integrity of the data processing systems and internal controls of the entity . the patriot act required financial institutions , including operators of a credit card system or associations , to establish aml programs by april 24 , 2002 . issuing banks solicit potential customers and issue the credit cards . these banks carry the credit card loan and set policies for matters such as credit limits for cardholders and treatment of delinquent cardholders . these banks maintain all account information on the cardholder . in many respects , american express and discover card act as issuing banks . they also sign up the cardholder , settle the transactions , and maintain all account information on the cardholder . acquiring banks , also known as merchant banks , sign up merchants to accept credit cards . these banks settle the credit card transactions and maintain all account information on their merchant clients . american express and discover card also perform many merchant bank functions . for the most part , they sign up merchants directly , settle accounts , and maintain all account information on their merchants . third - party credit card processors process credit card transactions for the issuing or acquiring banks that contract with them to perform these services .