gao - 07-757r . washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2007 . ( see app . ii for a list of selected government corporations ) . according to public administration experts , a government corporation is appropriate for the administration of governmental programs that are predominately of a business nature , produce revenue and potentially are self - sustaining , involve a large number of business - type transaction with the public , and require greater budget flexibility than a government department or agency . under erisa , pbgc is also empowered to sue and be sued ; appoint and fix the compensation of officers , employees , attorneys , and agents ; and utilize the personnel and facilities of any other agency or department of the u.s. government with or without reimbursement ( with its head's consent ) . figure 1 illustrates some of the differences among traditional government departments / agencies , government corporations , government - sponsored enterprises ( gse ) , and private corporations . with the financial collapse of several large corporations over the past years and the passage of the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 , which outlined a framework for more effective corporate governance , many private sector companies have reassessed their corporate governance practices . although the sarbanes - oxley act is intended to strengthen the corporate governance of private sector entities , certain corporate governance elements from it may also be relevant to government corporations and government - sponsored enterprises . for example , corporate governance practices suggest that corporations headed by boards of directors should have people in place with the appropriate qualifications , independence , and resources to conduct their responsibilities effectively . ( see table 1 for examples of corporate governance practices. ) additional information on corporate governance practices is included in appendix iii . pbgc's financial outlook has improved since 2004 , when it reported an accumulated deficit of $23 billion , but pbgc still projects large deficits for its single - employer program . despite ppa's provisions to strengthen defined benefit plan funding , pbgc reported an accumulated deficit of $18.1 billion as of september 30 , 2006 . while pbgc currently has assets exceeding $60 billion , sufficient to meet its responsibilities in the coming years , the single - employer program has had an accumulated deficit for much of its existence — the value of its program assets is less than the present value of benefits and other obligations ( see fig . pbgc's board has limited time and resources to provide policy direction and oversight and has not established procedures and mechanisms to monitor pbgc operations . although pbgc's board members have met more frequently since 2003 , the three cabinet secretaries composing the board have numerous other responsibilities , and have been unable to dedicate consistent and comprehensive attention to pbgc . in fact , we found that between 1980 and may 2007 , a span of 27 years , there were only 18 board meetings , 10 of which were since 2003 . the three - member board is also not large enough to ensure diverse skills , such as knowledge in strategic risk assessment and management , are included to direct and oversee pbgc .