gao - 07-594 . washington , d.c.: may 24 , 2007 . workforce investment act: employers found one - stop centers useful in hiring low - skilled workers ; performance information could help gauge employer involvement . gao - 07-167 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 . they set up centers that varied widely . to reach the hard - to - serve target population , grantees used a variety of recruiting techniques , ranging from the conventional to the innovative . for example , some grantees conducted community walking campaigns using staff to saturate shopping malls and other areas where youth congregate . conditions in the communities such as violence and lack of jobs presented a challenge to most grantees , but they took advantage of the local discretion built into the program to develop strategies to address them . grantees and others reported that the participants and their communities made progress toward the education and employment goals of the program . however , a formal assessment of the program's impact , while under way , has not yet been released by labor . although labor originally planned to continue to add grantees , funding for the program was eliminated in the budget for fiscal year 2004 . employers mostly use one - stop centers to fill their needs for low - skilled workers . most medium and large employers are aware of and use the system and are satisfied with its services ( see fig 2 ) . regardless of size , just over 70 percent of employers responding to our 2006 survey reported that they hired a small percentage of their employees — about 9 percent — through one - stops . two - thirds of those they hired were low - skilled workers , in part because they thought the labor available from the one - stops was mostly low - skilled . employers told us they would hire more job seekers from the one - stop labor pools if the job seekers had the skills for which they were looking . most employers used the centers' job posting service , fewer made use of the one - stops' physical space or job applicant screening services . still , when employers did take advantage of services , they generally reported that they were satisfied with the services and found them useful because they produced positive results and saved them time and money . when employers did not use a particular one - stop service , in most cases they said that they either were not aware that the one - stop provided the service , or said they obtained it elsewhere , or said that they carried through on their own . despite the successes state and local officials have had since wia's implementation , some aspects of the law and other factors have hampered their efforts . first , funding issues continue to stymie the system . for example , the formulas in wia that are used to allocate funds to states do not reflect current program design and have caused wide fluctuations in funding levels from year to year . in addition , labor's focus on expenditures without including obligations overestimates the amount of funds available to provide services at the local level .