same as comment 4 . since the working group has not determined a formula and how pass use or other factors will be considered in such a formula , it is still not clear how revenues will be distributed beyond the first 3 to 5 years of the pass program . therefore , the long - term revenue distribution strategy is unclear . the potential problems with collecting pass use data are outlined in this report . accurate pass - use data will be difficult to collect at remote locations and many units within the agencies do not have the infrastructure in place to collect pass - use data . this may lead units to have inaccurate pass - use data or data largely based on estimates . since pass use revenue distribution will be tied to the pass - use data , units and / or agencies may benefit from submitting inflated pass - use estimates . all of these issues are potential problems with the collection of pass - use data . the following are gao's comments on the department of agriculture's forest service letter dated september 7 , 2006 . fs provided additional detail on the results of their inquiries to units that responded to our survey that they did not offer all six amenities required to charge standard amenity fees under rea . we have summarized this information on pages 27 and 28 of the report . in essence , fs officials imply from the results of their inquiries that many of these unit officials were not aware of the type of fees they were charging or the amenities offered for the fees charged under the rea authority when they replied to our survey . this new information would have to be verified to attest to its accuracy . the gao survey was sent to 467 fs ranger district officials directly responsible for implementation of the fee program , under rea . the results we reported are based on two opinion survey questions that we asked both fs and doi field - level officials to respond to . the first question asked if the unit officials believed recreation fee revenues are being used to fund the types of projects formerly funded with appropriations at their unit . the second question sought the officials' opinions about the extent to which they believe that recreation fee revenue will be used to fund the types of projects over the next 5 years at their units that would have been funded with appropriated dollars . we recognize that individual units do not have agencywide perspectives on these issues . also , the inclusion of these survey results in our report is not intended as a forecast of the future but rather as a way to share the perspective of the survey respondents responsible for the on - the - ground implementation of this program . no gao conclusions or recommendations were based on these stated perceptions . see table 9 for a list of examples . in addition , many of the unit staff we visited or who commented on our survey stated that recreation fee revenues are essential to providing services at their recreation areas that would not otherwise be funded .