for annex i nations , those reports are extensive . annually , each annex i nation is required to submit inventory data — in a common reporting format the parties themselves agreed to — as well as a national inventory report that explains how the data in the common reporting format were derived . the common reporting format calls for data for each of the six emissions sectors — energy , industrial processes , solvent and other product use , agriculture , land - use change and forestry , and waste — as well as for the data on the major sources that contribute to emissions from each sector . in keeping with its practice of reporting on its assessments of non - annex i nations' inventories as a group , the report for 2001 contained only limited details that could be linked specifically to mexico's inventory . in particular , the secretariat reported that mexico had improved its estimates of emissions from the energy , agriculture , and land - use change and forestry sectors . it also reported that mexico could further improve its inventory by establishing systematic procedures for preparing the inventory annually and by including estimates for the solvent - use sector . otherwise , the secretariat reported only generally on the results of the assessments of submissions of the 52 non - annex i nations' inventories . mexico's 2001 submission contained estimates for 1994 , 1996 , and 1998 . according to an epa official who is knowledgeable about mexico's inventory , the 2001 mexico inventory is of reasonably high quality , especially considering the limited resources mexico has dedicated to developing it . according to its submission , mexico followed the ipcc estimating guidelines and good practice guidance in preparing the inventory . the epa official further commented that mexico's 2001 submission is among the best of those of the developing nations , and in some cases — for example , in presentation of its carbon dioxide emissions data — is equal to those of some developed nations . on the other hand , according to that official , mexico did not ( 1 ) comply with the ipcc estimating guidelines in developing the land - use change and forestry sector data , ( 2 ) adequately estimate data for the three synthetic gases , or ( 3 ) provide adequate documentation explaining the inventory . furthermore , mexico developed its two inventories independent of each other , without establishing a process that would systematically make documentation and data additions and revisions as needed . consequently , in the opinion of the epa official , it was difficult for mexico to build upon its previous efforts when preparing its second inventory . as required for the 2003 submissions , the four developed nations categorized their confidence in their emissions data as either high , medium , or low . this is in contrast to the requirement that annex i nations submit data for all years , from 1990 to the present . similarly , the parties specified that non - annex i nations should report data for carbon dioxide , methane , and nitrous oxide and encouraged reporting of the other three gases — hydrofluorocarbons , perfluorocarbons , and sulfur hexafluoride .