gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . this process can take months . for its part , va took steps to make seriously injured servicemembers a high priority for all va assistance . noting the importance of early intervention , va instructed its regional offices in 2003 to assign a case manager to each seriously injured servicemember who applies for disability compensation . va had detailed staff to mtfs to provide information on all veterans' benefits , including vocational rehabilitation , and reminded staff that they can initiate evaluation and counseling , and , in some cases , authorize training before a servicemember is discharged . while va tries to prepare servicemembers for a transition to civilian life , va's outreach process may overlap with dod's process for evaluating servicemembers for a possible return to duty . in our report , we concluded that instead of working at cross purposes to dod goals , va's early intervention efforts could facilitate servicemembers' return to the same or a different military occupation , or to a civilian occupation if the servicemembers were not able to remain in the military . in this regard , the prospect for early intervention with vocational rehabilitation presents both a challenge and an opportunity for dod and va to collaborate to provide better outcomes for seriously injured servicemembers . in our may 2006 report , we described dod's efforts to identify and facilitate care for oef / oif servicemembers who may be at risk for ptsd . to identify such servicemembers , dod uses a questionnaire , the dd 2796 , to screen oef / oif servicemembers after their deployment outside of the united states has ended . the dd 2796 is used to assess servicemembers' physical and mental health and includes four questions to identify those who may be at risk for developing ptsd . we reported that according to a clinical practice guideline jointly developed by dod and va , servicemembers who responded positively to at least three of the four ptsd screening questions may be at risk for developing ptsd . dod health care providers review completed questionnaires , conduct face - to - face interviews with servicemembers , and use their clinical judgment in determining which servicemembers need referrals for further mental health evaluations . oef / oif servicemembers can obtain the mental health evaluations , as well as any necessary treatment for ptsd , while they are servicemembers — that is , on active duty — or when they transition to veteran status if they are discharged or released from active duty . despite dod's efforts to identify oef / oif servicemembers who may need referrals for further mental health evaluations , we reported that dod cannot provide reasonable assurance that oef / oif servicemembers who need the referrals receive them . using data provided by dod , we found that 22 percent , or 2,029 , of the 9,145 oef / oif servicemembers in our review who may have been at risk for developing ptsd were referred by dod health care providers for further mental health evaluations .