such actions include the following . we did not investigate these beneficiaries for fraud or abuse . dur: as mentioned earlier , states perform durs and other controls during the prescription claims process to promote patient safety , reduce costs , and prevent fraud and abuse . the durs include prospective screening and edits for potential inappropriate drug therapies , such as overutilization , drug - drug interaction , or therapeutic duplication . in addition , selected states also require health care providers to submit prior authorization forms for certain prescriptions of drugs because those medications have public health concerns , are considered high risk for fraud and abuse , or both . each state has developed its dur differently , and some of the differences that we saw from the selected states include the following: officials from certain states said that they use the results of prospective screening ( eg , findings of overutilization , overlapping controlled substance prescriptions , etc. ) as an automatic denial of the prescription . officials from the other states generally use the prospective screening as more of an advisory tool for pharmacies , which pharmacies can override by entering a reason code . as such , the effectiveness of the tool for preventing fraud and abuse in these states is more limited . the types of drugs that require prior authorization vary greatly between the selected states . in states where it is used , health care providers may be required to obtain prior authorization if a specific brand name is prescribed ( eg , oxycontin ) or if a dosage exceeds a predetermined amount for a therapeutic class of controlled substances ( eg , hypnotics , narcotics ) . detection and monitoring: even with effective preventive controls , there is risk that fraud and abuse will occur in medicaid regarding controlled substances . in those cases , the selected states may place the beneficiaries into a restricted recipient program . under this program , the state medicaid office restricts the beneficiaries to one health care provider , one pharmacy , or both for receiving prescriptions . this program only applies to those beneficiaries in a fee - for - service arrangement since managed care organizations are responsible for determining the quality of care treatments for their enrollees . in fact , one state did not have a web - based pdmp ; a health care provider has to put in a manual request to the agency to have a controlled substance report generated . program officials at the selected states said that their systems were primarily used to respond to requests for controlled substance information on specific patients from medical practitioners . none of the selected states compared all the prescribers of controlled substances to the dea authorization list to identify medical practitioners who are illegally prescribing drugs that they are not authorized to prescribe . although the pdmps generally capture the name and address of the patient , the controlled substance prescribed , the date of the prescription , and the identity of the prescriber , they generally do not capture the method of payment that the patient used . thus , the system will not differentiate between prescriptions paid in cash and those paid using health insurance .