va concurred with our recommendations . va has not taken sufficient action to strengthen protections for human subjects since we made our recommendations nearly 3 years ago although it has taken some important steps . ord has not revised its policy on human subject protections , and it has not established training requirements , in policy , to ensure that research personnel obtain periodic training . moreover , va has not established a mechanism for handling adverse event reports to ensure that irbs have the information they need to safeguard the rights and welfare of human research participants and it has not ensured that sufficient resources are allocated to support human subject protection activities . on the other hand , va has strengthened aspects of its human subject protection systems . orca developed a training program and conducted oversight activities by investigating claims of research improprieties or noncompliance and restricting or suspending four medical centers' research activities when it found evidence of serious problems . va also instituted an external accreditation program that has the potential to further strengthen va's oversight of human subject protections . in 2000 , we reported that we had found problems with va's policy for implementing federal regulations for the protection of human subjects . these problems included requirements for obtaining and documenting informed consent . for example , the policy requires use of a particular form to document a subject's consent to participate in research . this form calls for the signature of a witness , but does not indicate who may serve as a witness , to what the witness is attesting , or the circumstances under which a witness is needed . in its comments to that report , va indicated that ord was in the process of updating its policy on human subject protections and that it expected to submit that policy for internal review by the end of august 2000 . when we followed up in september 2001 , va reported that comments were being incorporated into the draft policy . in september 2002 , va reported that it was awaiting final review but has not issued its revised policy as of june 2003 . as a result , investigators , irb members and staff , and other research personnel do not yet have a clear , up - to - date policy to follow when implementing human subject protections . kristen joan anderson , jacquelyn clinton , pamela dooley , lesia mandzia , marcia mann , and daniel montinez also contributed to this statement . human subjects research: hhs takes steps to strengthen protections , but concerns remain . gao - 01-775t . washington , d.c.: may 23 , 2001 . consequently , va cannot ensure that research staff know what they need to do to protect the rights and welfare of human research subjects . in addition to the problems we noted with va's policy , we reported in 2000 that va headquarters had not provided medical center staff with adequate guidance to help them ensure the protection of human research subjects . va has made some progress in this area . for example , orca had begun distributing some information to medical centers in early 2000 .