biosense . cdc's biosense , which the agency describes as an early event detection system , is designed to provide near real - time event detection by using data ( without patient names or medical numbers ) from existing health - related databases . although cdc began using biosense data in late 2003 , the biosense application was implemented for state and local use in may 2004 . biosense is continuously being updated , and current plans for phase two of biosense development call for enhancements to begin in may 2005 . biosense is a web - based application that currently provides cdc and state and local users with the ability to view syndromic and prediagnostic data: specifically , defense and veterans affairs ambulatory care data , biowatch laboratory results , and national clinical labs data . initially , cdc also provided data on sales of over - the - counter medication , but these were later discontinued . biosense data are provided in the form of data reports displayed in various ways , rather than as raw data that can be input to analytical systems . although cdc uses biosense for a number of federal bioterrorism preparedness activities , biosense is not extensively used by the state and local public health officials with whom we spoke , primarily because of limitations in the data and its presentation . these officials stated that the dod and va data were not useful to them , either because they were in locations without large military or veteran populations , or because they could get similar data elsewhere . for instance , many of these officials have access to local syndromic surveillance systems , which better fit their needs because the systems have better capabilities or because they provide data that are more timely than biosense data . some of these officials stated that they would prefer cdc to provide data for them to conduct their own analyses , especially data from national sources such as clinical laboratories , rather than displaying the data on the biosense web site . according to cdc officials , they will provide raw data to public health agencies upon request , have increased the number of data sets available , and have expanded the scope of user support by ( 1 ) increasing communications with state and local public health departments in the use of and response to daily surveillance data patterns , ( 2 ) monitoring data during special events ( eg , a presidential inauguration and sporting events ) at state and local request , and ( 3 ) contracting with john hopkins university for development of a standard operating procedure for monitoring and using early event detection . national environmental public health tracking network ( nephtn ) . initiated in 2001 , nephtn is still in the planning stage . cdc is planning to begin development of the network in 2006 and implementation of phase one in 2008 . this initiative involves intra - and interagency collaboration among cdc and other federal agencies . cdc established a memorandum of understanding in 2003 with the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to coordinate activities relating to epa's national environmental information exchange network and cdc's national environmental public health tracking network .