iv ) . however ssa's guidance is broad and does not specify how a state administrator should fulfill these responsibilities . as a result , state administrators vary in the extent to which they meet their responsibilities . for example , whi ssa's guidance notes that state administrators are to administer and maintain the coverage agreement , the guidance does not provide detail on the types of activities that are necessary for meeting this responsibility — the types of activities that are necessary for meeting this responsibility — such as the frequency with which modifications should be reviewed t such as the frequency with which modifications should be reviewed t determine whether changes to public employers have occurred . we reviewed a nongeneralizable sample of 20 compliance checks completed in fiscal year 2009 that irs identified as having issues related to social security coverage agreements . in 11 of these cases , the public employer was not covered under the state's social security coverage agreement . in 6 of the other cases in which the state or local government employer was actually covered under the state's coverage agreement , irs found that the employer did not have a copy of its modification and in one of these cases , the employer did not know one was in effect . in another case , a school district that was covered under its state agreement dissolved , and then combined with another school district that also was subject to a modification . the school district being reviewed was not certain if the coverage agreement was still in effect and planned to contact the state social security administrator to determine if a new modification was necessary . irs also has the authority to conduct examinations of public employers' records to determine the correct tax liability . unlike compliance checks , examinations are in - depth , formal audits that may result in a tax assessment . examinations review many areas , including proper social security withholding , fringe benefits , and public retirement systems . for each examination , the irs examiner is supposed to obtain information about the applicable social security coverage agreement and determine the employees that are covered . in making its coverage determination , irs examiners have to review employer records and may informally contact the state administrators and ssa . figure 7 shows the basic procedures irs uses to determine if public employees are covered by social security or medicare . generally , examinations are performed on larger public employers , and took an average of almost 9 months in fiscal year 2009 to complete . if errors are found , irs can either make a tax assessment for the amount owed by the employer or , among other things , refund an overpayment . generally , irs does not provide information about its enforcement activities to ssa or state administrators . irs is subject to statutory provisions that generally prevent it from disclosing taxpayer information unless there is an exception authorizing disclosure in the law . one such exception is for purposes of administering certain portions of the social security act , in which case the information can be disclosed to ssa upon a written request .