3 of this report ) . our analysis showed that the arp staff made at least 22 recommendations to address significant weaknesses in the 9 organizations' physical or information system security or business continuity planning efforts — including 10 recommendations to address significant weaknesses at organizations critical to the functioning of the markets . for example , in an examination conducted in 2000 , arp staff found that personnel at one exchange did not have consistent information system security practices across the organization and lacked a centrally administered , consolidated information system security policy . in addition , although sec recommends that organizations subject to arp have vulnerability assessments performed on their information systems , arp staff found that this exchange had not assessed its information systems . in three other reviews , the arp staff found that the organizations had not complied with arp policy expectations to fully test their contingency plans . arp staff noted other significant weaknesses , including inadequate bcps or backup facilities . arp staff said that they considered all the recommendations they make to be significant , including the 74 recommendations made in these 10 reports . these recommendations will remain open until the next time the arp staff review the organization and can assess whether they have been acted upon . because the arp program was established through a policy statement and compliance is voluntary , sec lacks specific rules that it can use to gain improved responsiveness to recommendations to the exchanges and clearing organizations subject to app . sec staff explained that they chose not to use a rule to implement arp because rules can become obsolete and having voluntary guidance provides them with flexibility . sec staff also told us that an organization's failure to follow arp expectations could represent a violation of the general requirement that exchanges maintain the ability to operate , and therefore they could take action under that authority . however , they noted that the use of such authority is rare . however , sec has issued a rule requiring the most active ecns to comply with all the arp program's standards . in 1998 , sec issued a regulation that subjected alternative trading systems such as ecns to increased regulatory scrutiny because of their increasing importance to u.s. securities markets . included in this regulation was a rule that required ecns whose trading volumes exceeded certain thresholds to comply with the same practices as those contained in the arp policy statements . in its explanation of the regulation , sec noted that its arp guidelines are intended to ensure that short - term cost cutting by registered exchanges does not jeopardize the operation of the securities markets , and therefore it was extending these requirements to the ecns because of their potential to disrupt the securities markets . we previously recommended that sec develop formal criteria for assessing exchange and clearing organization cooperation with the arp program and perform an assessment to determine whether the voluntary status of the arp program is appropriate .