gao - 04-381 . washington , d.c.: april 5 , 2004 . washington , d.c.: december 30 , 2003 . small business contracting: concerns about the administration's plan to address contract bundling issues . gao - 03-559t . washington , d.c.: march 18 , 2003 . small business: trends in federal procurement in the 1990s . gao - 01-119 . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2001 . small business subcontracting report validation can be improved . gao - 02-166r . washington , d.c.: december 13 , 2001 . ( see app . ii for details on contract bundling activity reported by agencies. ) through our review of fpds bundling data , we found that much of the data are inaccurate , causing fpds to record more bundled contracts and actions than reported by the agencies to ofpp . for example , about 33 percent of fpds - coded bundled contract actions were also shown as being awarded to small businesses . by definition , a small business is essentially precluded from being awarded a bundled contract . according to osdbu officials at the departments of defense ( dod ) , veterans affairs , interior , health and human services , and transportation — the five agencies with the largest number of fpds - reported bundled actions in fiscal year 2002 — the inaccuracies in fpds were coding errors made as the result of confusion about the statutory definition of contract bundling , inadequate verification of data , and ineffective controls in the fpds reporting process . for example , through a review of interior's 80 contracting offices , interior's osdbu found that all had erroneously coded contracts as bundled . interior's osdbu attributed the coding errors to confusion over the statutory definition of a bundled contract . dod similarly had its military departments and defense agencies review the 109 contracts originally identified as bundled , and they determined that only 8 out of the 109 contracts met the statutory definition of a bundled contract . the 101 miscoded contracts were primarily the result of confusion about the definition of bundling and lack of controls and oversight in the fpds reporting system . inaccuracies in fpds data are a long - standing problem , which we have previously reported on — most recently on december 30 , 2003 , when we issued a letter to omb expressing our concern that continuing problems with the reliability of fpds data could adversely impact decision - making and oversight of the federal procurement system . we identified a number of examples where poor data limited our ability to assess procurement programs and found that many of the fpds data problems , including inaccurate data on bundling activity , were the result of confusion over information requirements , which led to data entry mistakes by agency contracting officials . we made recommendations to improve the reliability of fpds data . omb generally concurred with our recommendations and , as of march 25 , 2004 , are considering actions to respond to them . according to ofpp , the primary goal of its strategy — and the recent far changes — is to increase small business federal contracting opportunities .