those discussions were documented . if additional documentation was necessary to resolve differences of opinion , we obtained additional information from the agency . the two analysts reached agreement on all of the packets . to describe how , if at all , selected characteristics of epa's advisory committees changed after january 2017 , we analyzed information from the faca database , a publically - available database maintained by gsa . the database contains information about faca advisory committees that agencies , including epa , are required to provide . the initial scope of our review was the 22 committees in existence on march 31 , 2018 . of these 22 committees , we excluded from all of our analyses the four committees that were established after november 2007 because this is the earliest date of one of our analyses . we also excluded four other committees from the three analyses that rely on member appointment start and end dates ( committee composition , membership turnover , and regional affiliation ) because of missing or inconsistent data . additionally , we excluded some other committees from some of our analyses because of other types of data reliability issues or because of the nature of the characteristic . to assess the reliability of the committee data , we reviewed database technical documentation and interviewed gsa and epa officials to identify any potential issues with our planned analysis of the data , among other things , and determined that overall the data were sufficiently reliable for conducting analysis to describe changes in selected member and committee characteristics for our selected time periods . we discuss additional steps we took to assess the reliability of the data and data reliability issues with the faca database at the end of this appendix . additionally , appendix ii identifies which committees we excluded from which analyses and the reasons why . primarily using information available in the faca database , we compared changes in four committee characteristics across committees and changes in presidential administrations . specifically , we measured the characteristics before and after january 20 , 2017 , and compared them to similar periods before and after january 20 , 2009 . additionally , we also compared the characteristics to those before and after january 21 , 2013 , to provide context to our findings and identify any patterns over time in the data . the four characteristics we measured and compared across committees and changes in presidential administrations were: number of committee meetings for the first two characteristics , we compared across committees the percentage of members in the characteristics' categories on either january 19 , 2017 , or january 19 , 2009 , to a day about 15 months later ( either march 31 , 2010 , or march 31 , 2018 ) . for membership turnover , we compared across committees the percentage of members on either january 19 , 2017 , or january 19 , 2009 , who left a committee by about 15 months later ( either march 31 , 2010 , or march 31 , 2018 ) .