see app . iv for a discussion of the challenges related to assumptions and uncertainty we encountered during our attempt to use a model to predict freight mode shift from truck to rail . the varying quality and focus of assessments of project benefits and costs included in both tiger and hsipr applications resulted in additional work for dot officials in order for dot to be able to determine whether project benefits were likely to exceed project costs . for example , dot officials stated that dot economists for the tiger program spent 3 to 4 hours per application examining whether it contained any improper analysis techniques or other weaknesses , seeking missing information , and resolving issues in the analyses . for the hsipr program , a dot economist with subject matter expertise reviewed the demand forecasts provided by selected track 2 applicants , devoting significant time to assess the level of risk the uncertainty in these projections was likely to pose to the ultimate success of the project . in order to improve the quality of applicant assessments of project benefits and costs , dot economists identified limitations of the benefit - cost analyses submitted during tiger i and used that information to develop guidance for tiger ii . in the federal register notice for tiger ii , dot provided additional information to applicants regarding what should be included in assessments of project benefits and costs . this guidance included information on the differences between benefit - cost analysis and economic impact analysis , assessment of alternatives in relation to a baseline , discounting , forecasting , transparency and reproducibility of calculations , and methods of calculating various benefits and costs . as part of its guidance on assessing costs , dot noted that applicants should use life - cycle cost analysis in estimating the costs of projects . for example , dot guidance states that external costs , such as noise , increased congestion , and environmental pollutants resulting from construction or other project activities , should be included as costs in applicants' analyses . furthermore , applicants should include , to the extent possible , other costs caused during construction , such as delays and increased vehicle operating costs . fra also plans to alter hsipr requirements in order to increase the quality of information on project benefits and costs provided by future applicants . according to fra officials , while applicants to the second round of hsipr funding were presented with similar guidelines for assessing project benefits and costs as those provided in the first round , future hsipr applicants will be required to provide more rigorous projections of ridership , benefits , and costs and to revise their assessments of project benefits and costs based on their improved ridership projections . officials noted , however , that the process will be iterative and anticipated that models for the high - speed rail program will improve as domestic historical data on ridership becomes available over time . in addition , officials stated that fra plans to take steps to encourage consistency in the methodologies grant applicants use to project demand , benefits , and costs .