ry . economic systems inc. , a study of compensation payments for service - connected disabilities , a special report prepared at the request of the department of veterans affairs , september 2008 . in fiscal year 2005 , vr&e created a standardized presentation for the disabled transition assistance program ( dtap ) , which informs disabled servicemembers of the full range of benefits and services available to them once they leave active duty . vr&e has assigned rehabilitation counselors or contractors to present this information at dod installations and military treatment facilities . according to a senior vr&e official , vr&e is also increasing outreach to national guard and reserve servicemembers by providing information about this dtap briefing at required post - deployment health assessments . in fiscal year 2007 , va and dod began to share information earlier about seriously injured servicemembers , and vr&e now has access to a database that allows it to identify and locate them to facilitate early outreach . in fiscal year 2008 , vr&e rolled out the coming home to work ( chtw ) initiative nationwide . this key component of vr&e's early intervention efforts provides counseling to individuals on active duty pending medical separation and rehabilitation services to eligible servicemembers . according to officials , vr&e has placed 13 full - time rehabilitation counselors at 12 military treatment facilities to administer this program and initiate early contact with injured servicemembers . in addition to these 13 counselors , vr&e has designated one staff member in each regional office as the program coordinator . as of august 2008 , over 4,000 servicemembers had received counseling through chtw and 149 servicemembers who received rehabilitation services had obtained employment , according to vr&e officials . in another effort to provide services to seriously injured veterans early in their treatment process , vr&e has taken steps to develop a partnership with the cwt program at va . the cwt program works primarily with veterans that many vr&e regional officials said their staff had difficulty serving . such veterans might have a traumatic brain injury or mental health diagnosis , or may need more intensive support in the structured environment cwt provides . cwt's early intervention model addresses both employment goals and medical rehabilitation needs . also , veterans receiving services simultaneously from vr&e and the cwt program can continue to receive services from cwt even after vr&e education and training benefits are exhausted , according to officials . the 2004 task force noted the potential advantages of increased collaboration between vr&e and cwt . according to officials from both programs: vr&e refers veterans to the cwt program . regional officials at the four sites we visited said their staff refer veterans to this program when it is appropriate . vr&e and cwt briefed each other's staff at their national training conferences in fiscal year 2008 . vr&e plans to provide a 1-hour training session for vr&e staff on the cwt program via satellite broadcast in fiscal year 2009 . the department of labor is vr&e's primary employment services partner , and an effective relationship between these agencies is important in giving disabled veterans the best chance for successful outcomes .