gao - 07-1054 . washington , d.c.: september 18 , 2007 . is it well coordinated with similar programs ? targeting: is the program's distribution of benefits consistent with contemporary assessments of need ? affordability: is the program affordable , given the nation's severe budgetary constraints ? is it using the most efficient , cost - effective approaches ? effectiveness: are program goals clear , with a direct connection to policies , resource allocations , and actions ? does the program demonstrate measurable progress toward its goals ? is it generally free of unintended consequences , including ecological , social or economic effects ? does the program allow for adjustments to changes in markets ? oversight: does the program have mechanisms , such as internal controls , to monitor compliance and help minimize fraud , waste , and abuse in areas where these are most likely to occur ? data from usda's compliance share file indicate how producers — whether individuals or entities — are involved and whether they own a particular farm field or area of land for which direct payments were made . producers report they either ( 1 ) own and operate the farm ( “owner - operator” ) , ( 2 ) operate but do not own the farm ( “tenants” ) , or ( 3 ) are an owner of the farm ( “other owners” ) . our analysis of usda data found that ownership characteristics of land for which direct payments were made have changed from 2003 through 2011 , as shown in table 3 . moreover , we found that the ownership characteristics regarding the operation of land for which direct payments were made varied according to which crops were grown . table 4 shows these variations by crop , for all covered crops , corn , cotton , oats , rice , soybeans , and wheat in 2011 . our analysis of usda data found variation in the extent to which producers grew the crop associated with their base acres . table 5 depicts the results for each crop eligible for direct payments , as well as the totals for all eligible crops , from 2003 through 2011 . our analysis of usda data found that some producers chose to not grow any of the crop associated with their base acres in a given year — as they are allowed to do . table 6 depicts our results of this analysis , by crop , and the corresponding value of direct payments made for each crop . according to our analysis of usda data , 2,327 farms , or about 0.15 percent of the 1.6 million farms receiving direct payments in 2011 , reported all their land as “fallow” from 2007 through 2011 . that is , producers did not plant any crops of any type on this land in any year during this 5-year period , as they are allowed to do in accordance with planting flexibility rules . table 7 presents the results of our analysis , by state , of the number of such fallow farms in each state , including the direct payments received by producers on these farms in 2011 .