reconstituted gses . market participants and commenters , trade groups representing the banking and home construction industries , and community and housing advocates we contacted believe that reconstituting the enterprises would help ensure that they would remain responsive to market developments , continue to produce innovations in mortgage finance , and be less bureaucratic than a government agency or corporation . but they also advocate a variety of additional regulations and ownership structures to help offset the financial risks inherent in the for - profit gse structure , such as substantially downsizing or eliminating the enterprises' mortgage portfolios ; breaking up the enterprises into multiple gses to mitigate safety and soundness and financial stability risks ; establishing public utility - type regulation for the enterprises ( for example , limiting their rates of return ) ; and converting the enterprises into lender - owned associations ( creating incentives for mortgage lenders to engage in more prudent underwriting practices ) . privatization or termination . some analysts and financial commenters contend that privatizing or terminating the enterprises ( including dispersing key functions among private - sector entities ) represents the best public policy option . advocates believe that privatized entities would align mortgage decisions more closely with market factors and that the resultant dispersal of credit and interest rate risk would reduce safety and soundness risks . federal reserve chairman ben s. bernanke has suggested that privatized entities may be more innovative and efficient than government entities , and operate with less interference from political interests . elements of the proposals include introducing a transition period to mitigate any potential market disruptions and facilitate the development of a new mortgage finance system ; and establishing a federal entity to provide catastrophic mortgage insurance for lenders and help ensure that mortgage markets would continue functioning during stressful economic periods . we sought to assess each restructuring option in terms of its capacity to meet key housing objectives ( providing liquidity and support to mortgage markets and facilitating housing opportunities for targeted groups ) while also mitigating safety and soundness and financial stability risks . our analysis indicates that each option involves important trade - offs , which are summarized in table 2 . the table also identifies regulatory and oversight structures that might help ensure that any option implemented would achieve housing mission and safety and soundness objectives . while the table provides a comprehensive overview of our analysis , let me highlight some implications and trade - offs as they relate to the critical issues of safety and soundness and systemic risk . in some regards , a government entity may mitigate the safety and soundness and systemic risk concerns of the traditional gse structure . that is , it would eliminate the concern that publicly held profit - maximizing corporations would be able to operate with relatively low levels of capital and take excessive risks because of an implied federal guarantee that undermined market discipline . and , if a government entity were to focus on mbs issuances and not retain a mortgage portfolio , then it would be less complex and potentially less risky than the gses were .