( see fig . as of july 2012 , the united states provided less total third party liability coverage than china , france , or russia — the primary countries that have conducted commercial space launches in the last 5 years — according to published reports . these countries each had an indemnification regime in which the government states that it will assume a greater share of the risk compared to that of the united states because each country had a two - tiered system with no limit on the amount of government indemnification . by comparison , the united states caps government indemnification at $1.5 billion adjusted for inflation beyond the first - tier insurance amount . however , u.s. government coverage , in some cases , begins at a lower level than that of the other countries because u.s. coverage begins above the maximum probable loss , which averaged about $82 million for active faa launch and reentry licenses as of 2012 , and ranged from about $3 million to $267 million . the level at which government coverage begins for the other three countries ranged from $79 million to $300 million . if there are fewer launches , the cost of maintaining that capacity will be spread among these fewer launches , resulting in a higher price for each launch . to the extent that the federal government is a customer that relies on private launch companies for its space launch needs , it too could face potentially higher launch costs . although the number of commercial launches by u.s. companies has been lower in the past few years than in years prior , commercial space is a dynamic industry with newly developing space vehicles and missions . with the termination of the shuttle program , nasa has begun to procure cargo delivery to the iss from private launch companies and intends to use private companies to carry astronauts to the iss starting in 2017 . in addition , private launch companies have been developing launch vehicles that will eventually carry passengers as part of an emerging space tourism industry . both of these developments would increase the number and type of flights eligible for third party liability indemnification under csla . china , france , and russia had a first tier of insurance coverage that a commercial launch company must obtain , similar to the united states . the second tier of government indemnification varied for these countries: the chinese government provided indemnification for third party claims over $100 million . the french government provided indemnification for third party claims over 60 million euros ( about $75 million as of may 2012 ) . the russian government provided indemnification for third party claims over $80 million for the smaller start launch vehicles and $300 million for the larger soyuz and proton vehicles . for all these countries , their commitments to pay have never been tested . globally , there has never been a third party claim for damages from a commercial space launch failure that reached second - tier government coverage .