the costs were not adjusted for inflation . arc then aggregated the data from each state to produce an overall estimate of the cost to complete the entire highway system . arc uses this estimate as the basis for allocating funds appropriated for the appalachian development highway system . specifically , arc calculates each state's percentage share of the total cost to complete the highway system and distributes funding to each state accordingly . in may 2001 , gsa's data indicated that $4.58 billion in federal funds was required over the next 5 years to meet the repair and alteration needs of public buildings . ( 2 ) to what extent do the agencies' procedures for developing the estimates embody practices of leading government and private - sector organizations ? we did not independently verify the agencies' investment estimates , but we did rely on past reviews of these data by us and others that examined the soundness and completeness of the methodology and / or data used to develop the estimates . we incorporated findings from these reviews as appropriate . the amount of information we present concerning an estimate reflects the extensiveness of past reviews and does not imply that an estimate is better or worse than other estimates . for some agencies — arc , the army corps , epa , and fta — we did not have past reviews related to the estimates to draw upon . we reviewed agencies' documentation of their procedures to develop the estimates , but we did not verify whether these procedures were followed . we compared agencies' procedures with some of the capital decisionmaking practices used by leading government and private sector organizations that we identified and reported on in 1998 . this report focuses on those leading practices that relate to developing and using investment estimates . we included practices such as establishing a baseline inventory of assets , using cost - benefit analysis to identify economically justified investments , and ranking and selecting projects for funding based on established criteria . see appendix i for additional information on our scope and methodology . to determine what would be sufficient to meet the nation's demand for infrastructure services such as efficient and safe mobility and clean water is not simple . the investment requirements depend on ( 1 ) the supply of service — what facilities exist , their condition and maintenance , how efficiently they are operated , and how services might be provided other than through capital spending — and ( 2 ) the demand for such services by the public , which can be influenced , in part by the price charged for infrastructure services and the state of the economy . infrastructure investment estimates can vary greatly depending on the extent to which such factors are considered in investment calculations . for example , the investment required to maintain or rehabilitate existing facilities could differ significantly from the investment required to meet a specified level of service . moreover , focusing on the provision of service , rather than the condition of a structure or facility , can lead to the consideration of less costly , noncapital alternatives to meeting the demand for infrastructure .