data anomalies . for all three projects , the evm systems we assessed contained data errors or anomalies that could potentially distort the analysis of evm data . anomalies included , for example , reporting negative actual costs or reporting costs that are not tied to work scheduled or performed . the los alamos evm data contained both types of these anomalies , which may have distorted the results of data analyses by as much as $34 million , preventing managers from understanding the true status of project performance . according to project officials , the anomalies occurred primarily because los alamos had initially assigned costs to a general account , and waited up to several months before assigning these costs to the correct specific work activities . in another case , in a significant number of instances the contractor at hanford's river corridor closure project reported costs incurred for work activities performed that had not been scheduled to start until future years , skewing the reported performance results . the contractor explained that these data anomalies occurred because it had performed work sooner than originally expected — and therefore the work was not incorporated into the project's evm planned schedule in the periods for which it was actually performed . project officials at the site stated that they believe the evm information , as reported , correctly represents the project's status . as such , the summary - level evm data seem to depict a favorable schedule performance in april 2008 ; however , our independent analysis of this data shows that when we removed the value of the work that was started and completed ahead of schedule , the remainder of the originally scheduled work was actually behind schedule in april 2008 , and trends indicated that the variance was worsening . data on the availability of staff to perform future work was not always developed . for one of the projects we reviewed , the evm system lacked important information on staffing , contrary to gao - identified best practices . doe officials at los alamos' soil and water remediation project told us they plan to begin asking for staffing information from the contractor , and contractor officials stated they are setting up a staffing report within their evm system . without this information , project managers lack important information necessary for ensuring that they have , or will have , an adequate number and type of staff to perform the upcoming scheduled work . reliability of earned value systems is questionable . oecm has certified that the earned value system used to report performance for only one of the three systems we assessed meets the required industry standards . the evm system used by the contractor operating the advanced mixed waste treatment project — a significant portion of the solid waste stabilization and disposition project at the idaho national laboratory — has not been reviewed by oecm to determine whether it is compliant with industry standards , and contractor officials stated they believed their system does not meet the standards . in addition , oecm was in the process of reviewing the system used by the contractor responsible for the soil and water remediation project at los alamos national laboratory at the time of our review .