, steel ) . in order to determine the total quantities of acpvs that selected dod components purchased between 2011 and 2015 , we sent questionnaires to agency officials asking specifically about procurement quantities . we also reviewed contract file documentation that pertained to quantities obtained over that time frame and summarized the results . although we calculated a quantity for acpvs that dod components procured from 2011 to 2015 , the state information for vehicles it provided to dod was inconsistent with information provided by all the services . as a result , we were unable to verify the exact total number of vehicles dod components acquired over this time frame . for example , state and marine corps officials both reported vehicle quantities and contract numbers , but they were unable to provide task orders to validate those quantities . those inspections were similar to dia's . specifically , the contract files contained checklists for in - progress inspections of opaque armor , transparent armor , and roadworthiness , as well as vehicle components such as the engine , exterior , interior , operation / control , and special equipment / options . the files also contained evidence of final inspection armoring checklists completed by state personnel . state personnel inspected the vehicle's chassis , glass , serviceability , appearance , and roadworthiness . based on our review of in - progress inspections conducted by state , there were issues with vehicles ranging from problems with adhesive or fenders to a need to reseal transparent armor . lastly , there was evidence of final acceptance , indicating that any issues discovered in inspections were addressed , with both state officials and navy officials accepting the acpvs under these interagency acquisitions . according to a marine corps official , they deferred to state to conduct in - progress inspections of marine corps' acpvs procured through interagency acquisitions . marine corps identified the state contracts that were utilized to procure their acpvs and state provided evidence of final and in - progress inspections and acceptance for vehicles procured under those contracts . however , gao could not confirm that those inspection records correlated to the marine corps' acpvs in every case . the inspection records referenced vehicle identification numbers that linked to state's contracts and task orders , but neither state nor the marine corps were able to provide all the task orders required to corroborate these purchases . while this demonstrated that inspections were conducted for vehicles procured under these contracts , it did not allow verification that all the marine corps' acpv orders were placed under those contracts . army contract actions contained language and clauses for in - progress inspections as well as final inspections and acceptance , and army officials provided evidence of final inspections and acceptance of acpvs procured between 2011 and 2015 . however , army officials conducted in - progress inspections for a single procurement in 2011 . although the remaining army contract actions included clauses that allowed such inspections , the army instead depended on the vendors' certified quality control and inspection processes to ensure the vehicles were manufactured to specifications . the level of armoring depends on the expected threat .