donations . the smaller division i - a school revitalized a business relationship with the chief executive officer of a local private firm . this individual's prominence , in turn , encouraged financial support from the rest of the business community . substantial donations from fans and locally based corporations also enabled the school to add new teams and build facilities such as a new football stadium , a sports complex with a softball field , a track , a soccer field , and a planned olympic - sized pool . similarly , at the larger division i - a school , large donations helped the school to add teams and increase the capacity of its football stadium , build a new basketball and ice hockey arena , and upgrade locker facilities . by 1998 – 99 , ncaa had 1,041 members and naia had 339 members , 61 of which were dual members as of april 1999 , according to the ncaa . based on the number of teams and average team sizes , we estimated that these schools accounted for about 3 percent of male and 2 percent of female participants in 1997 – 98 . because dual - membership schools report their participation statistics to both associations , we counted their statistics only once to avoid double - counting the numbers of teams and participants . the adjusted participation statistics were used to calculate net change in number of teams , number of participants , and participation rates between 1981 – 82 and 1998 – 99 . to estimate rates of participation , we divided the total estimated number of participants for both associations by the estimated total number of full - time undergraduates enrolled at all 4-year institutions . to the extent that an individual student participated in more than one sport , our calculation of the number of participants may be overstated because these individuals are counted more than once in the statistics . in addition , some 4-year institutions are not members of either naia or ncaa , and they were excluded from our analyses . although we did not verify the accuracy of the statistics provided by the ncaa and naia , they are the best available data and are widely used by researchers to study intercollegiate athletic participation . to respond to the other three questions , we developed and administered a questionnaire to gather information from athletic directors at all 4-year colleges and universities that were members of either the naia or ncaa . we pretested a draft questionnaire at six schools and subsequently revised it based on their comments . in may 2000 , we mailed the final questionnaire to 1,310 institutions including 326 naia members and 1,040 ncaa members ( both active and provisional members. ) this included 56 4-year colleges and universities that were members of both ncaa and naia . by october 2000 , we had received 1,191 usable questionnaire responses for an overall response rate of 91 percent . in some cases , however , respondents did not respond to all applicable questions . the questionnaire asked athletic directors for the total number of women's and men's intercollegiate sports teams added and discontinued during the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 school - year period .