gao - 07-1257t . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2007 . influenza pandemic: further efforts are needed to ensure clearer federal leadership roles and an effective national strategy . gao - 07-781 . washington , d.c.: august 14 , 2007 . hsc did not comment on our recommendation and has not indicated if it plans to implement it . the national pandemic implementation plan required federal agencies to develop operational plans for protecting their employees and maintaining essential operations and services in the event of a pandemic . in our june 2009 report , we found that federal agency progress in pandemic planning is uneven . we surveyed the pandemic coordinators from the 24 agencies covered by the chief financial officers act of 1990 , which we supplemented with a case study approach of 3 agencies . we used the survey to get an overview of governmentwide pandemic influenza preparedness efforts . the survey questions asked about pandemic plans ; essential functions other than first response that employees cannot perform remotely ; protective measures , such as procuring pharmaceutical interventions ; social distancing strategies ; information technology testing ; and communication of human capital pandemic policies . although all of the surveyed agencies reported being engaged in planning for pandemic influenza to some degree , several agencies reported that they were still in the early stages of developing their pandemic plans and their measures to protect their workforce . for example , several agencies responded that they had yet to identify essential functions during a pandemic that cannot be performed remotely . and , although many of the agencies' pandemic plans rely on telework to carry out their functions , 5 agencies reported testing their information technology capability to little or no extent . the three case study agencies also showed differences in the degree to which their individual facilities had operational pandemic plans . the bureau of prisons' correctional workers had only recently been required to develop pandemic plans for their correctional facilities . the department of treasury's financial management service , which has production staff involved in disbursing federal payments such as social security checks , had pandemic plans for its four regional centers and had stockpiled personal protective equipment . by contrast , the federal aviation administration's air traffic control management facilities , where air traffic controllers work , had not yet developed facility pandemic plans or incorporated pandemic plans into their all - hazards contingency plans . we reported in june 2008 that , according to cdc , all 50 states and the 3 localities that received federal pandemic funds have developed influenza pandemic plans and conducted pandemic exercises in accordance with federal funding guidance . a portion of the $5.62 billion that congress appropriated in supplemental funding to hhs for pandemic preparedness in 2006 — $600 million — was specifically provided for state and local planning and exercising . all 10 localities that we reviewed in depth had also developed plans and conducted exercises , and had incorporated lessons learned from pandemic exercises into their planning .