since a u.s . marshal , chief deputy , and judicial security officer would be shared with the usms in hawaii and not be located in american samoa , personnel costs for this scenario are estimated to be approximately $0.4 million less than scenario 1 . operational costs ( reflecting the standard , nonpersonnel costs for operational and administrative positions ) under scenario 2 were estimated to be $0.5 million , or about $0.3 million less than scenario 1 . the operational cost differential between the two scenarios with respect to prisoner transport is unclear . while the usms did not specifically address information technology costs and other equipment costs with respect to scenario 2 , the same types of costs in scenario 1 would be involved if a computer network and telephone system would need to be established . with respect to space and facilities , if the usms were housed in the same court building as used for scenario 1 , rental costs should be comparable ( between $1.1 million and $1.3 million. ) if , however , under scenario 2 , the usms were housed in an office building rather than a courthouse , then the resulting cost may be lower than scenario 1 . additionally , to the extent that defendants are detained in the same facilities as in scenario 1 ( eg , the bureau of prisons detention facility in hawaii ) , detention facility costs should be comparable . funding for the federal judiciary and doj agencies derives primarily from direct congressional appropriations to each agency and funding for a federal court in american samoa would likely be funded similarly . in fiscal year 2006 , about 94 percent of the total court salary and expense obligations were obtained through direct judiciary funding . the remaining 6 percent was obtained through offsetting collections , such as fees . in that same year , about 95 percent of the total probation and pretrial services obligations were obtained through direct congressional appropriations . with regard to doj , in fiscal year 2006 , 96 percent of the u.s. attorneys' obligations to support district court activities were obtained through direct congressional appropriations and the remaining 4 percent were obtained through other sources , such as asset forfeitures . in fiscal year 2008 , usms used direct congressional appropriations to cover the expenses for staff hiring , payroll , relocation , personnel infrastructure , rent , and utilities . the office of the federal detention trustee funds 100 percent of prisoner detention , meals , medical care , and transportation . aousc funds 100 percent of the court security officers , magnetometers , and security measures at courthouse entrances . we are not making recommendations regarding whether the current system and structure for adjudicating matters of federal law in american samoa should be changed . also , given the multiple limitations on available cost data , we are not making any determinations as to whether the current system is more or less costly than the different scenarios for change presented in this report . rather , our purpose in reporting the issues has been to provide decision makers with information regarding the issues associated with potential scenarios for change .