a case that has not been completed . a case is considered completed once an immigration judge renders a decision . proceedings may also be completed for other reasons , such as administrative closures , changes of venue , and transfers . all cases awaiting adjudication . how does ocij assign and manage immigration court caseload ? how does eoir / ocij evaluate the immigration courts' performance ? to address these objectives , we met with officials from doj's eoir headquarters to obtain information and documentation on caseload trends , caseload management , and evaluation of immigration courts . to gain a better understanding of the operations and management of immigration courts , we also visited four immigration courts — arlington in arlington , virginia ; newark in newark , new jersey ; and two courts in new york city , new york . we selected these four courts to include courts varying in size , based on the number of immigration judges . at these locations , we observed court proceedings and met with immigration judges , court administrators , and attorneys that litigate cases before the immigration courts — attorneys from the office of chief counsel of dhs's immigration and customs enforcement and private bar attorneys . we also interviewed representatives of the national association of immigration judges , the american immigration lawyers association , and the american bar association , commission on immigration . for the first objective , we obtained and analyzed caseload data contained in eoir's case management system . to assess the reliability of those data needed to answer this objective , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , ( 2 ) reviewed related documentation about the data and the systems that produced them , including a contractor's report on data verification of the case management system , and ( 3 ) interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . for the second objective , we obtained and reviewed policies , procedures , and other documents about caseload management , as well as staffing data for fiscal years 2000 through 2005 . for the third objective , we obtained and reviewed policies , procedures , and other documents about the evaluation of immigration courts' performance . we also obtained and analyzed eoir's case completion goal reports for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 ( as discussed later in this report , our review raised questions about these reports ) and reviewed the relevant internal control standards for such reports . we also reviewed ocij's reports for court evaluations conducted in fiscal years 2000 and 2004 and eoir's data on complaints against immigration judges for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 . we conducted our work from march 2005 through august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . i for more details on our scope and methodology. ) under the authority of the attorney general , eoir interprets and administers federal immigration laws by conducting formal quasi - judicial proceedings , appellate reviews , and administrative hearings .