such problems are not new . in assessing logcap implementation during the bosnian peacekeeping mission in 1997 , we identified weaknesses in the available doctrine on how to manage contractor resources , including how to integrate contractors with military units and what type of management and oversight structure to establish . we identified similar weaknesses when we began reviewing dod's use of contractors in iraq . for example , in 2003 we reported that guidance and other oversight mechanisms varied widely at the dod , combatant command , and service levels , making it difficult to manage contractors effectively . similarly , in our 2005 report on private security contractors in iraq , we noted that dod had not issued any guidance to units deploying to iraq on how to work with or coordinate efforts with private security contractors . further , we noted that the military may not have a clear understanding of the role of contractors , including private security providers , in iraq and of the implications of having private security providers on the battle space . our prior work has shown that it is important for organizations to provide clear and complete guidance to those involved in program implementation . in our view , establishing baseline policies for managing and overseeing contractors would help ensure the efficient use of contractors in places such as iraq . dod took a noteworthy step to address some of these issues when it issued new guidance in 2005 on the use of contractors who support deployed forces . however , as our december 2006 report made clear , dod's guidance does not address a number of problems we have repeatedly raised — such as the need to provide adequate contract oversight personnel , to collect and share lessons learned on the use of contractors supporting deployed forces , and to provide dod commanders and contract oversight personnel with training on the use of contractors overseas prior to their deployment . in addition to identifying the lack of clear and comprehensive guidance for managing contract personnel , we have issued several reports highlighting the need for dod components to comply with departmental guidance on the use of contractors . for example , in our june 2003 report we noted that dod components were not complying with a long - standing requirement to identify essential services provided by contractors and develop backup plans to ensure the continuation of those services during contingency operations should contractors become unavailable to provide those services . we believe that risk is inherent when relying on contractors to support deployed forces , and without a clear understanding of the potential consequences of not having the essential service available , the risks associated with the mission increase . in other reports , we highlighted our concerns over dod's planning for the use of contractor support in iraq — including the need to comply with guidance to identify operational requirements early in the planning process . when contractors are involved in planning efforts early , and given adequate time to plan and prepare to accomplish their assigned missions , the quality of the contractor's services improves and contract costs may be lowered .