res code . certain projects in california have been excluded from review , however . see , eg , cal . pub . code . by comparison , massachusetts' sepa covers all projects undertaken or financially assisted by a government agency , including any authority of any political subdivision . mass . gen. laws , ch . minnesota requires an environmental impact study where there is potential for significant effects from major government actions , defined to include local and municipal agencies . minn . stat. , § 116d.04 , subd . 1a ( e ) . some states' sepas do not apply to locally managed and funded projects , for example georgia ( ga. code ann . § 12-16-3 ( 5 ) ) and maryland ( md . code ann. , nat . § 1-301 ( e ) ) . maryland's sepa also focuses primarily on providing environmental assessments to the state legislature . md . code ann. , nat . one state's sepa — north carolina's — does not apply to local units of government unless they elect to be covered . see n.c. gen stat . finally , sepas vary with respect to which project characteristics trigger an environmental review , as well as what type of review is required , and can include thresholds related to project costs and physical length , project use , and geographic area , among other things . these thresholds differ from the federal triggers for the type of review , which generally focus on the potential for significant environmental impacts rather than the scale or size of the project . for example , in virginia , reviews are required for state projects costing $500,000 or more . va. code ann . other dollar - value thresholds are built into the sepa requirements of the district of columbia , georgia , and new jersey . some states , such as massachusetts , require environmental impact reviews for the construction of new roadways 2 or more miles in length . 301 mass . code regs. likewise , minnesota requires an environmental impact statement ( eis ) for new road projects four or more lanes in width and 2 or more miles in length . minn. r. 4410.4400 , subp . minnesota also requires certain types of reviews for new roads over 1 mile in length that will function as collector roadways . minn. r. 4410.4300 , subp . new york's sepa does not apply to projects within the jurisdiction of the adirondack park agency , n.y. comp . codes r. & regs. , tit . 17 , § 15.2 ( l ) ( 3 ) , and no eis is required under the district of columbia's sepa if the project is located in what is known as the central employment area , an area including but not limited to federal government facilities . d.c. code § 8-109.06 ( a ) ( 7 ) . finally , some states , such as indiana , do not extend coverage to state licensed or permitted projects , see , eg , ind . code § 13-12-4-8 , while texas' sepa applies only to certain transportation projects .