we incorporated them as appropriate . in its written comments ( reproduced in appendix ii ) , dhs concurred with our recommendation and identified actions it has taken or plans to take to implement our recommendation . for example , as part of its fiscal year 2014 hiring plan , the national protection and programs directorate's office of cybersecurity and communications is establishing and expanding a new federal customer service unit within the united states computer emergency readiness team to better understand the circumstances and needs of the various federal civilian departments and agencies , including small and micro agencies . three agencies did not complete any assessments . the sixth agency was not required to perform an assessment because it did not maintain any systems containing personally identifiable information . regarding the three agencies that did not complete pias , officials offered a variety of reasons for why they were not conducted . iii ) , the federal trade commission acknowledged that improvements can be made in aspects of its information security program and described steps it has taken or plans to take to address weaknesses we identified . in its written comments ( reproduced in app . iv ) , the james madison memorial foundation reiterated that it is one of the smallest agencies in the federal government , with only three full - time employees and one half - time employee , and that it had operated since november 2010 with the understanding that the agency was granted an exemption from fisma by omb officials . however , the agency stated that it plans to take the necessary actions to conform to fisma requirements . the chief information officer for the national endowment for the humanities provided comments via e - mail on june 6 , 2014 . he discussed the usefulness of the report contents and noted that it was very much needed . in addition , he noted that gao's report highlights the lack of compliance with reporting requirements by small agencies and that these agencies may be struggling to meet all requirements . he further commented that large agencies , unlike small agencies , have dedicated it staff and that there should not be a “one size fits all” set of requirements for all federal agencies . however , while smaller federal agencies may not have dedicated it staff , we believe federal agencies , large or small , should perform an assessment of their risks and implement appropriate safeguards to reduce risk to an acceptable level . he also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the acting commissioner for the international boundary commission , united states and canada , provided comments via e - mail on june 5 , 2014 . the acting commissioner stated that he disagreed with our statement that all computer equipment within the agencies reviewed contained classified or sensitive information . however , our report does not state this ; rather , it discusses the selected agencies' actions to implement federal information security and privacy requirements . we believe our characterization of the weaknesses identified is accurate as of the time of our review .