in addition , the u.s . to prevent similar delays during the response to future disasters , atsdr officials are developing a questionnaire , known as the rapid response registry , to allow officials to identify and locate potentially affected individuals immediately after a disaster and collect basic preliminary information , such as their current contact information and their location during the disaster . atsdr officials expect that using this instrument would reduce delays in collecting time - sensitive information while officials take the time necessary to develop a monitoring program for disaster - related health effects . furthermore , officials told us that health monitoring for future disasters could benefit from additional centrally coordinated planning . such planning could facilitate the collection of compatible data among monitoring efforts , to the extent that this is appropriate . collecting compatible data could allow information from different programs to be integrated and contribute to improved data analysis and more useful research . in addition , centrally coordinated planning could help officials determine whether separate programs are necessary to serve different groups of people . for example , worker and volunteer program officials indicated that it might have been possible for that program to serve federal workers who responded to the disaster in an official capacity , which might have eliminated the need to organize and administer a separate program for them . officials also stated that screening and monitoring programs should be comprehensive , encompassing both physical and mental health evaluations . worker and volunteer medical monitoring program officials told us that the initial planning for the program had focused primarily on screening participants' physical health , and that they did not originally budget for extensive mental health screening . subsequently , they recognized a need for more extensive mental health screening , including greater participation of mental health professionals , but the program's federal funding was not sufficient to cover such screening . by collaborating with the mount sinai school of medicine department of psychiatry , program officials were able to obtain philanthropic funding to develop a more comprehensive mental health questionnaire , provide on - site psychiatric screening , and , when necessary , provide more extensive evaluations . many participants in the monitoring programs required additional testing or needed treatment for health problems that were identified during screening examinations . officials told us that finding treatment sources for such participants is an important , but challenging , part of the programs' responsibility . for example , officials from the worker and volunteer program stated that identifying providers available to treat participants became a major part of their operations , and was especially difficult when participants lacked health insurance . the officials said that planning for future monitoring programs should include a determination of how best to help participants obtain needed treatment . federally funded programs implemented by state and local governments or private organizations to monitor the health effects of the wtc attack on thousands of people who responded to the disaster have made progress . however , the program hhs established to screen the federal employees whose agencies sent them to the wtc after the attack has accomplished little , completing screenings of fewer than 400 of the thousands of federal responders .