we would be happy to answer any questions you may have . this could limit its ability to develop key partnerships . since its establishment was announced in early 2007 , africom has encountered concerns from u.s. civilian agencies , nongovernmental organizations , and african partners about what africom is and what it hopes to accomplish in africa . many of the concerns from u.s. government agencies , nongovernmental organizations , and african partners stem from their interpretations of africom's intended mission and goals . each of these component commands has a significant role in planning and supporting operations . on february 6 , 2007 , the president directed the secretary of defense to establish a new geographic combatant command to consolidate the responsibility for dod activities in africa that have been shared by u.s. central command , u.s. pacific command , and u.s. european command . africom was officially established on october 1 , 2007 , with a goal to reach full operational capability as a separate , independent geographic combatant command by september 30 , 2008 . full operational capability was defined as the point at which the africom commander will accept responsibility for executing all u.s. military activities in africa currently being conducted by the u.s. european , central , and pacific commands ; have the capability to plan and conduct new operations ; and have the capability to develop new initiatives . africom's mission statement , which was approved by the secretary of defense in may 2008 , is to act in concert with other u. s. government agencies and international partners to conduct sustained security engagement through military - to - military programs , military - sponsored activities , and other military operations as directed to promote a stable and secure african environment in support of u.s. foreign policy . since the president announced the establishment of africom , dod has focused on building the capabilities necessary for africom to systematically assume responsibility for all existing military missions , activities , programs , and exercises in the area of responsibility it is inheriting from the u.s. european , central , and pacific commands . for example , at a dod - sponsored roundtable , a group of u.s. - based african attachés identified their most pressing security issues were poverty , food shortages , inadequate educational opportunities , displaced persons , and hiv / aids , while they perceived u.s. priorities were focused on combating terrorism and weakened states . one factor contributing to persistent concerns among u.s. government agencies , non governmental organizations , and african partners is the evolution of how dod has characterized africom's unique mission and goals . between february 2007 and may 2008 africom's mission statement went through several iterations that ranged in its emphasis on humanitarian - oriented activities to more traditional military programs . according to an official from an organization representing nongovernmental organizations , the emphasis on humanitarian assistance as part of africom's mission early on contributed to their fears that africom would be engaged in activities that are traditionally the mission of civilian agencies and organizations . additionally , the discussion of africom's mission evolved from highlighting its whole - of - government approach to referring to it as a bureaucratic reorganization within dod .