pub . 112-96 , § 6206 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , 126 stat . firstnet is still determining how it will satisfy this requirement . as previously described , npstc published a report to provide guidance for firstnet as it constructs and implements the public safety network . npstc concluded that a “public - safety grade” communications system should be designed to resist failures due to manmade or natural events as much as practical , and that the public safety network must be constructed to meet as many of these requirements as possible . if firstnet implements all of npstc's best practices , though , it will significantly add to the cost of building the network . for example , transmission sites , such as cell towers , should have backup power sources when used for public safety communications , according to npstc . existing commercial sites , however , generally do not have such backup , primarily to reduce costs in extremely competitive markets . fcc , for instance , has reported that it could cost $35,000 per site to harden existing commercial lte sites . the public safety network's coverage will also influence the cost to construct and operate the network . the 2012 act requires firstnet to establish a “nationwide” network , but does not define the level of coverage that constitutes “nationwide.” generally speaking , increasing the area covered by the network , as well as the extent to which coverage penetrates buildings , increases the amount of infrastructure needed , and thus the cost of the network . it may be relatively affordable , for example , to cover large segments of the population concentrated in relatively small areas . for instance , one stakeholder we spoke with suggested that firstnet could provide service to as much as 25 percent of all potential customers by covering just the 8 largest metropolitan areas . providing coverage outside dense metropolitan areas can be particularly expensive . one study has shown that a nationwide public - safety broadband network would generally be profitable in urban areas and unprofitable in rural areas . this study demonstrated that a network built with a commercial partnership could cover 94 percent of the u.s. population and break even because urban areas could subsidize coverage in rural areas . although firstnet has various revenue options it is authorized to use to become self - funding , it is unclear how firstnet will use those authorities . as the cost estimates discussed above illustrate , firstnet's network will likely cost tens of billions of dollars to construct and initially operate . as also noted above , firstnet is required to be self - funding . to meet the costs of building and maintaining the network , firstnet may generate revenue through user fees and commercial partnerships , the latter of which can involve the secondary use of the network for non - public safety services . however , firstnet faces difficult decisions determining how to best utilize these revenue sources . additionally , regardless of the effectiveness of firstnet's use of these revenue sources , the public safety network will likely have net negative income in the first few years of operation .