citizenship and immigration services . when the privacy office was initially established , it had 5 full - time employees , including the chief privacy officer . since then , the staff has expanded to 16 full - time employees . as of february 2007 , the privacy office also had 9 full - time and 3 half - time contractor staff . the first chief privacy officer served from april 2003 to september 2005 , followed by an acting chief privacy officer who served through july 2006 . in july 2006 , the secretary appointed a second permanent chief privacy officer . the privacy office is responsible for ensuring that dhs is in compliance with federal laws that govern the use of personal information by the federal government . among these laws are the homeland security act of 2002 ( as amended by the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ) , the privacy act of 1974 , and the e - gov act of 2002 . based on these laws , the privacy office's major responsibilities can be summarized into these four broad categories: 1. reviewing and approving pias , 2. integrating privacy considerations into dhs decision making , 3. reviewing and approving public notices required by the privacy act , 4. preparing and issuing reports . the privacy office is responsible for ensuring departmental compliance with the privacy provisions of the e - gov act . specifically , section 208 of the e - gov act is designed to enhance protection of personally identifiable information in government information systems and information collections by requiring that agencies conduct pias . in addition , the homeland security act requires the chief privacy officer to conduct a pia for proposed rules of the department on the privacy of personal information . according to omb guidance , a pia is an analysis of how information is handled: ( 1 ) to ensure that handling conforms to applicable legal , regulatory , and policy requirements regarding privacy ; ( 2 ) to determine the risks and effects of collecting , maintaining , and disseminating personally identifiable information in an electronic information system ; and ( 3 ) to examine and evaluate protections and alternative processes for handling information to mitigate potential risks to privacy . agencies must conduct pias before they ( 1 ) develop or procure information technology that collects , maintains , or disseminates personally identifiable information or ( 2 ) initiate any new data collections of personal information that will be collected , maintained , or disseminated using information technology — if the same questions are asked of 10 or more people . to the extent that pias are made publicly available , they provide explanations to the public about such things as what information will be collected , why it is being collected , how it is to be used , and how the system and data will be maintained and protected . integrating privacy considerations into the dhs decision - making process several of the privacy office's statutory responsibilities involve ensuring that the major decisions and operations of the department do not have an adverse impact on privacy .