gao - 08-240 . washington , d.c.: april 25 , 2008 . supply chain security: examinations of high - risk cargo at foreign seaports have increased , but improved data collection and performance measures are needed . gao - 08-187 . washington , d.c.: january 25 , 2008 . maritime security: the safe port act: status and implementation one year later . gao - 08-126t . washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2007 . cbp did not indicate that it would systematically pursue information on these host government examination systems . it did state that it was working through the wco to address uniform technical standards for equipment . we reported that while cbp engaged with international trade groups to develop supply chain security requirements , these requirements do not specify particular equipment capabilities or examination practices . both the safe port and 9 / 11 acts require dhs to develop technical and operational standards for scanning systems ; therefore , the challenges that csi has faced in obtaining information about host governments' examination systems are relevant to the sfi pilot program and the 100 percent scanning requirement . however , as noted earlier in this statement , the united states cannot compel foreign governments to use specific equipment for the sfi pilot program or the 100 percent scanning requirement , thus challenging cbp's ability to set and enforce standards . in addition , because cbp does not systematically collect information on the efficacy of host governments' examinations systems , it lacks reasonable assurance that these examinations could reliably detect and identify wmd unless it implements our january 2008 recommendation to determine actions to take to ensure the desired level of security . this is particularly important since currently , under csi , most high - risk cargo containers examined at international seaports are not re - examined upon arrival at domestic seaports . in our reviews of the csi and c - tpat programs , we identified challenges with cbp's ability to measure program performance because of , among other things , the difficulty in determining whether these programs were achieving their desired result of increasing security for the united states . in the past , we and the office of management and budget ( omb ) have acknowledged the difficulty in developing outcome - based performance measures for programs that aim to deter or prevent specific behaviors . in the case of c - tpat , we noted in our march 2005 and april 2008 reports that cbp had not developed a comprehensive set of performance measures and indicators for the programs , such as outcome - based measures , to monitor the status of program goals . a senior cbp official stated that developing these measures for c - tpat , as well as other cbp programs , has been difficult because cbp lacks the data necessary to determine whether a program has prevented or deterred terrorist activity . we recommended that cbp complete the development of performance measures , to include outcome - based measures and performance targets , to track the program's status in meeting its strategic goals . cbp agreed with our recommendation on developing performance measures , and had developed initial measures relating to membership , inspection percentages , and validation effectiveness .