our audit covered the following . an assessment of the risk of loss , theft , and misappropriation of va it equipment items based on statistical tests of va it equipment inventory at selected case study locations and our investigator's evaluations of physical security and va law enforcement investigations of incidents of loss or theft . results of physical inventories of it equipment performed by case study locations covered in this audit and our previous audit . most of the items that could not be located were computer equipment . based on our work , we concluded in our july 2004 report that these weak practices , combined with lax implementation , resulted in low levels of accountability and heightened risk of loss . during 2006 , va employed nearly 235,000 employees and relied on an undetermined number of contractors , volunteers , and students to support its operations . va provided these individuals a wide range of it equipment , including desktop and laptop computers , monitors and printers , personal digital assistants , unit - level workstations , local area networks , and medical equipment with memory and data processing / communication capabilities . va information resource management ( irm ) and property management personnel share responsibility for management of it equipment inventory . this report responds to your request that we perform follow - up work to determine ( 1 ) the risk of theft , loss , or misappropriation of it equipment at selected va locations ; ( 2 ) whether selected va locations have adequate procedures in place to assure physical security and accountability over it equipment in the excess property disposal process ; and ( 3 ) what actions va management has taken to address identified it equipment inventory control weaknesses . in assessing the risk of theft , loss , or misappropriation of it equipment , you also asked that we consider the results of physical inventories performed by the four case study locations covered in this audit and the six medical centers we previously audited . to achieve our first two objectives , we used a case study approach , selecting va medical centers located in washington , d.c. , indianapolis , indiana , and san diego , california ; associated clinics ; and va headquarters organizations for our test work . to determine the risk of theft , loss , or misappropriation of it equipment at these locations , we statistically tested it equipment inventory to determine the effectiveness of controls relied on for accurate recording of inventory transactions , including existence ( meaning it equipment items listed in inventory records exist and can be located ) , user - level accountability , and inventory record accuracy . as requested , we also obtained and analyzed the results of physical inventories performed by the case study locations covered in our current and our previous audits . in addition , our investigator assessed physical security of it equipment storerooms and procedures for reporting lost and missing items to va law enforcement officials at our four current case study locations .