gao - 15-239 . washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2015 . medicaid: cms oversight of provider payments is hampered by limited data and unclear policy . gao - 15-322 . washington , d.c.: april 10 , 2015 . ( see table 1. ) hospital officials from seven of nine selected hospitals in these three states said they used the revenues from the large upl supplemental payments they received in part to cover the costs of providing services to uninsured patients . although hospital officials were able to describe multiple purposes for which they used revenues from medicaid surpluses resulting from large upl supplemental payments , they were unable to specify how much was used for each purpose they described . examples of specific expenses cited by hospital officials include the following: a new mexico hospital official described a variety of capital expenses for which revenues from upl payments , in part , were used . examples included constructing new medical office buildings , constructing a new cancer treatment center , opening a new health clinic , purchasing a new ct scanner , purchasing a new x - ray imaging system , and purchasing a new helicopter to transport patients . although hospital officials could not estimate how much of the medicaid surplus was devoted to capital investment , the surplus was significant compared to the amount of its capital investments . for example , in 2009 this hospital had a medicaid surplus of about $16 million . the budget for its capital investments totaled $24.6 million that year . the hospital reported an overall profit exceeding $5 million each in 2009 and 2012 . officials with a texas hospital described the establishment of new outpatient clinics for both primary care and some specialty services , extension of clinic hours , and capital expenses as the types of services and projects that it would not have been able to provide or complete without the supplemental payments it received . although hospital officials could not estimate how much of the medicaid surplus was devoted to capital investment , the surplus was significant compared to its capital investments . for example , in 2009 , this hospital had a medicaid surplus of nearly $78 million . that same year the hospital spent $100 million for construction of a new patient tower that included new operating rooms , emergency rooms , examination rooms , isolation rooms , three floors of patient rooms , administration offices , and waiting rooms . under medicaid demonstrations , states were approved to make medicaid supplemental payments to hospitals for costs and activities not otherwise covered under medicaid to promote medicaid objectives , and hospitals were required to track how they used these payments . specifically , the two states in our review that operated under demonstrations , florida and texas , were authorized to make new types of supplemental payments to hospitals for hospitals' uncompensated care costs associated with medicaid - enrolled and uninsured patients , and texas was also authorized to make incentive payments for broadly targeted improvements to hospitals' health care delivery systems . florida began its medicaid demonstration in fiscal year 2006 and texas began its demonstration in fiscal year 2012 .