b . scope ( eg , operational command , training command , installation command , personnel management , officer personnel management , legal affairs , information , etc. ) c. level of function ( eg , national , secretarial , service , theater , field command , etc. ) grade and position of c. lateral points of coordination ( relative position within the military or governmental structure within which the position's function is performed ) 3 . to what extent have each of the services used these workarounds ? dod used an established methodology known as job evaluation to assess general and flag officer requirements . job evaluation methodologies have been widely used in the united states to assess job value and rank one job against another . one limitation of job evaluation is that it has numerous subjective features , including the selection of job factors to be assessed . the factors used in dod's study were subject to differing interpretations . another limitation is that the methodology is based on an existing organizational structure at a designated point in time . the methodology is not designed to capture new or emerging needs , such as those resulting from dod transformation efforts or other changes in the department . periodic updates could capture changes in requirements . such limitations do not invalidate dod's methodology ; however , an explicit acknowledgment and assessment of these limitations would have provided more context for the study results . in addition , the study did not clearly account for dual - hatted positions or assess how each service's authorizations were affected by the need to contribute general and flag officers to fill external ( joint ) positions . addressing these issues could have enhanced the precision and usefulness of dod's study . in addition , we noted that while congress directed dod to ensure the reserve forces policy board participated in development of the report's recommendations , the board played a minimal role in producing the dod 2003 report . the board registered strong objections to dod's recommendation not to seek additional authorizations now to meet validated requirements and to the limited role it played in the overall process . to assess and validate general and flag officer requirements , dod applied an established methodology known as job evaluation . job evaluation methodologies have been widely used in the united states and were used in past general and flag officer studies , including the 1997 and 1988 studies . job evaluation is a formal procedure for hierarchically ordering a set of jobs in terms of their value or worth to the organization . no universally accepted approach to job evaluation exists , and several types of job evaluation methodologies may be used . dod's 2003 study was not explicit about the type of job evaluation methodology used but appeared to be a point - factor system . while point - factor systems may vary , the basic steps involved are gathering job descriptions for all jobs , selecting the factors to be used for measurement , identifying benchmarks for comparing jobs in a similar industry or field , assigning weights to the factors , assigning numerical values to the selected factors , and establishing a rank band .