while sffas no . 4 does not specify the programs , services , or activities that federal entities should determine costs for , such as travel for vendor - provided training , the standards focus on developing information to help management and congress understand the costs of operations and make informed decisions . the standards also provide that often a combination of a cost accounting system and cost finding techniques should be used to provide the cost information that is needed to address specific issues that arise . the lack of cost data available from faa's cost accounting system or through cost analysis techniques to summarize travel to vendor training courses limits faa's ability to manage the costs of such travel and evaluate all aspects of technician training costs and benefits . faa could help provide information that addresses congressional concerns about the cost of in - house and vendor - provided training and of the travel related to those training activities by modifying its cost accounting system or cost finding techniques . ( 2 ) how does faa's technician training compare with key practices of leading organizations ? ( 3 ) how have the costs of technician training , including travel costs , changed in recent years ? to assess faa's workforce planning for technicians , we analyzed faa data from fiscal year 1999 through fiscal year 2009 to identify trends in staffing , hiring , and attrition ; reviewed faa's workforce planning documents ; and compared the agency's workforce planning practices with criteria from our past work . we selected key leading practices , listed in tables throughout the report , and assessed the extent to which faa followed each practice by applying the following scale: “fully” indicated that , in our judgment , all or virtually all aspects of the practice were followed ; “mostly” indicated that more than half but less than all or virtually all were followed ; “partially” indicated that less than half but more than a few were followed ; and “minimally” indicated that few or no aspects of the practice were followed . to assess training for technicians , we analyzed faa training data from fiscal year 2006 through may 2010 to identify trends in course offerings and determine the number of classes , students , and instructors ; reviewed end - of - course surveys and technician training documents ; and compared faa's development and delivery of technician training with key leading practices identified through our past work , as described above . in addition , to address both workforce planning and training , we conducted 12 focus group meetings — 11 with faa technicians and 1 with faa academy managers — at 11 locations and conducted semistructured interviews with faa managers and pass union officials . to identify the focus group locations , we considered the number of technicians at the facilities , geographic location , notable conditions ( such as recent equipment outages ) , and agency and pass recommendations . the information collected from the focus groups is not generalizable to all faa technicians .