conferences . dod officials told us that leading practices and lessons learned formerly were exchanged at dod antiterrorism conferences . however , dod and two of the military services cancelled their annual antiterrorism conferences from 2013 to 2014 because of limited funding and increased scrutiny of conferences . the army reinitiated its antiterrorism conference in 2015 and an air force official told us that the service is considering merging antiterrorism and other force protection issues into a mission assurance conference going forward . lessons - learned information systems . the joint staff and each of the military services have established information systems to exchange information on lessons from training , exercises , and combat operations across the department . however , military service and installation officials told us they do not consistently use joint or military service lessons - learned information systems . officials told us they do not use these systems because they believed the information within the systems focuses more on military combat operations , there is not a requirement to use the systems to share information on insider threats , and there is limited time or desire to use the systems . when we examined the joint lessons - learned information system , we found examples of information contained in the system that installations could use to enhance their efforts to protect against insider threats . for example , we found two after - action reports that highlight lessons learned on active shooter exercises conducted at two installations within the united states . antiterrorism web - based portals . the joint staff established an antiterrorism web - based , secure portal in 2003 to provide a collaborative environment for the dod community to share antiterrorism and force protection information with the military services , combatant commands , and other dod agencies . the portal contains links to various antiterrorism organizations , communities , and other force protection portals . however , service and installation officials told us they either were not aware of or did not use the joint staff's antiterrorism portal . marine corps and army officials told us that they use their service - specific antiterrorism portals . when we examined the army's antiterrorism enterprise portal we found examples of information contained in the system that installations could use to enhance their efforts to protect against insider threats . for example , the army's antiterrorism enterprise portal contained documentation on mitigating insider threats and antiterrorism best practices . dod guidance and recommendations issued after the 2009 fort hood shooting state that dod should identify and share leading practices to enhance the department's ability to protect the force . for example , dod's joint guidance on antiterrorism states that after - action reports and lessons learned should be shared with other units and defense components . also , in 2014 , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff recommended that the department share innovative measures to prevent and respond to attacks similar to those at fort hood and the washington navy yard . further , the independent review of the 2009 fort hood shooting encouraged the department to identify best practices to enhance the department's ability to protect the force .