gao - 07-851 . the totmount of fun dod hasxpded or oligated to degn and imlemet nspsring fi through 2006 cannot e determied ecause dod has ot eablihed an overht mechanm to ensure tht thee co re fllapred . most of the movement in responses was negative . specifically , in response to a question about the impact nsps will have on personnel practices at dod , the number of positive responses decreased from an estimated 40 percent of spiral 1.1 employees in may 2006 to an estimated 23 percent in may 2007 . however , thi guidance doe ot defie the direct and idirect co dod reqire tht the comapre . dod's ervasive financil managemet deficiecieve ee the bas for gao's degnatio of thi as hih - rire ce 199 . gao's review of submitted reort from the com found tht their officiccounting system do ot capre the totl funxpded or oligated to degn and imlemet nsps . withoan effective overht mechanm to ensure tht the officiccounting systemapre ll approrite co , dod ancngress do ot hve viilit over the ctual cot to degn and imlemet nsps . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact derek stewart at ( 202 ) 512-5559 or stewartd@gao.gov . peole re criticl to any ag transformtio ecause the defian agy'sltre , develo itowledbase , romote innovtio , anre it mot imortanasset . thus , trteic hanapitl managemet the departmet of defense ( dod ) can hel it ml , manage , and m the eole ankill eeded to meet it criticl missio . i novemer 2003 , cngress rovided dod with gnificant fleilit to degn moderan rerceanagemesystem . o novemer 1 , 200 , dod and the office of pernnel managemet ( opm ) joitl released the final regutions dod's ew han rerceanagemesystem , kow as the ntionasecrit pernnel system ( nsps ) . gao elieve tht dod's final nsps regutions coany of the basic ricile thre constet with rove approche to trteic hanapitl managemet . for insance , the final regutions rovide for ( 1 ) flele , cotemor , mrket - based anerformance - orieted comnsatio system — such as pay ban anpay for erformance ; ( 2 ) iving reter riorit to emloee erformance i it retetio deciions connectio with workforce rihtizing and redctions - i - force ; and ( 3 ) ivolvemet of emloee reretive throughot the imlemetio rocess , such asvingpportunitie to participate i develong the imlemetingssuance . however , fre ctions will determie whether such labor reltions effort will e meanngand credile . severl moth ago , with the release of the roed regutions , gao observed thome part of the han rerceanagemesystem red qtions for dod , opm , ancngress to consider i the reas of pay anerformance anagemet , dverctions anapp , and labor managemet reltions . gao o idetified mltile imlemetio chlleng for dod oce the final regutions for the ew system were issued . despite theitive aspect of the regutions , gao has everreas of cocer .