5 through fig . 14 in appendix ii. ) agencies obligated approximately $15 billion in fiscal year 2015 , the most recent obligations data available at the time we conducted our review , across the nine programs with an explicit early learning or child care purpose . the vast majority of this funding is concentrated in two programs administered by hhs: head start and ccdf . together , these two programs comprised over 90 percent of total obligations for programs with an explicit early learning or child care purpose in fiscal year 2015 . all other programs with an explicit early learning or child care purpose each obligated less than $500 million in fiscal year 2015 ( see table 1 ) . all of the programs with an explicit early learning or child care purpose require at least some funds to be used on early learning or child care services , according to agency officials . however , not all funds for these programs are targeted toward children from birth through age 5 in an early learning or child care setting , and agencies noted that they are generally not required to track funds used specifically for these purposes . one exception is the striving readers comprehensive literacy program: education officials collect data on the amount of funds used for pre - literacy activities because grantees must ensure that local providers use 15 percent of funds to serve children from birth through age 5 . in fiscal year 2015 , all four programs that exclusively target children age 5 or under — early intervention program for infants and toddlers with disabilities , preschool development grants , preschool grants for children with disabilities , and head start — used 100 percent of their funds for early learning or child care services for this population , according to agency officials . in contrast , ccdf , family and child education ( face ) , promise neighborhoods , and child care access means parents in school ( ccampis ) programs provide services to school - age children in addition to children age 5 and under . officials told us they were unable to identify the amount of funds used specifically for children age 5 and under for these programs . for example , ccdf serves eligible children under age 13 , and while states report the percentage of children served by age , officials told us states are not required to report the amount of ccdf funds spent by age . not all ccdf funds are used for child care subsidies . in addition to directly subsidizing access to child care services for eligible low - income children , ccdf invests in improving the quality of child care available to families . we recently reported that the majority of children who received ccdf subsidies were under age 5 . among programs without an explicit early learning or child care purpose , none require spending on early learning or child care , according to agency officials . further , agency officials told us that they do not track the amount of funds used for early learning or child care for most of these programs and are not required to do so .