gao - 16-356 . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2016 . littoral combat ship: knowledge of survivability and lethality capabilities needed prior to making major funding decisions . gao - 16-201 . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2015 . the lcs acquisition was challenging from the outset . navy officials have stated that the frigate is expected to cost no more than 20 percent — approximately $100 million — more per ship than the average lcs seaframes . however , the navy will not establish its cost estimate until may 2017 — presumably after the navy requests authorization from congress in its fiscal year 2018 budget request for the block buy contracting approach for 12 frigates — raising the likelihood that the budget request will not reflect the most current costs for the program moving forward . in addition to the continued cost uncertainty , the schedule and approach for the frigate acquisition have undergone substantial changes in the last year , as shown in table 3 . according to frigate program officials , under the current acquisition approach the navy will award contracts in fiscal year 2017 to each of the current lcs contractors to construct one lcs with a block buy option for 12 additional lcs — not frigates . then , the navy plans to obtain proposals from both lcs contractors in late 2017 that would upgrade the block buy option of lcs to frigates using frigate - specific design changes and modifications . the navy will evaluate the frigate upgrade packages and then exercise the option — now for frigates — on the contract that provides the best value based on tradeoffs between price and technical factors . this downselect will occur in summer 2018 . figure 3 illustrates how the navy plans to modify the fiscal year 2017 lcs contract to convert the ships in the block buy options to frigates . the navy's current plan , which moves the frigate award forward from fiscal year 2019 to fiscal year 2018 , is an acceleration that continues a pattern of committing to buy ships in advance of adequate knowledge . specifically , the navy has planned for its downselect award of the frigate to occur before detail design of the ship begins . as we previously reported , awarding a contract before detail design is completed — though common in navy ship acquisitions — has resulted in increased ship prices . further , in the absence of a year of frigate detail design , the navy plans to rely on a contractor - driven design process that is less prescriptive . this approach is similar to that espoused by the original lcs program , whereby the shipyards were given performance specifications and requirements , selecting the design and systems that they determined were best suited to fit their designs in a producible manner . program officials told us that this new approach should yield efficiencies ; however , history from lcs raises concern that this approach for the frigate similarly could lead to the ships having non - standard equipment , with less commonality with the other design and the rest of the navy .