( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we conducted our work between march 2006 and december 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . over the years , congress has established many employment - related programs to help people with disabilities obtain jobs . four of these programs , pwi , supported employment state grants , randolph - sheppard , and jwod , illustrate several different approaches taken by congress to create more employment opportunities for people with severe disabilities — from providing job training and support to enabling individuals to run businesses . congress created two of the four programs ( pwi and supported employment state grants ) in the 1970s and the other two ( randolph - sheppard and jwod ) in the 1930s . during the state visits , we met with officials representing each of the four programs . for education's programs , we interviewed local officials of nonprofit agencies with pwi grants , state program administrators for the state - operated randolph - sheppard programs as well as licensed vendors , and state vr officials responsible for administering the supported employment state grants program . for jwod , we interviewed chief executive officers or their representatives of the jwod nonprofit agencies with current federal contracts to provide goods and / or services . in addition , during these meetings , we collected documentation to ascertain how the federal and two central nonprofit agencies were monitoring their respective programs . we also reviewed the records of 137 workers who were blind or had severe disabilities , selecting some records at each of the 13 jwod nonprofit agencies we visited . the records were randomly selected from lists of current jwod workers . a random number generator was used to assign a number to each name on the active roster and records were selected on the basis of the number — starting with the lowest number . during the record review , we assessed whether the agencies' files of workers who were blind or had severe disabilities contained required medical documentation and assessment of ability to work in competitive employment . for example , reviews of the information reported by officials for the pwi program were generally performed by project managers . for fiscal reporting , however , we found that jwod nonprofit agencies , pwi grantees , and licensed vendors generally had systems and procedures for stronger accounting of financial data . for example , state licensing agency ( sla ) officials used cash register receipts and routine reports on business activities submitted by the licensed vendors to the slas to review the financial information for these programs . in addition , licensed vendors were also required to complete merchandise inventories at least once each year . we also reviewed other available reports on the randolph - sheppard program of the states visited , and reviewed the findings and recommendations of state audit reports from four other states — california , georgia , michigan , and south carolina — that had evaluated all or certain aspects of their state - operated randolph - sheppard programs in recent years .