mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . currently there is inconsistent use of it in exchanging data and delivering care . in addition , implementing information security measures that resist cyber attacks also remains a challenge . at your request , today i will summarize our previously issued reports on ( 1 ) the reported benefits of using it for health care delivery , including lessons learned from health care organizations that have implemented it and ( 2 ) it initiatives that support the public health infrastructure , including the status of standards setting initiatives that are necessary to support greater information sharing . in preparing this testimony , we summarized our prior reports and updated progress on our recommendations in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the united states health care system is a large sector of the economy comprised of clinicians , health care delivery organizations , insurers , consumers , and government health agencies . according to the medicare payment advisory commission , the health care industry generally uses less it than other industries , and the extent and types of it deployed vary by setting and institution . the health care industry has recognized that it can improve the quality of care , promote patient safety , reduce costs of both care and administrative functions , and expedite response to public health emergencies . public health officials are increasingly concerned about our exposure and susceptibility to infectious disease and food - borne illness because of global travel , increased volume of food imports , and the evolution of antibiotic - resistant pathogens . public health experts maintain that a strong infrastructure could provide the capacity to prepare for and respond to both acute and chronic threats to the nation's health , whether they are bioterrorism attacks , emerging infections , disparities in health status , or increases in chronic disease and injury rates . it can play an essential role in supporting federal , state , local , and tribal governments in public health activities and clinical care delivery . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include joanne fiorino , m. saad khan , and mary beth mcclanahan . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . for example , organizations reported that business process changes were key in effectively implementing the technology and that users , including physicians , should be involved in systems design and implementation . in may 2003 , we reported that six federal agencies involved in bioterrorism preparedness and response had a large number of existing and planned information systems associated with supporting a public health emergency . specifically , these agencies identified 72 information systems and supporting technologies . of the 72 systems , 34 are surveillance systems , 18 are supporting technologies , 10 are communications systems , and 10 are detection systems . in spite of these many initiatives , the key ones that are intended to facilitate greater information sharing are still being developed and implemented .