fishing . in 2003 , the trust granted 1,785 people access to the preserve's two fishable streams , on a first - come , first - served basis . the trust also holds adult and youth fishing clinics . in 2009 , it began allowing anglers to drive their own vehicles to parking areas near assigned stream reaches , instead of providing van transportation as in previous years . hiking . visitors have been allowed to hike at the preserve since 2002 , first in guided hikes , then on their own . the trust has increased the number and mileage of available hiking trails , opening about 30 miles of trails to hikers , including 5 miles requiring no fee . other recreational activities . the trust has also offered horse - drawn wagon rides , sleigh rides , van tours , snowshoeing , cross - country skiing , stargazing lectures , horseback riding , marathon runs , mountain biking , group tours and seminars , workshops , antler collection , and overnight photographic and birding excursions . in 2006 , the trust also hosted its first free open house , which drew more than 1,400 cars and nearly 4,000 people . the trust used this event to inform the public about then - current programs and future opportunities and to monitor the effects of so many visitors . since 2008 , the preserve has been open 7 days a week from april through september for summer recreation and events and fewer days the rest of the year to accommodate hunting and winter activities . the preservation act's findings and purposes section states , among other things , that the baca ranch could serve as a model for sustainable land development and use of timber , grazing , and recreation and that management of the ranch through a trust would eventually allow the ranch to become financially self - sustaining . over its existence , the trust recognized it had no marketable timber , but it has experimented with a number of grazing options and expanded recreational opportunities . collectively , from 2005 through 2008 , the trust's grazing , recreation , and other activities have generated , on average , about $733,000 in gross revenues per year ( see table 1 ) . in comparison , from 2000 through 2009 , the trust received nearly $31 million in federal funding — an average of about $3.5 million per year over the time frame . faced with average gross revenues amounting to about 20 percent of average federal funding , the board of trustees contracted with an independent consulting firm in 2008 to develop a revenue enhancement study aimed at realizing annual revenues of about $5 million . made public in april 2009 , this document details various options for generating revenues of this scale and bringing the trust to financially self - sustaining status by the end of fiscal year 2015 . these options include high - end elements such as a luxury lodge , as well as more modest elements such as tent camps . the options could be mixed and matched to produce a plan that the trust could use as it decides how to further develop infrastructure and public programs at the preserve .