centralized design . the centralized design uses a minimal number of governmentwide e - rulemaking system components in the same location to provide consistent access and services for citizens and agency staff across all dockets . under this design , the features and functions of the governmentwide e - rulemaking system are provided by component - based application architecture and all standard components are centrally located . these application components would reside on servers in a single location for delivery of services to the public and the agencies . unlike the tiered and distributed designs , which are discussed in the next sections , the centralized design will not support existing agency docket systems nor will it distribute components of the governmentwide e - rulemaking system in agency facilities . tiered design . the tiered design utilizes a centralized governmentwide e - rulemaking system to deliver all agency and citizen services , but is different from the centralized design because common hardware and software components installed in the governmentwide e - rulemaking system are also installed at different agency sites to enhance system performance . for example , components like the database management or document management system may be placed on separate servers in the same or different locations to process information more efficiently to boost system performance , and the responsibility for the data is dispersed across multiple entities or agency sites and would be maintained locally at each site . because the tiered design is based on the use of common hardware and software components , the governmentwide e - rulemaking system is not linked to any existing agency specific docket system with its unique hardware and software . as a result , no customized software interfaces are needed . distributed design . the distributed design integrates a centralized governmentwide e - rulemaking system with existing agency - specific electronic docket systems while satisfying all governmentwide e - rulemaking system requirements . this design links agencies with existing docket systems to the governmentwide e - rulemaking system using customized software ( middleware ) to allow interconnectivity between agencies' systems and the governmentwide e - rulemaking system . this design provides the public with a means of searching across agency dockets and establishes the governmentwide e - rulemaking system as an access point to the public and agencies for searching , reviewing , and commenting on dockets that reside on the agencies' existing docket systems . in addition , agencies with docket systems will continue to perform their own workflow / business / docket life - cycle processing . in 2002 , dot , which was the managing partner for the e - rulemaking initiative , contracted with a consulting firm to assess the capabilities of seven existing agency e - rulemaking systems and prepare a business case describing alternative designs for the system and the recommended design . the firm was to provide advice to dot about the best technical approach for the initiative , along with a full analysis of alternatives that leverage the use of existing technology to meet the vision , goals , and objectives of the initiative .