we did not evaluate agency compliance with these laws and guidance . to address our first objective , we reviewed and analyzed relevant laws and guidance to determine privacy responsibilities for privacy officials at agencies . we reviewed relevant laws , including the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 , the homeland security act of 2002 , and others ( see app . their comments are reprinted in appendixes ii and iii respectively . justice , labor , and treasury provided written comments and disagreed with our characterization of their agency saops as not having oversight of all key privacy functions . their comments are reprinted in appendixes iv , v , and vi respectively . the chief information officer of the department of commerce stated that the department agreed with our characterization of the fragmentation that has resulted from recent laws and guidance that have significantly changed requirements for privacy oversight and management . however , she stated that applicable law does not require that the administration of the privacy act be consolidated with other privacy functions under the office of the chief information officer . law and omb guidance direct agencies to have a senior agency official , the cio in the case of the paperwork reduction act , serving as a focal point for privacy and ensuring compliance with the privacy act . clearly establishing a senior official as a focal point for departmental privacy functions aligns with direction provided by law and omb and would help ensure that the agency provides consistent privacy protections . the senior agency official for privacy at the department of defense stated that , while privacy responsibilities are divided among the defense privacy office , the cio , and agency components , the current privacy management structure at defense has proven to be successful over time . we did not assess the effectiveness of the privacy management structures we reviewed . however , establishing an agency official that serves as a central focal point for departmental privacy functions aligns with direction provided by law and omb and would help ensure that the agency provides consistent privacy protections . the acting chief privacy and civil liberties officer at justice disagreed with our assessment that the department's saop did not have oversight of redress procedures . he stated that the chief privacy and civil liberties officer has statutory authority under the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act to assume primary responsibility for privacy policy and to ensure appropriate notifications regarding the department's privacy policies and privacy - related inquiry and complaint procedures . we agree that the chief privacy and civil liberties officer has the statutory authority and responsibility for the oversight of privacy functions at justice , including redress . however , our analysis of agency policies and procedures showed that the chief privacy and civil liberties officer did not have an established role in oversight of redress procedures . clearly defining the role of the chief privacy and civil liberties officer in the departmental redress procedures would help ensure that the saop has oversight of this key privacy function .