gao - 02-1021 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2002 . ( see fig . in total , dod reports that $32.1 billion has been allocated for combating terrorism activities during this 5-year period . the dollar amounts shown in figure 1 do not include funding for the current global war on terrorism , such as military operations in afghanistan , because these activities are not intended to be included . although not clearly identified in dod's budget reports , our analysis estimates that $19.4 billion ( 60 percent ) of the $32.1 billion combating terrorism funding is for military ( $14.1 billion ) and civilian personnel and personnel - related operating costs ( $5.3 billion ) ; however , this estimate may be overstated . ( see fig . in accordance with dod's financial management regulation , the department's combating terrorism costs include funding for personnel in designated specialties that have combating terrorism missions , such as military police , civilian police , and security guards . the military services' accounting systems do not track the time that individuals in these specialties spend on activities related to combating terrorism ; therefore , the total personnel costs are reported even if the individuals spend only a portion of their time performing combating terrorism activities . the actual proportion of time these personnel spend between combating terrorism and unrelated activities ( such as counter drug investigations ) varies , although all of these personnel are available to perform combating terrorism duties when needed . the $19.4 billion of estimated combating terrorism personnel costs shown in figure 2 consists of military personnel costs of $14.1 billion and estimated operation and maintenance civilian personnel costs of $5.3 billion . other components of the total $32 billion shown include $4.3 billion from the defense emergency response fund and $8.4 billion in other appropriations , including procurement , research and development , and military construction . officials in the office of the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low - intensity conflict recognize that improvements could be made in the budget report for next year and plan to consider ways to restructure its contents to include more summary information . funding for antiterrorism requirements has increased since fiscal year 1999 , but it is widely recognized that vulnerabilities at military installations will continue to outpace available funding . it is therefore essential that funds be spent efficiently and effectively if the services are to achieve the highest level of protection possible for military personnel , equipment , and critical facilities and operations . our analysis indicates that the military services generally are not applying a results - oriented management framework to guide their antiterrorism efforts , in part , because dod does not yet have a department - wide antiterrorism strategy . without a results - oriented management framework to implement antiterrorism efforts and monitor results , the services , military commanders , and congress will not be able to determine if past and future resources — which have been significantly increased — are achieving their desired results in the most efficient and effective manner . the services and commands we reviewed are adhering to prescribed policies and procedures and taking significant steps to improve their capability to use a risk management approach .