gao - 07-660 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2007 . ( see app . ii for a description of the 86 icao standards and recommended practices tsa uses to assess security measures at foreign airports. ) while tsa is authorized under u.s. law to conduct foreign airport assessments at intervals it considers necessary , tsa may not perform an assessment of security measures at a foreign airport without permission from the host government . during fiscal year 2005 , tsa scheduled assessments by categorizing airports into two groups . category a airports — airports that did not exhibit operational issues in the last two tsa assessments — were assessed once every 3 years , while category b airports — airports that did exhibit operational issues in either of the last two tsa assessments , or were not previously assessed — were assessed annually . based on documentation provided by tsa , during fiscal year 2005 , tsa assessed aviation security measures in place at 128 foreign airports that participated voluntarily in tsa's foreign airport assessment program . in april 2007 , we issued a report that contained sensitive security information regarding tsa's foreign airport assessments and air carrier inspections . this report provides the results of our april 2007 report with the sensitive security information removed . to address these objectives , we obtained and reviewed tsa guidance for conducting and reporting the results of foreign airport assessments and air carrier inspections . we also obtained and analyzed the results of 128 foreign airport assessments and 529 air carrier inspections conducted by tsa during fiscal year 2005 to determine the extent to which foreign airports and air carriers operating overseas complied with aviation security standards . we assessed the reliability of tsa's air carrier inspection data for fiscal year 2005 and concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . we also interviewed tsa's office of security operations and its transportation sector network management officials , both in headquarters and the field , who are responsible for planning , coordinating , overseeing , and carrying out foreign airport assessments and air carrier inspections , to obtain information on tsa's efforts to help foreign officials address airport security deficiencies and tsa's efforts to overcome challenges identified by tsa officials in conducting foreign airport assessments and air carrier inspections . additionally , we visited three european , three asian , and one other north american country where we met with host government aviation security officials , air carrier representatives , airport officials , aviation industry representatives , and tsa officials to obtain their perspectives on tsa's foreign airport assessment and air carrier inspection programs . we also accompanied tsa officials during an airport assessment and air carrier inspection at an airport in the caribbean . in addition , we interviewed 16 foreign aviation security officials stationed in their countries' embassies in washington , d.c. , to obtain their perspectives on tsa's foreign airport assessment and air carrier inspection programs . however , information obtained from our interviews with host government and aviation industry representatives cannot be generalized beyond those contacted because we did not use a probability sampling method to select these officials for interviews .