rpt . 112-492 , at 64-65 ( may 23 , 2012 ) ( accompanying h.r . 5855 , 112th cong . ( 2d sess . gao , aviation security: tsa's cost and performance study of private - sector airport screening , gao - 09-27r ( washington , d.c.: jan. 9 , 2009 ) . tom lombardi provided legal support . linda miller provided assistance in report preparation , and lydia araya made contributions to the graphics presented in the report . the limitations we identified . tsa generally concurred with our recommendation , and in march 2011 , we reported that tsa has made progress in addressing the limitations related to costs and estimated that spp airports would cost 3 percent more to operate in 2011 than airports using federal screeners . this report addresses the ( 1 ) status of airport applications made to the spp , and airport operator , other stakeholders , and tsa views on the advantages and disadvantages of participating in the spp ; ( 2 ) extent to which tsa has provided guidance to govern the spp application process ; and ( 3 ) extent to which tsa assesses and monitors the performance of private and federal screeners . this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . dhs deemed some of the information in the prior report as sensitive security information ( ssi ) , which must be protected from therefore , this report omits information about the public disclosure.specific results of our comparison of spp screener performance with performance of federal screeners across four performance measures we analyzed . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to address all three of these objectives , we interviewed federal security directors ( fsd ) ; airport operators ; screeners ; and where applicable , spp contractors at 10 airports . we selected the 10 airports by matching an spp to a non - spp airport , in each of the five airport categories ( category x , i , ii , iii , and iv ) , based primarily on ( 1 ) annual passenger and baggage volumes , ( 2 ) screener staffing model full - time equivalent allocation , and ( 3 ) number of check - points and screening lanes . additionally , on the basis of available travel resources , we visited 7 of the 10 airports to observe airport screening operations , including any unique challenges faced by these airports . our observations from these airport visits and interviews are illustrative and provide insights about private and federal screening operations but are not generalizable to all airports across the country . to determine the status of spp applications , and airport operators' , other stakeholders' , and tsa's views on the advantages and disadvantages of participating in the spp , we interviewed officials of tsa's spp program management office ( pmo ) and reviewed the 15 spp applications that had been submitted since fiscal year 2009 , as well as tsa's available decision memos on the applications .