gao - 17-809t . washington d.c.: september 19 , 2017 . we are making two recommendations to dod . the secretary of defense should ensure that the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in conjunction with the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the commanding general of socom , clarify its guidance on perstempo thresholds as long as the statutory thresholds are waived by either establishing specific and measurable department - wide perstempo thresholds in dod policy or ensuring that the army , the air force , and the marine corps establish and follow their own service - specific guidance on thresholds . ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in conjunction with the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the commanding general of socom , take steps to emphasize the collection of complete and reliable perstempo data so that dod , the services , and socom can monitor perstempo . ( recommendation 2 ) . dod's written comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix i . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ; the secretaries of the air force , the army , and the navy ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the commanding general of socom . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . john h. pendleton , ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , patricia lentini , assistant director ; suellen foth ; mae jones ; james p. klein ; amie lesser ; ricardo marquez ; shari nikoo ; joshua parr ; and michael silver made key contributions to this report . navy readiness: actions needed to address persistent maintenance , training , and other challenges affecting the fleet . navy readiness: actions needed to address persistent maintenance , training , and other challenges facing the fleet . gao - 17-798t . washington , d.c.: september 7 , 2017 . military readiness: dod's readiness rebuilding efforts may be at risk without a comprehensive plan . gao - 16-841 . washington , d.c.: september 19 , 2016 . special operations forces: opportunities exist to improve transparency of funding and assess potential to lessen some deployments . gao - 15-571 . operational deployments are one of the deployment perstempo events . the memorandum also requires the military services to register perstempo events .