iii ) . further , the number of quality defects and total hours spent on scrap , rework , and repair declined in 2016 . although data indicate that airframe manufacturing efficiency and quality continue to improve , supply chain challenges remain . some suppliers are delivering late and non - conforming parts , resulting in production line inefficiencies and workarounds . for example , in 2016 , lockheed martin originally planned to deliver 53 aircraft , but quality issues with insulation on the coolant tubes in the fuel tanks resulted in the contractor delivering 46 aircraft . according to lockheed martin officials , late deliveries of parts are largely due to late contract awards and supply base capacity . while supplier performance is generally improving , it is important for suppliers to be prepared for both production and sustainment support going forward . inefficiencies , such as conducting production line work out of sequence , could be exacerbated if late delivery of parts continues as production more than doubles over the next 5 years . the engine manufacturer , pratt & whitney , is also improving efficiency . as of october 2016 , pratt & whitney had delivered 279 engines . the labor hours required to assemble an f - 35 engine decreased quickly and has remained relatively steady since around the 70th engine produced , and little additional efficiency is expected to be gained . other pratt & whitney manufacturing metrics indicate that production efficiency and quality are improving . scrap , rework , and repair costs were reduced from 2.22 percent in 2015 to 1.8 percent in 2016 . we previously reported that according to pratt & whitney officials , moving from a hollow blade design to a solid blade would reduce scrap and rework costs because it is easier to produce . however , pratt & whitney experienced unanticipated problems with cracking in the solid blade design . as a result , pratt & whitney is continuing to produce a hollow blade while it further investigates the difficulty and costs associated with a solid blade design . pratt & whitney's supply chain continues to make some improvements . for example , critical parts are being delivered ahead of schedule , and some are already achieving 2017 rate requirements . to further ensure that suppliers are capable of handling full - rate production , pratt & whitney is pursuing the potential to have multiple suppliers for some engine parts , which officials believe will help increase manufacturing capacity within the supply chain . although the program has made progress in improving system - level reliability and maintainability , some metrics continue to fall short of program expectations in several key areas . for example , as shown in figure 6 , while metrics in most areas were overall trending in the right direction , the f - 35 program office's internal assessment indicated that as of august 2016 the f - 35 fleet was falling short of reliability and maintainability expectations in 11 of 21 areas . although many of the metrics remain below program expectations , some of the metrics have shown improvement over the last year , and time remains for continued improvements .