v ) . the department generally agreed with our findings and concurred with both recommendations . specifically , the department agreed that a more timely publication of the federal register listing of designated hpsas is necessary to ensure that only those areas meeting the regulations remain designated , and stated that hrsa should publish lists of hpsas or hpsa withdrawals to ensure that designations that have already been proposed for withdrawal are actually withdrawn . the department also noted that it is proposing a change in the process for withdrawing hpsa designations , but it did not provide any details on this proposal . hhs also agreed with our recommendation that the department complete and publish its proposal to revise the hpsa designation system . hhs stated that this proposal would address shortcomings that we identified in this and previous reports and would also affect the regulations governing mua and mup designations . hhs also commented on our finding that many health centers and rural health clinics did not benefit from automatic designation as facility hpsas . specifically , hhs stated that our draft report provided a somewhat misleading assessment of the impact of the automatic designation process and the department provided additional information on nhsc placements in automatically designated hpsas in 2005 . our draft report stated that few health centers had hpsa scores associated with automatic designation that were high enough to qualify for a physician through the nhsc scholarship program , but that all health centers that received automatic designation as hpsas , even those with lower hpsa scores , could apply in 2005 for a health care provider through the nhsc loan repayment program . the data the department provided on nhsc placements in automatically designated health centers were actually consistent with the statement in our draft report . hhs's data , which hhs officials said included both primary care and nonprimary care providers , showed that of 216 nhsc providers placed in health centers , relatively few ( less than 5 percent ) were placed through the nhsc scholarship program and the nhsc ready responder program ( less than 1 percent ) , whereas the vast majority ( more than 95 percent ) were placed through the nhsc loan repayment program . according to hrsa officials , data for primary care provider placements ( which were not included in the department's comments ) , showed a similar distribution between the three nhsc programs for 155 primary care nhsc placements in health centers in 2005 . in its comments , hhs also provided information on the process for scoring automatically designated hpsas and on nhsc and j - 1 visa waiver programs . in response , we added information on j - 1 visa waiver programs administered by federal agencies other than hhs and by state health departments . finally , hhs suggested that we clarify that our scope was limited to primary care hpsas . we made revisions to the report to highlight that our review only examined primary care hpsa designations . the department also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of hrsa , the administrator of cms , and to appropriate congressional committees .