these key initiatives are discussed below . the information systems security line of business: the goal of this initiative is to improve the level of information systems security across government agencies and reduce costs by sharing common processes and functions for managing information systems security . several agencies have been designated as service providers for it security awareness training and fisma reporting . federal desktop core configuration: this initiative directs agencies that have windows xp deployed and plan to upgrade to windows vista operating systems to adopt the security configurations developed by nist , dod , and dhs . for example , omb added questions regarding incident reporting and assessments of system inventory . however , the current metrics do not measure how effectively agencies are performing various activities . current performance measures offer limited assurance of the quality of agency processes that implement key security policies , controls , and practices . for example , agencies are required to test and evaluate the effectiveness of the controls over their systems at least once a year and to report on the number of systems undergoing such tests . however , there is no measure of the quality of agencies' test and evaluation processes . the goal of this initiative is to improve information security and reduce overall it operating costs . smartbuy: this program , led by gsa , is to support enterprise - level software management through the aggregate buying of commercial software governmentwide in an effort to achieve cost savings through volume discounts . the smartbuy initiative was expanded to include commercial off - the - shelf encryption software and to permit all federal agencies to participate in the program . the initiative is to also include licenses for information assurance . trusted internet connections initiative: this is an effort designed to optimize individual agency network services into a common solution for the federal government . the initiative is to facilitate the reduction of external connections , including internet points of presence , to a target of fifty . in addition to these initiatives , omb has issued several policy memorandums over the past two years to help agencies protect sensitive data . for example , it has sent memorandums to agencies to reemphasize their responsibilities under law and policy to ( 1 ) appropriately safeguard sensitive and personally identifiable information , ( 2 ) train employees on their responsibilities to protect sensitive information , and ( 3 ) report security incidents . in may 2007 , omb issued additional detailed guidelines to agencies on safeguarding against and responding to the breach of personally identifiable information , including developing and implementing a risk - based breach notification policy , reviewing and reducing current holdings of personal information , protecting federal information accessed remotely , and developing and implementing a policy outlining the rules of behavior , as well as identifying consequences and potential corrective actions for failure to follow these rules . opportunities also exist to enhance policies and practices related to security control testing and evaluation , fisma reporting , and the independent annual evaluations of agency information security programs required by fisma . clarify requirements for testing and evaluating security controls .