the electronic media . subsequently , irs sent out a notice for public comment on this revenue rule and modified it in 2014 . dot's transerve debit - card program includes activities that correspond to the five internal control standards — ( 1 ) control environment , ( 2 ) risk assessment , ( 3 ) control activities , ( 4 ) monitoring , and ( 5 ) information and communication . in combination , these activities would be expected to provide reasonable assurance that non - transit - related purchases can be identified and denied . based on our review of the design of transerve's internal controls for the transerve debit - card program , we found that those internal controls align with gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . however , certain weaknesses could exist as we did not independently test dot's internal controls to determine whether they mitigate all possible risks and are operating as intended . transerve's activities for establishing a control environment — a disciplined work environment and ethical culture — amongst management and staff were generally consistent with internal control standards . the standards for internal control in the federal government states that management and employees should establish and maintain an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude toward internal control and conscientious management . a positive control environment is the foundation for all other standards , a foundation that provides discipline and structure as well as the climate that influences the quality of internal control . several key factors affect the control environment , eg , the integrity and ethical values maintained and demonstrated by management and staff . transerve has established a control environment framework for the debit - card program through the following: a primary goal for the debit - card program: transerve has set a primary goal for the debit - card program of offering enhanced internal controls to preserve transit benefits by deterring waste , fraud , and abuse . internal controls officer: transerve created an internal controls officer position in april 2007 , which according to officials , has been staffed since 2007 without vacancies . according to the program's policy and guidance , this position heightens review of the program's internal controls . the internal controls officer is responsible for maintenance and testing of internal controls , through a combination of inquiry , inspection , and observation . also , the internal controls officer is responsible for designing training classes for transerve employees and dot's transit benefit participants . training: dot requires all staff who are participants in the transit benefit program , to complete mandatory transit benefit integrity awareness training on an annual basis . this is a mandatory electronic course that clarifies transit benefit requirements and emphasizes the internal controls in place to minimize fraud and address ramifications of noncompliance . additionally , according to transerve officials , the training is available on its website for client agencies . moreover , if requested , the transerve staff are available to assist or conduct the training . online resources: finally , transerve has a number of resources available for internal and external participants and client agency points of contacts .