va concurred with these recommendations . in june 2014 , we discussed va's progress in implementing these recommendations with va officials . these officials indicated that the department anticipated being able to track some wait time information for veterans seen by non - va providers that va contracts with under its new patient centered community care ( pccc ) initiative in the near term . however , wait time information for all non - va medical care will not be readily available until va completes a redesign of its claims processing system , which is expected to occur in fiscal year 2016 . with respect to establishing a mechanism to analyze the episode of care costs for non - va medical care , va officials explained that they are in the process of fully implementing this recommendation by ( 1 ) improving existing data systems to systematically audit claims that include billing codes typically included in bundled payments while the claims are in a pre - payment status and to require va facilities to review these claims prior to payment , and by ( 2 ) making improvements to its non - va medical care program data that would allow all non - va medical care data to be analyzed on an episode of care basis . however , va officials did not provide a time frame for when all non - va medical care would be routinely analyzed by episode of care . in march 2014 , we reported that four va facilities we visited had patterns of noncompliance with va claims processing requirements , which led to the inappropriate denial of some millennium act emergency care claims and the failure to notify some veterans that their claims had been denied . we also found that va's existing oversight mechanisms for non - va medical care claims processing were not sufficiently focused on whether va facilities were inappropriately approving or denying claims . for our march 2014 report , we examined a sample of 128 millennium act emergency care claims that the four va facilities we visited had denied in fiscal year 2012 and found 66 instances of noncompliance with va policy requirements . in addition , va mailed letters to all non - va providers that had submitted claims during the previous 2 years to inform them of these online resources . however , none of the four non - va providers included in our march 2014 review recalled receiving the letter that va mailed . two non - va providers were familiar with the website , but one commented that it lacked some necessary information and was not useful . none of these four non - va providers were aware of va's electronic newsletter , and va officials acknowledged that a very small percentage of the non - va providers who submit claims to va had signed up for it . while these communications have not always reached their intended audience , va is continuing its efforts to improve communications with non - va providers . ( see fig .