workforce changes within dcma have contributed to this shift . for example , dcma procurement technicians traditionally performed routine administrative functions such as entering and maintaining contract data , but this role has been understaffed , resulting in more senior personnel , such as industrial specialists , performing such functions . dcma is currently taking steps to rebuild the industrial specialist function by hiring more personnel , developing a new manufacturing and production policy , and upgrading training . dcma has identified ongoing concerns with its ability to effectively carry out its quality assurance responsibilities because of workforce size and capability shortfalls , increasing the risk to the warfighter and the taxpayers . for example , dcma reported an increase in customer complaints in the form of reported quality deficiencies in products . cmos' leadership can be either military or civilian . dcma has acknowledged the need to address supply chain risks that may affect program cost and schedule , such as poor supply chain management by prime contractors that are subcontracting , by defining where those risks lie and influencing prime contractor oversight in those areas . to support these activities , dcma plans to increase the size and quality of its supply management specialist workforce , including provision of training and certification and creation of development plans for supply management professionals . our past work and that of others have identified concerns with dcma's oversight in the contingency setting , but have also noted some positive outcomes . for example , over the past decade , we , the dod inspector general , and others expressed concerns that dcma was not adequately staffed to provide sufficient oversight in contingency settings . other contingency - setting issues included a lack of sufficient training for deployed staff and dcma's inability to determine its resource requirements . however , we also found that dcma's oversight in iraq produced good results , reporting in 2004 for example that dcma contracting officers had eliminated unnecessary airfield services and identified equipment and materials that could be reused to reduce contract costs . further , in 2008 we found that dcma had made progress in increasing its oversight personnel in iraq . dcma has undergone significant shifts in its workforce , organizational structure , and policies and procedures over the past 10 years . after its formation in the early 1990s , dcma's workforce numbers declined and there was significant erosion of some areas of expertise , such as the cost and pricing function . ultimately , the workforce became so out of balance with workload after 2000 that the organization could not fulfill all of its oversight functions . a shift to a substantially decentralized , customer - oriented approach was intended to mitigate the impact of this workforce imbalance , but resulted in a number of unintended consequences , such as inefficiencies in how work was done at the cmos . in light of recent , significant workforce growth , dcma is rebuilding its expertise in areas that had been bereft , instituting new , centralized policies and procedures and developing agency - wide performance indicators intended to gauge how well the agency is meeting its missions .