most of the items that could not be located were computer equipment . for today's testimony , i will provide the highlights of our current findings related to the risk of theft , loss , or misappropriation of it equipment at selected va locations ; whether selected va locations have adequate procedures in place to assure physical security and accountability over it equipment in the excess property disposal process ; and what actions va management has taken to address identified it equipment inventory control weaknesses . my statement is based on our report on va it inventory controls , which you are releasing today . as part of our audit , we statistically tested it equipment inventory at selected case study locations . in addition , our investigator inspected physical security at it equipment storage sites . we performed our audit procedures in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , and we performed our investigative procedures in accordance with quality standards for investigators as set forth by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . our tests of it equipment inventory controls at four case study locations , including three va medical centers and va headquarters , identified a weak overall control environment and a pervasive lack of accountability for it equipment items across the locations we tested . as summarized in table 1 , our statistical tests of key it inventory controls at our four case study locations found significant control failures . none of the case study locations had effective controls to safeguard it equipment from loss , theft , and misappropriation . our statistical tests identified a total of 123 lost and missing it equipment items across the four case locations , including 53 it equipment items that could have stored sensitive personal information . such information could include names and social security numbers protected under the privacy act of 1974 and personal health information accorded additional protections from unauthorized release under the health information portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) and implementing regulations . although va property management policy establishes guidelines for holding employees and supervisors pecuniarily ( financially ) liable for loss , damage , or destruction because of negligence and misuse of government property , except for a few isolated instances , none of the case study locations assigned user - level accountability for it equipment . instead , these locations relied on information about user organization and user location , which was often incorrect and incomplete . our investigator's inspection of physical security at officially designated it warehouses and storerooms at our four case study locations that held new and used it equipment found that most of these storage facilities met the requirements in va handbook 0730 / 1 , security and law enforcement . however , not all of the formally designated storage locations at two medical centers had required motion detection alarm systems and special door locks . we also found numerous instances of informal it storage areas at va headquarters that did not meet va physical security requirements .