state argued that it already had such a plan . moreover , state claimed that it appreciates that priority positions must be filled worldwide based on the relative strategic importance of posts and positions . while state argued that every visa consular officer is serving a strategic function , the department identified one post , embassy baghdad , as a clear example of a priority post . further , state acknowledged that it has fewer midlevel consular officers than it needs . we continue to believe it is incumbent on the department to conduct a worldwide analysis to identify high - priority posts and positions , such as supervisory consular positions in posts with high - risk applicant pools or those with high workloads and long wait times for applicant interviews . as we note in our report , at the time of our work , the midlevel visa chief positions in riyadh and jeddah , saudi arabia , and cairo , egypt , were not filled with permanent midlevel officers . this was a serious deficiency given that the visa sections were staffed with officers on their first tour . although state noted that it anticipated addressing this shortage of midlevel consular officers before 2013 , it did not indicate when that gap would be filled . moreover , state's bidding and assignment process does not guarantee that the positions of highest priority will always be filled with qualified officers . therefore , a further assessment is needed to ensure that state has the right people in the right posts with the necessary skill levels . we continue to see the need for such an assessment . while state has been able to hire more entry - level officers in recent years , we found that more than one - quarter of state's midlevel consular positions were either vacant or filled by an entry - level officer . in addition , consular headquarters officials may not have accurate statistics on wait times for visa interviews from which to allocate resources effectively , and visa applicants may be using inaccurate wait - time information when planning their travel to the united states . state has also increased its targeted recruitment of foreign language proficient officers , but gaps remain . further , state has expanded its training efforts , but additional training would further benefit consular officers . moreover , state has strengthened its fraud prevention efforts , but has not developed systematic criteria to identify high - fraud posts . finally , state has increased funding to improve consular facilities , but many posts' facilities remain inadequate . since 2002 , state has received funding to address ongoing staffing shortfalls , but we continue to see the need for a fundamental reassessment of resource needs worldwide . through the diplomatic readiness initiative and other sources , state has increased the number of foreign service officer consular positions by 364 , from 1,037 in fiscal year 2002 to 1,401 in fiscal year 2005 . moreover , human resource officials anticipate that many officers hired under the diplomatic readiness initiative will begin to reach promotion eligibility for midlevel positions within the next two years .