gao - 07-835t . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2007 . first responders: much work remains to improve communications interoperability , gao - 07-301 washington , d.c.: apr . homeland security: preparing for and responding to disasters . gao - 07- 395t . ( 2 ) how does dhs communicate with states and localities in making federal grant allocation decisions ? ( 3 ) what are the challenges that affect the expeditious spending of dhs grant funds by states and localities ? ( 4 ) to what extent does dhs measure program outcomes as part of its efforts to monitor the expenditure of grant dollars ? my comments are based on gao's historical body of work on dhs grants management , including prior reviews of dhs's ( 1 ) risk management efforts , ( 2 ) methodology for allocating urban area security initiative ( uasi ) grants for fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , ( 3 ) processes for managing their state homeland security and transportation sector - specific grants , and ( 4 ) preparedness for disasters , including fema's reorganization based on the post - katrina reform act . in addition , my comments are based on our ongoing mandated work examining the risk - based grant distribution processes used by fema to distribute the fiscal year 2008 homeland security grant program ( hsgp ) . this program includes the uasi grants as well as the state homeland security program ( shsp ) which provides funding for state , local , and tribal governments . for our ongoing work , we analyzed dhs documents including the fiscal years 2007 and 2008 risk analysis models , grant guidance , and presentations , and interviewed dhs officials about the hsgp grant determination process in fiscal year 2007 as well as any changes to the fiscal year 2008 process . we conducted this work according to generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the purpose of risk management is not to eliminate all risks , as that is an impossible task . rather , given limited resources , risk management is a structured means of making informed trade - offs and choices about how to use available resources effectively and monitoring the effect of those choices . thus , risk management is a continuous process that includes the assessment of threats , vulnerabilities , and consequences to determine what actions should be taken to reduce or eliminate one or more of these elements of risk . risk management includes a feedback loop that continually incorporates new information , such as changing threats or the effect of actions taken to reduce or eliminate identified threats , vulnerabilities , and / or consequences . because we have imperfect information for assessing risks , there is a degree of uncertainty in the information used for risk assessments ( eg , what the threats are and how likely they are to be realized ) .