coverage identification . to identify enrollees with third - party health coverage , states are required to request coverage information from potential medicaid enrollees at the time of any determination or redetermination of eligibility for medicaid . after a state has verified other coverage , it must generally seek to ensure that health care providers' claims are directed to the responsible party.of the cost savings associated with third - party liability . the cost - avoidance process accounts for the bulk 4 . payment recovery . when states have already paid providers for submitted claims for which a third party is liable , they must seek reimbursement from the third party , if it is cost effective to do so . states have flexibility in determining specific approaches to achieve these ends . for example , states are increasingly contracting with managed care plans to deliver services to medicaid enrollees ( such plans are hereafter referred to as medicaid managed care plans ) , and may delegate tpl responsibilities to such plans . both states and medicaid managed care plans may obtain the services of a contractor to identify third - party coverage by conducting electronic data matches and to conduct other tpl responsibilities , such as payment recovery . ensuring compliance with medicaid tpl requirements has long been challenging for states . the mccarran - ferguson act affirms the authority of states to regulate the business of insurance in the state , without interference from federal regulation , unless federal law specifically provides otherwise . thus , states generally regulate private health insurers operating in the state . however , states may not have authority over private insurers that are not licensed to do business in the state but still provide coverage to state residents . for example , some individuals work and receive health insurance through employment in one state but live in a neighboring state . in addition , states are preempted by the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) from regulating employer - sponsored health benefit plans that self - insure coverage rather than purchase coverage from an insurer . due to the bifurcated nature of private health insurance regulation , both federal and state legislation has been required to allow states to enforce tpl requirements . for example , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 required all states to enact laws prohibiting insurers from taking medicaid status into account in enrollment or payment for benefits and to enact laws giving the state rights to payments by liable third parties . in addition , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ) contained provisions affecting state authority to verify coverage and recoup payments from liable health insurers . under the dra , states must attest that they have laws in place to require health insurers to , among other requirements , provide information necessary to identify medicaid enrollees with third - party coverage and , within specified time limits , respond to inquiries from the state regarding claims , as well as to agree not to deny claims solely because of the date the claim was submitted , the form that was used , or the failure to properly document coverage at the point of service .