assistant - at - surgery services are not included in this bundle of services . generally , the amount medicare pays under the physician fee schedule is based on the resources needed to perform a service: the physician's time and skill , practice expenses that include the costs of staff , equipment , and supplies , and the cost of liability insurance . while a surgeon's global fee for a surgical procedure is set to reflect the resources required to perform the service , payments under the physician fee schedule for assistant - at - surgery services are not ; they are calculated as a fixed percentage of the surgeon's global fee . the percentage varies depending on the profession of the assistant - at - surgery . the medicare physician fee schedule pays physicians more than nonphysician health professionals for assistant - at - surgery services ( see table 1 ) . medicare sets requirements that various health care institutions , suppliers , and professionals must meet to be paid by the program . institutions , such as hospitals , must meet conditions of participation ( cop ) — health and safety rules used to ensure quality of care . providing additional services would not increase their payments . consequently , pps payments to the hospital are sometimes less and sometimes more than the cost of providing care . payments are also made under the hospital inpatient pps to teaching hospitals for providing gme to the residents employed by the hospital . in 2001 , about 20 percent of the approximately 5,800 u.s. hospitals were considered teaching hospitals . in 2003 , surgical residents comprised about 20 percent of all residents at these hospitals . doing so , however , would provide no financial incentive for surgeons to use an assistant - at - surgery only when one is medically necessary . decisions to use an assistant - at - surgery should not be influenced by payment ; they should be based on medical necessity . the majority of assistants - at - surgery are likely employed by hospitals , where the inpatient hospital pps pays for their services . if congress were to consolidate medicare physician fee schedule payments for assistant - at - surgery services into the inpatient hospital pps , this would give hospitals an incentive to use assistants only when they are necessary . we conducted our work from july 2001 through december 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . assistants - at - surgery , who serve as members of surgical teams , perform tasks under the direction of surgeons and aid them in conducting operations . these tasks may include making initial incisions ( “opening” ) , exposing the surgical site ( “retracting” ) , stemming blood flow ( “hemostasis” ) , surgically removing veins and arteries to be used as bypass grafts ( “harvesting” ) , reconnecting tissue ( “suturing” ) , and completing the operation and reconnecting external tissue ( “closing” ) . some of these tasks , like retraction , are relatively simple , while others , such as harvesting , are more complex . an assistant - at - surgery may perform one or more simple or complex tasks during an operation .