reducing debt . through the bankruptcy process , chrysler and gm eliminated a substantial amount of their long - term financial liabilities , including debt owed to bank lenders and bondholders . in our previous work , we discussed the importance of reducing debt for companies to achieve long - term viability . by reducing the amount the companies pay in interest expense , cash flow is improved , freeing up more money for research and development and other activities that can help the businesses prosper . the precise amount of the companies' total debt reduction is not known because the value of some debts will not be determined until the companies' post - reorganization accounting is complete . however , some reduced or eliminated debts whose values are known include $6.9 billion of secured bank debt owed by old chrysler , of which $2 billion was repaid and none carried forward to new chrysler ; $5.9 billion of secured bank debt owed by old gm , substantially all of which was repaid by old gm , leaving new gm with none of this debt ; substantial reductions of the companies' monetary obligations to the trusts established to provide health care benefits to retirees of the international union , united automobile , aerospace and agricultural implement workers of america ( uaw ) ; and about $27 billion in unsecured gm bondholder debt and $2 billion in unsecured chrysler obligations , which stayed as a liability of the old gm and old chrysler , leaving new gm and new chrysler with none of this debt . reducing the number of brands and models . gm is reducing its north american brands from eight to four . in november 2007 , chrysler announced it would eliminate four models within its three primary brands — chrysler , dodge , and jeep — and in october 2009 it announced that it would create a fourth brand by splitting the ram brand out of the dodge brand . as we have previously reported , advantages of reducing brands and models include eliminating costs such as factory tooling and product development , reducing intracompany competition for sales of similar models , and allowing more focus and resources on the remaining models' quality , image , and performance . rationalizing dealership networks to align with sales volumes . both chrysler and gm have made cuts to their dealership networks since year - end 2008 . as we reported in april , the companies' dealer networks were too large to be supported by recent sales levels . as of april 2009 , chrysler , ford , and gm dealerships — most of which are independently owned and operated — were more numerous and , in general , sold half or fewer vehicles per dealership than dealerships selling vehicles from foreign automakers . higher sales per store allow for a greater return on the dealer's fixed costs of running the business , allowing for more investment in facilities and advertising — which ultimately benefits the automaker by improving the price for which its cars are sold .