gao - 03-519t . washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2003 . these combat patrols continue today . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . homeland security: management challenges facing federal leadership . while these forces may obtain some training benefit from actually conducting the mission , the benefit is limited by the narrow scope of maneuvers performed during these missions . also , as with the army , air force servicemembers away 220 to 365 days had risen from about 1,600 to over 22,100 . the number of air force active , air force reserve , and air national guard air force personnel exceeding the third personnel tempo threshold of 401 or more days away from home in the preceding 730-day period also increased during the latter period of 2002 , starting at about 3,700 personnel in september 2002 and rising to more than 8,100 servicemembers in december 2002 . of those , about one - half of these personnel were air national guard personnel , some of whom were tasked with conducting air sovereignty alert missions in the continental united states . in september 2002 , 1,900 had spent more than 401 days away from home over a 2-year period . by december 2002 , the number of air national guard personnel spending more than 401 days away from home had increased to about 3,900 . exceeding the threshold on a sustained basis can indicate an inadequacy in the force structure or the mix of forces . dod has recognized the potential for retention problems stemming from the current high personnel tempo but has balanced that against immediate critical skill needs to support ongoing operations . therefore , to prevent servicemembers with key skills from leaving the services , dod issued orders to prevent degradation in combat capabilities , an action known as stop loss authority . dod took these actions because it recognized that individuals with certain key skills — such as personnel in army military police and air force fighter units — were needed , in some cases , to perform the increasing number of military domestic missions . these orders affected personnel with designated individual job skills or in some cases all of the individuals in specific types of units that were critical for overseas combat and military domestic missions . officials from the four services who manage the implementation of these orders cautioned that they are short - term tools designed to maintain unit - level military readiness for overseas combat and military domestic missions . moreover , the officials added that the orders are not to be used as a long - term solution to address mismatches or shortfalls in capabilities and requirements , or as a substitute for the routine recruiting , induction , and training of new servicemembers . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . contacts and staff acknowledgments for future questions about this statement , please contact raymond j. decker at ( 202 ) 512-6020 . individuals making key contributions to this statement include brian j. lepore , deborah colantonio , richard k. geiger , kevin l. o'neill , william j. rigazio , susan k. woodward , and michael c. zola .