gao - 11-278 . washington , d.c.: february 2011 . food and drug administration: response to heparin contamination helped protect public health ; controls that were needed for working with external entities were recently added . gao - 11-95 . washington , d.c.: october 29 , 2010 . drug safety: fda has conducted more foreign inspections and begun to improve its information on foreign establishments , but more progress is needed . gao - 10-961 . washington , d.c: september 30 , 2010 . we also examined methods used by fda to select establishments for inspection . for our work examining how fda responded to the heparin crisis , we reviewed actions fda took during the crisis period , which fda defined as january 2008 through may 2008 . we also interviewed fda officials and drug manufacturers and reviewed fda documents , such as inspection reports and internally produced summaries ( eg , a time line of events related to the crisis ) . for our work reviewing the information fda has on foreign drug manufacturing establishments , we obtained data from fda's registration database on the number of establishments registered to market their drugs in the united states . fda also identified statutory changes that would help improve its oversight of drugs manufactured in foreign establishments . these include authority to ( 1 ) suspend or cancel drug establishment registrations to address concerns , including inaccurate or out - of - date information ; ( 2 ) require drug establishments to use a unique establishment identifier ; and ( 3 ) implement a risk - based inspection process , with flexibility to determine the frequency with which both foreign and domestic establishments are inspected , in place of the current requirement that fda inspect domestic establishments every 2 years . globalization has fundamentally altered the drug supply chain and created regulatory challenges for fda . in our prior reports we identified several concerns that demonstrate the regulatory difficulties that fda faces conducting inspections of , and maintaining accurate information about , foreign drug establishments . while inspections provide fda with critical information , we recognize that inspections alone are not sufficient to meet all the challenges of globalization . fda should be credited for recent actions , such as collaborating with and exchanging information on drug establishments with foreign governments , that represent important initial steps toward addressing these challenges . fda relies on these establishment inspections to determine compliance with current good manufacturing practice regulations ( gmp ) . the purpose of these inspections is to ensure that foreign establishments meet the same requirements as domestic establishments to ensure the quality , purity , potency , safety , and efficacy of drugs marketed in the united states . requirements governing fda's inspection of foreign and domestic establishments differ . specifically , fda is required to inspect every 2 years those domestic establishments that manufacture drugs in the united states , but there is no comparable requirement for inspecting foreign establishments that market their drugs in the united states .