my testimony today revisits these issues . i will discuss ( 1 ) progress made by hhs's wtc federal responder screening program , and ( 2 ) actions cdc has taken to award the $75 million that the congress appropriated to the agency in december 2005 for programs that provide screening , monitoring , or treatment for wtc responders . to assess progress made by hhs's wtc federal responder screening program , we obtained and reviewed program data and documents from hhs , including applicable interagency agreements and budget documents . we interviewed officials from the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) ; cdc's national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) ; federal occupational health services ( foh ) ; and the office of public health emergency preparedness ( ophep ) . to determine actions taken by cdc to award funds from the $75 million appropriated , we obtained documents and interviewed officials from niosh and atsdr . we also interviewed officials from organizations implementing programs designated in the appropriations act as having first priority for receiving the funds — including the mount sinai - irving j. selikoff center for occupational and environmental medicine , one of the clinical centers of the worker and volunteer wtc program ; fdny's bureau of health services ( fdny - bhs ) ; the new york city department of health and mental hygiene ; the police organization providing peer assistance ( the poppa program ) ; and the new york city police foundation's project cope — and officials from the american red cross , which has funded treatment services for responders . we relied on data provided by agency officials and contained in government publications and did not independently verify the data we obtained . although we could not independently verify the reliability of all of this information , we compared it with other supporting documents , when available , to determine data consistency and reasonableness . based on these efforts , we believe the information we obtained is sufficiently reliable for this report . we conducted our work from july 2006 to september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , since february 2006 , hhs has registered and screened additional federal responders , and arrangements are being developed for screening responders who are former federal workers residing outside the new york metropolitan area . through march 2004 , the program — which started about a year later than the other wtc monitoring programs — completed screenings of 394 federal workers . hhs put the program on hold in january 2004 , when it stopped scheduling new examinations , because it wanted to resolve several operational issues , including hhs's determination that foh did not have the authority to provide examinations to people who are no longer in federal service . under an agreement between ophep and foh that was established in july 2005 , the program resumed providing examinations for current federal workers in december 2005 , and in february 2006 , ophep executed an agreement with niosh calling for niosh to arrange for the worker and volunteer wtc program to provide examinations to former federal workers .