strengthen health care . advance scientific knowledge and innovation . advance the health , safety , and well - being of the american people . ( see app . i for a list of these 12 programs. ) for each of these 12 programs we did the following: reviewed performance measures to determine how they contribute toward department and agency goals ; reviewed documentation and interviewed responsible officials to determine how hhs monitors these programs and how the workforce programs align with hhs strategic planning goals ; compared agency performance management practices to criteria from gprama as well as leading practices identified in prior gao work ; examined the extent to which these programs meet identified areas of health care workforce need ; to identify areas of need , we reviewed the literature on the health care workforce , as well as workforce projection reports issued by hrsa that estimate key future areas of shortages in the nation's health care workforce , examining the most recent hrsa reports presenting projections for physicians , nurses , dentists , and other clinical specialties ; reviewed documentation from hhs to identify changes that hhs has made or proposed to the structure or allocation of program funds to meet emerging health care workforce needs ; and reviewed the statutory requirements relevant to the permissible uses of program funds and confirmed our understanding with agency officials . we conducted this performance audit from december 2014 to december 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . strategic planning provides an important mechanism for hhs to establish long - term goals and strategies to improve the performance of its many health care workforce programs . hhs , as with all executive branch agencies , is required by gprama to engage in performance management tasks , such as setting goals , measuring results , and reporting progress toward these goals . as one of its gprama responsibilities , hhs issues a strategic plan at least every 4 years . hhs's most recent plan covers fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2018 and describes four broad strategic goals: 1 . ensure efficiency , transparency , accountability , and effectiveness of hhs programs . within each strategic goal , the plan presents specific objectives that are linked to a set of strategies for accomplishing that objective , as well as a representative set of performance goals or measures for assessing progress . ( see fig . annually , hhs releases a performance report that presents progress on the performance measures that contribute to its strategic plan . according to hhs officials , the performance measures included in this performance report are a small but representative subset of hhs's work as a whole and of the performance measures that hhs tracks annually and publishes through other means . hhs's strategic planning efforts are led by staff offices that report directly to the secretary of health and human services .