this continues to be the case . following are some examples: transit infrastructure facilities: $2.8 billion , or 47 percent , of these funds obligated nationally have been for transit infrastructure construction projects and related activities , which range from large - scale projects , such as upgrading power substations , to a series of smaller projects , such as installing enhanced bus shelters . for example , in pennsylvania , the lehigh and northampton transportation authority will implement a new passenger information technology system , install enhanced bus shelters and signage , and fund a new maintenance facility . elsewhere , in north carolina , the charlotte area transit system will renovate its operating and maintenance facilities . in addition , in california , the san diego association of governments plans to upgrade stations on a light - rail line and replace a section of a railroad trestle bridge . bus fleets: $2 billion , or 33 percent , of recovery act funds obligated nationally have been for bus purchases or rehabilitation to replace aging vehicles or expand an agency's fleet . for example , in pennsylvania , the lehigh and northampton transportation authority plans to purchase 5 heavy - duty hybrid buses and the southeastern pennsylvania transportation authority plans to purchase 40 hybrid buses . in iowa , the state's smaller transit agencies are combining bus orders through the state's department of transportation for 160 replacement buses and 20 buses to expand bus fleets in areas of growth around the state . in colorado , both the regional transportation district in denver and the fort collins - transfort agency plan to purchase 6 buses each . preventive maintenance: another $515 million , or 9 percent , has been obligated for preventive maintenance . fta considers preventive maintenance projects eligible capital expenditures under the transit capital assistance program . see figure 1 . while reimbursement rates have been increasing , wide differences exist across states . some differences we observed among the states were related to the complexity of the types of projects states were undertaking and the extent to which projects were being administered by local governments . for example , illinois and iowa have the highest reimbursement rates — 36 percent and 53 percent of obligations , respectively — far above the national average . illinois and iowa also have a far larger percentage of funds devoted to resurfacing projects than other states — as discussed in the next section , resurfacing projects can be quickly obligated and bid . florida and california have among the lowest reimbursement rates , less than 2 percent and 4 percent of obligations respectively . florida is using recovery act funds for more complex projects , such as constructing new roads and bridges and adding lanes to existing highways . florida officials also told us that the pace of award ing contracts has been generally slower in areas where large numbers of projects are being administered by local agencies . in california , state officials said that projects administered by local agencies may take longe to reach the reimbursement phase than state projects due to additional steps required to approve local highway projects .