ii ) . finsa does not formally define national security , but provides a number of factors for cfius and the president to consider in determining whether a transaction poses a risk . appendix i provides more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from december 2016 to february 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 1975 , an executive order established cfius to monitor the impact of and coordinate u.s. policy on foreign investment in the united states . in 1988 , congress enacted the exon - florio amendment adding section 721 to the defense production act of 1950 . the amendment authorized the president to investigate the impact of certain foreign acquisitions of u.s. companies on national security and to suspend or prohibit acquisitions that might threaten to impair national security . finsa further amended the defense production act , established cfius as it currently exists , and guides the committee . one of the purposes of finsa's enactment was to ensure national security while promoting foreign investment and the creation of u.s. jobs . cfius reviews transactions involving a large variety of countries and industry sectors to determine if such transactions pose a threat to national security and whether the transactions should be allowed to proceed ( for more information on the characteristics of transactions reviewed by cfius , see app . these factors include the potential national security - related effects on u.s. critical technologies and whether the transaction could result in the control of a u.s. business by a foreign government . cfius also may consider other factors that it finds appropriate in determining whether a transaction poses a national security risk ( for a full list of factors , see app . iii ) . under finsa , cfius is chaired by the secretary of the treasury and includes voting members from the departments of commerce , defense , energy , homeland security , justice , and state ; and the offices of the u.s. trade representative , and science and technology policy . this report ( 1 ) examines changes in the committee on foreign investment in the united states' ( cfius ) workload and staffing from 2011 through 2016 , and ( 2 ) provides information on stakeholder views on potential changes to cfius . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws , executive orders , and regulations . we interviewed officials from each cfius voting member agency , including the departments of commerce , defense , energy , homeland security , justice , state , and the treasury as well as the offices of the u.s. trade representative and science and technology policy . we also interviewed officials from the two nonvoting ex officio members , the office of the director of national intelligence and the department of labor .