deferred maintenance . we reported in 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 that maintenance deferred while a ship is deployed can develop into more costly issues that must be addressed later , often during depot - level maintenance . deferred maintenance can lead to new work at the shipyards , as the degraded ship conditions result in the need for additional maintenance . for example , maintenance officials told us that the focus for ships homeported overseas is on mission readiness , so overseas - homeported ships place priority on the maintenance of combat systems . this means that systems with the potential to reduce ship service life — such as fuel and ballast tanks that require extended in - port periods to properly maintain — can be subject to maintenance deferrals in order to allow the ship to sustain a high operational tempo . in our prior work , we identified numerous challenges that occur during the navy's planning and execution of a ship's maintenance period that contribute to delays . for example: difficulties in adhering to the maintenance planning process . we reported in 2016 that the navy must accurately define the work for each ship's maintenance period . to do this , the navy's maintenance planning process specifies planning milestones intended to ascertain the ship's condition , identify the work needed , and plan for its execution . missing or meeting planning milestones late can contribute to maintenance delays . however , the navy does not always adhere to its own maintenance planning process due to high operational tempo , scheduling difficulties , or personnel shortages , among other factors , resulting in shipyards discovering the need for additional repairs after maintenance has begun and adding time to the schedule for planning , contracting , or waiting for parts . navy shipyards have shortages of skilled personnel . the navy has reported a variety of workforce challenges at the four public shipyards such as hiring personnel in a timely manner and providing personnel with the training necessary to gain proficiency in critical skills . the navy has noted that some occupations require years of training before workers become proficient . according to navy officials , a large portion of its workforce is inexperienced . for example , we reported in december 2018 that 45 percent of the puget sound and 30 percent of the portsmouth naval shipyards' skilled workforce had fewer than 5 years of experience . according to dod officials , workforce shortages and inexperience contribute to maintenance delays . for example , at pearl harbor naval shipyard in 2014 and 2015 , two submarines were delayed approximately 20 months each , in part because of shortages in ship fitters and welders , among other skilled personnel . most of dod's depots , which include the naval shipyards , have taken actions to maintain critical skills through retention incentives , bonuses , and awards . however , we found that neither the depots , their higher - level service component commands , nor the services have conducted an assessment to determine the effectiveness of these actions . the condition of facilities and equipment at navy shipyards is generally poor .