ii. ) the aoc oig also provided several comments about the qualifications of uscp , citing its accreditation by the commission on accreditation for law enforcement agencies , inc . the oig includes the attributes for accreditation , which included among others , professionalism , independence , and objectivity . as stated in our report , our focus was on oig investigations and specifically how oig investigations follow quality standards provided by cigie , which were established , in part , to help ensure the independence of oig investigative efforts . based on technical comments provided by the uscp general counsel on behalf of uscp officials , we added certain information regarding requirements of uscp's criminal investigations . however , we did not audit uscp or the policies and procedures that apply to its investigations . aoc oig has responsibility for ensuring that its investigations comply with applicable standards . it is for these reasons that we have recommended that the aoc oig work with cigie to obtain a peer review from another federal oig of the aoc oig's overall investigative operations , including consideration of the oig's reliance on investigations performed by other entities , and make any needed changes in its operating procedures based on the results of the review to help ensure that investigations of aoc are conducted in accordance with cigie standards for investigations and aoc ig act requirements . the aoc oig agreed to implement this recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the architect , the architect of the capitol inspector general , and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . our audit objectives were to ( 1 ) identify the architect of the capitol's ( aoc ) jurisdictions , offices , and major contracts subject to aoc office of inspector general ( oig ) oversight during fiscal years 2012 through 2015 ; ( 2 ) determine the statutory requirements , policies , and budgetary and staffing resources of the aoc oig during fiscal years 2012 through 2015 ; and ( 3 ) examine the extent to which the aoc oig developed plans and policies for oversight of aoc's jurisdictions , offices , and major contracts during fiscal years 2012 through fiscal year 2015 , and the extent to which oversight was provided . to identify the aoc jurisdictions , offices , and major contracts subject to aoc oig oversight during fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , we obtained the aoc's performance and accountability reports for each fiscal year . from these reports , we determined aoc's priorities and the focus of aoc's efforts for matters that could be considered for oig oversight .