see pub . 113-188 , ยง 901 ( d ) - ( e ) , 128 stat . 2016. relevant issues . to assess the reliability of sblf data , we reviewed prior gao work on the data and the systems that produced them , which included interviewing treasury officials on how they assess the reliability of participants' quarterly data and the information they maintain on sblf . in addition , we inspected data for missing observations and outliers . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing the status of the program . to determine the status of ssbci as of june 30 , 2014 , we analyzed data on the amount of funds used by states and on how the states had allocated funds across the types of eligible programs . to assess the reliability of ssbci data , we reviewed prior gao work on the data and the systems that produced them . in addition , we performed electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness . where there were questions or discrepancies we identified related to the data , we clarified them through communication with treasury officials . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of describing the status of the program . to obtain information on participants' experiences with the program , we interviewed officials from 10 ssbci participants: west virginia ; washington ; minnesota ; massachusetts ; laramie , wyoming ; connecticut ; nebraska ; oklahoma ; idaho ; and louisiana . factors we used for selecting the ssbci participants included their percentage of funds used , number of programs implemented , and geographic dispersion . we also interviewed representatives from three trade associations involved with the ssbci program: ( 1 ) the council of development finance agencies because of its role in supporting ssbci participants through webinars and other resources ; ( 2 ) the opportunity finance network because it is a national network of community development financial institutions ; and ( 3 ) the community development venture capital alliance because of its role in supporting venture capital investing . we also examined the president's budget request for additional ssbci funds and interviewed agency officials about the budget request and lessons learned they would apply in a second round of funding . to assess the status of treasury's efforts to enhance performance measurement and program evaluation , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed agency officials . specifically , to assess the extent to which treasury's evaluation of sblf isolates program impact , we interviewed agency officials on their approach , reviewed treasury's methodology , and considered criteria from standard economic and statistical approaches . we also assessed how effectively treasury communicated the results of its impact analysis based on our analysis of relevant resources on the use and presentation of program evaluations . to assess the extent to which treasury has made progress in establishing performance targets and obtaining input from stakeholders as part of its evaluation design process for ssbci , we examined documents and interviewed officials on their planned activities . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology .