circuit . neither of these recommendations has been implemented , and in august 2013 , aousc officials stated that the judiciary does not have plans to update the 2004 district court case weights or the 1996 court of appeals adjusted filings weights . with regard to our 2003 recommendation for updating the district court case weights , we reported that fjc agreed that the method used to develop the new case weights would not permit the calculation of standard errors , but that other methods could be used to assess the integrity of the resulting case weight system . in response , we noted that the delphi technique to be used for developing out - of - court time estimates was most appropriate when more precise analytical techniques were not feasible and the issue could benefit from subjective judgments on a collective basis . more precise techniques were available for developing the new case weights and were to be used for developing new bankruptcy court case weights . in our 2003 report , we also concluded that the methodology the judicial conference decided to begin in june 2002 for the revision of the bankruptcy case weights offered an approach that could be usefully adopted for the revision of the district court case weights . the bankruptcy court methodology used a two - phased approach . first , new case weights were to be developed based on time data recorded by bankruptcy judges for a period of weeks — a methodology very similar to that used to develop the bankruptcy case weights that existed in 2003 at the time of our report . the accuracy of the new case weights could be assessed using standard errors . the second part represents experimental research to determine if it is possible to make future revisions of the weights without conducting a time study . the data from the time study could be used to validate the feasibility of this approach . if the research determined that this was possible , the case weights could be updated more frequently with less cost than required by a time study . we concluded in 2003 that that approach could provide ( 1 ) more accurate weighted case filings than the design developed and used for the development of the 2004 district court case weights , and ( 2 ) a sounder method of developing and testing the accuracy of case weights that were developed without a time study . however , we have not reviewed the effectiveness of this methodology or confirmed whether the judiciary implemented this approach . with regard to our recommendation on improving the case - related workload measure for the courts of appeals , the chair of the committee on judicial resources commented that the workload of the courts of appeals entails important factors that have defied measurement , including significant differences in case - processing techniques . we recognized that there were significant methodological challenges in developing a more precise workload measure for the courts of appeals . however , we stated that using the data available , neither we nor the judicial conference could have assessed the accuracy of adjusted case filings as a measure of the case - related workload of courts of appeals judges .