( see fig . in addition , states could modify the calculation of their work participation rates through funding decisions . specifically , because prwora's work participation requirements only applied to families receiving cash assistance funded with tanf block grant dollars , states could opt to use their moe dollars to fund cash assistance for families less likely to meet their individual work participation requirements . by creating these moe - funded separate state programs ( ssp ) , states were able to remove selected families from the work participation rate calculation . ( 3 ) how did the recovery act affect state tanf programs ? as criteria for program implementation , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and agency guidance . to answer the questions , we collected and analyzed information through several methods . at the federal level , we interviewed hhs officials and reviewed the agency's tanf data , including the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance , work participation rates , and federal and state expenditures , as well as states' applications for the emergency contingency fund . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to gather information from states about changes to their tanf programs after dra was enacted , the economic recession began , and the recovery act was enacted , we surveyed state tanf administrators from the 50 states and the district of columbia , and we conducted site visits in 3 states ( florida , ohio , and oregon ) . we administered our web - based survey between november 2009 and january 2010 , and all state tanf administrators responded . while we did not validate specific information that administrators reported through our survey , we reviewed their responses , and we conducted follow - up , as necessary , to determine that their responses were complete , reasonable , and sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . our site visit states were selected because they made varied modifications to their tanf programs after dra and the recovery act , and the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance in these states had increased since the economic recession began . these states were also selected because they varied in geographic location and selected tanf program characteristics , including the maximum amount of tanf cash assistance provided to each recipient family . within each state , we interviewed state tanf administrators , as well as tanf officials from two to three local offices serving urban and rural areas . we cannot generalize our findings from the site visits beyond the states and localities we visited . to gather additional perspectives about changes to state tanf programs , we also interviewed researchers knowledgeable about tanf from a range of organizations . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 to may 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .