employee training . all 32 of the rail operators we previously interviewed had provided security training to their staff , which largely consisted of ways to identify suspicious items and persons and how to respond to events . cctv and video analytics . as we previously reported , 29 of 32 u.s. rail operators had implemented some form of cctv to monitor their stations , yards , or trains . some rail operators have installed “smart” cameras which make use of video analytics to alert security personnel when suspicious activity occurs , such as if a passenger left a bag in a certain location or if a person entered a restricted area . according to one passenger rail operator we spoke with , this technology was relatively inexpensive and not difficult to implement . several other operators stated they were interested in exploring this technology . rail system design and configuration . in an effort to reduce vulnerabilities to terrorist attack and increase overall security , passenger rail operators are incorporating security features into the design of new and existing rail infrastructure , primarily rail stations . for example , of the 32 rail operators we previously interviewed , 22 of them had removed their conventional trash bins entirely , or replaced them with transparent or bomb - resistant trash bins . of 32 rail operators we previously interviewed , 22 had stated they were incorporating security into the design of new or existing rail infrastructure . in deploying explosives detection technologies , it is important to develop a concept of operations ( conops ) for both using these technologies to screen passengers and their belongings and for responding to identified threats . this conops for passenger rail would include specific plans to respond to threats without unacceptable impacts on the flow of passengers through the system . there are multiple components of a conops . first , operators identify likely threats to rail systems and choose layers of security to mitigate these threats . since each rail system in the united states faces different risks , rail systems perform their own risk assessment in consultation with federal partners to identify their risks . using the results of the risk assessment , each system crafts a strategy to respond to the threat and to mitigate the risks by acquiring different layers of security . rail systems typically make use of multiple security layers — which may or may not include the use of an explosives detection technology component — based on the risks each system faces . the conops is a plan to respond to threats identified by one of the layers of security . developing a conops for responding to explosives detection technology is challenging because of the potential for false alarms . for example , two rail operators with whom we spoke and that were using explosives detection technologies to screen passengers and their belongings stated that a conops was critical for ensuring that actions taken in response to an alarm are appropriate and are followed correctly . for example , should the person be questioned or searched further or should the person be moved to another location on the chance that the threat is real .