objectivity . all six measures we assessed addressed the attribute of objectivity . ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no.” ) ( if yes ) how do you identify training to include in your plan ? is your plan updated ? ( if yes ) how often ? is your plan tracked to ensure that training has been completed ? ( if yes ) who is responsible for tracking it ? would a standardized training curriculum with material specific to your core responsibilities as a whistleblower reprisal investigations unit investigator help you execute your responsibilities as an investigator ? ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no.” ) ( if yes ) why ? ' during intake , do you document any information from the intake interview with the complainant in the case - management system ? ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no.” ) ( if yes ) how is this information documented ? in your opinion , is it generally feasible to complete contractor investigations within 180 days ? ( this question was repeated for civilian investigations within 240 days. ) ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no,” “don't know.” ) ( if yes ) why do you think it is feasible ? ( if no ) why do you think it is not feasible ? are there factors that have typically contributed to any delays you've encountered in meeting investigative time frames ? ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no,” “don't know,” “no delays.” ) ( if yes ) what are the factors ? as an investigation unfolds , how often , if at all , do investigative planning roundtables occur ? ( this question was repeated for five other types of roundtables. ) who typically attends investigative planning roundtables ? have you ever observed bias by another investigator , supervisory investigator , whistleblower reprisal investigations unit management , or other staff involved in the investigative or review processes ? ( interviewer recorded: “yes,” “no,” “don't know.” ) ( if yes ) please provide an example of bias without identifying the individuals involved . in your opinion , what , if anything , could be done to improve the handling of whistleblower reprisal investigations for dod civilians and contractors ? separately , we also reviewed training materials , guidance , and requirements for dodig investigators and attended three dodig administrative investigations training symposia , which included sessions on recent developments in whistleblower reprisal investigations , investigator competencies , hotline best practices , and protecting investigative source identities . during the course of our semistructured interviews , we also discussed training practices , requirements , and experiences with the 24 investigators responsible for conducting investigations , and separately discussed these same topics and other key survey questions with the four supervisory investigators responsible for supervising the investigative teams . to determine the extent to which dodig has conducted oversight of civilian reprisal cases handled by the defense intelligence components , we assessed dodig , national security agency ig , and defense intelligence agency ig oversight policies , processes , practices , and guidance against dod policy that implements presidential policy directive 19 ( ppd - 19 ) and governs the whistleblower reprisal case oversight process .