doing what works . led by education's office of planning , evaluation and policy development , dww is a web - based resource intended to help teachers , schools , districts , states and technical assistance providers implement research - based instructional practice . in 2002 , ies awarded a $27 million 5-year contract to the initial contractors to operate the clearinghouse . the wwc contractors developed the clearinghouse's research review standards with ies and reviewed research related to topic areas considered to be pressing issues in education . one of the goals of the clearinghouse was to promote informed education decision making through a web - based dissemination system that featured rigorous reviews of studies on the effectiveness of educational interventions . the wwc experienced a slow start due in part to the amount of work involved in developing a research review and reporting process that was valid , transparent , and replicable , according to the initial contractors . in developing the research review process , the contractors and ies addressed over 60 technical issues , such as determining what constitutes an acceptable level of participant loss ( attrition ) from a study and what methods should be in place to accommodate common education research techniques . in addition , initial plans for topic areas and reporting formats were modified . for example , ies decided to drop one planned topic area because ies officials determined it to be too broad . the wwc and ies also spent a substantial amount of time developing and refining a reporting format to communicate research results to a lay audience . as a result , the wwc began releasing reports in 2006 . by september 2007 , the wwc had released 89 intervention reports , six topic reports , and three practice guides . the wwc uses a three - step review process to assess the quality of studies and report on what the research indicates about the effectiveness of interventions . the wwc definition of interventions includes programs ( such as whole school reform ) , products ( such as a textbook or curriculum ) , practices ( such as mixed - age grouping ) , or policies ( such as class size reduction ) . the process begins with an initial screening of published and unpublished studies relevant to the intervention being reviewed . studies are collected from electronic databases , journals , conference proceedings , and nominations solicited from the general public . the studies that pass initial screens are reviewed to determine whether they provide valid evidence of an intervention's effectiveness . using these studies , the wwc then synthesizes the evidence about the effectiveness of an intervention and publishes a report describing its findings . the clearinghouse categorizes interventions as either having positive effects , potentially positive effects , mixed effects , no discernable effects , potentially negative effects , or negative effects ( see fig . the wwc uses evidence standards to assess the strengths and weaknesses of a study's methodology , such as the type of design it uses , the quality of the study's data , and the appropriateness of the study's statistical procedures . until recently , the wwc accepted two types of study designs — randomized experiments and quasi - experimental studies .