we disagree . our report focuses on state department efforts to protect u.s. officials and their families from terrorist threats , at their homes , recreation centers , schools , commuting , and living outside the embassy compounds . although state , in its comments , indicated that it has long had a “security strategy” to protect u.s. officials and their families outside the embassy , it was never able to produce such a document . in addition , while state has a number of programs and activities designed to protect u.s. officials and their families at soft target areas , senior ds officials agreed that these programs are not tied together in an overall strategy . in january 2005 , state agreed that it should develop a comprehensive soft target strategy , and as part of that effort , undertake a formal evaluation of how existing programs can be more effectively integrated and whether new programs might be needed to fill any potential gaps . state said it planned to complete the strategy by june 1 , 2005 . we have taken out reference to “other americans” throughout the report , except in reference to the soft targets program , which covers u.s. children and teachers who have no affiliation with the u.s. government . we have also modified the scope and methodology to show that our focus is “primarily” on the protection of u.s. government officials and their families . we have clarified the sentence by indicating that rsos were unclear about which schools could qualify for security assistance under phase three of the soft targets program . phase three , because it can encompass all schools in a country with one or more americans , can potentially include vastly more schools than in phase one or two of the program . we recognize that the department's soft targets working group is currently defining parameters for which schools could qualify under phase three , in addition to identifying other vulnerable off - compound facilities . we believe that a soft target strategy could help identify which schools most urgently need security improvements . we clarified the report to stipulate that these reports focused on the security of u.s. officials . see gao comment 1 . we have also changed the word “defines” to “considers.” 8 . it is not uncommon for gao to clarify , add specificity and thus make adjustments or changes to a requested engagement , provided that these adjustments and changes are discussed and agreed upon by the requester . we informed state of these changes . see gao comment 4 . see gao comment 1 . see gao comment 4 . the appropriations subcommittee report language is within the scope of the gao review because it covers u.s. officials and their dependents , which is the primary focus of our review . moreover , this language was based on testimony provided by afsa out of concern that the department was not providing adequate security for u.s. diplomats and their families while they are outside of the embassy compound . gao agrees that the subcommittee report language is not binding and we are not judging the department's performance against this language .