( see app . i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) as arranged with your offices , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . at that time , we will send copies to other appropriate congressional committees , the epa administrator , and the international joint commission . subsequent amendments were made to the agreement in 1983 and 1987 . the 1987 amendments added several annexes that focused on specific environmental concerns , such as contaminated sediment . the 1978 agreement as amended contains 17 annexes that define in detail the specific programs and activities that the two governments agreed upon and committed to implement . although most of the annexes specify pollution prevention strategies , annex 2 calls for the preparation of raps to address the restoration and protection of beneficial uses in specific contaminated areas designated as areas of concern and the other open waters of the great lakes . such areas may include areas along the great lakes' shoreline and areas that drain into the lakes that states and provinces identified as contaminated areas requiring cleanup . the agreement binds the united states and canada to cooperate with state and provincial governments to designate such areas of concern , with the ijc reviewing progress by each government in addressing actions to restore water quality in the lakes . the methodology that we used to address these issues is presented in appendix i . recognizing their mutual interests in the great lakes and other boundary waters , the united states and canada signed the boundary waters treaty in 1909 , giving both countries equal rights to use the waterways that cross the international border . accordingly , the treaty established the international joint commission ( ijc ) , comprised of three commissioners from each country , to help the two governments resolve and prevent disputes concerning boundary waters . in addition , the water quality act of 1987 amended the clean water act to provide that epa should take the lead in coordinating with other federal agencies and state and local authorities to meet the goals in the agreement . the act also established glnpo within epa to fulfill the united states' responsibilities under the agreement and to coordinate epa's actions both at headquarters and in the affected regional offices . the great lakes critical programs act of 1990 amended the clean water act further defining glnpo's role and requiring the submission of all raps to the office and also requiring each plan be submitted to the ijc for review and comment . the 1990 act designated states as the primary parties for developing and implementing plans , although ensuring successful completion of the plans remains the responsibility of the united states and epa under the agreement and the clean water act . when coastal environmental management ( cem ) funding first became available in 1992 , and because the water divisions administered other water program funding , epa officials made the decision to transfer oversight of the rap process from glnpo to the water division in epa regions ii , iii , and v , which border the great lakes .