iv. ) components most often identified deficiencies related to aligning fee rates to recover a greater share of program costs . specifically , 12 of the 20 deficiencies related to recovering greater shares of program cost through collections by adjusting rates and spending caps or establishing charges for additional services . another 5 deficiencies involved existing rates that may not distribute costs among users in an equitable manner . two deficiencies identified challenges related to managing unobligated carryover balances . the remaining deficiency identified a difference in program collections and costs that could be addressed by recognizing other revenue sources , such as available unobligated carryover balances . however , components have not taken action to address 9 of these 20 deficiencies . for example , components have not addressed 5 of the deficiencies related to cost recovery , resulting in a difference between identified program costs and collections of around $700 million for the related programs since these deficiencies were identified in fiscal year 2014 . if left unaddressed , these deficiencies may lead to management and operational challenges , such as the inequitable distribution and inefficient use of funds . dhs ocfo identified the need for greater oversight of the dhs fee portfolio through its winter study . specifically , the winter study found considerable variation across components relating to the development and budgeting of user fees and other collections , and recommended as first steps towards greater standardization and coordination ( 1 ) the establishment of a framework for developing fee proposals , and ( 2 ) a department - wide fee governance council comprising chief financial officers from components responsible for collecting fees and other collections as well as representatives from dhs ocfo and dhs office of general counsel . in january 2016 , dhs formally established the dhs fee governance council for the purpose of advising and assisting the dhs ocfo in establishing a consistent program for the financial management functions , activities , and policies relating to fees across dhs . moreover , in accordance with its charter , the fee governance council is to establish a governance and oversight structure for fees and other collections across dhs , developing policy guidance on issues such as , how fees and other collections are established , updated , or changed , and how regular fee reviews are conducted . while the establishment of a department - wide fee council is a positive step , dhs has not determined whether dhs ocfo will use this venue to issue guidance to components or provide oversight to ensure appropriate actions are taken to address management and operational deficiencies , such as those relating to cost recovery and excess carryover . standards for internal control in the federal government state that policies and procedures should provide reasonable assurance that ongoing monitoring and evaluation are institutionalized in an agency's operations , and require that findings from audits and other reviews are promptly resolved . further we have previously reported that evaluating and reporting on results is a key practice that can assist interagency efforts in identifying areas for policy and operational improvement .