as depicted in fig . 2 below , city officials replaced the street signs even in abandoned neighborhoods . this assisted listers in locating the blocks they were assigned to canvass and expedited the canvassing process in these deserted blocks . to further ensure a quality count in the hurricane affected areas , the bureau plans to hand - deliver an estimated 1.2 million questionnaires ( and simultaneously update the address list ) to housing units in much of southeast louisiana and south mississippi that appear inhabitable , even if they do not appear on the address list updated by listers during address canvassing . finally , the bureau stated that it must count people where they are living on census day and emphasized that if a housing unit gets rebuilt and people move back , then that is where those people will be counted . however , if they are living someplace else , then they will be counted where they are living on census day . the bureau has made remarkable progress in improving its overall readiness for 2010 , with substantial strides being made in the management of its it systems and other areas . that said , as i noted throughout this statement , considerable challenges and uncertainties lie ahead . while the decennial is clearly back on track , many things can happen over the next few months , and keeping the entire enterprise on plan continues to be a daunting challenge fraught with risks . mr. chairman and members of this subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you might have at this time . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this statement , please contact robert n. goldenkoff at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or by e - mail at goldenkoffr@gao.gov . other key contributors to this testimony include steven berke , virginia chanley , benjamin crawford , jeffrey demarco , dewi djunaidy , vijay d'souza , elizabeth fan , ronald fecso , amy higgins , richard hung , kirsten lauber , jason lee , andrea levine , signora may , ty mitchell , naomi mosser , catherine myrick , lisa pearson , david powner , david reed , jessica thomsen , jonathan ticehurst , shaunyce wallace , timothy wexler , and katherine wulff . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we did not assess the effectiveness of these steps . until the bureau completes the detailed requirements for pbocs , it will not have reasonable assurance that pbocs will meet the program's needs . the bureau is continuing to examine how improvements will be made . a successful census relies on an accurate list of all addresses where people live in the country , because it identifies all households that are to receive a census questionnaire and serves as a control mechanism for following up with households that fail to respond .