although h.r . 1158 would not require the national homeland security agency director to conduct a threat and risk assessment , it directs this individual to establish and maintain strong mechanisms for sharing information and intelligence with u.s. and international intelligence entities . information and intelligence sharing may help identify potential threats and risks against which the united states could direct resources and efforts . 1292 would require the president to conduct a comprehensive homeland security threat and risk assessment . this assessment would be the basis for a comprehensive national strategy . in our testimony last july , we noted that the united states has no comprehensive national strategy that could be used to measure progress.the attorney general's five - year plan represents a substantial interagency effort to develop a federal strategy , but it lacks defined outcomes . the department of justice believes that their current plan has measurable outcomes about specific agency actions . however , in our view , the plan needs to go beyond this to define an end state . as we have previously testified , the national strategy should incorporate the chief tenets of the government performance and results act of 1993 ( p.l . the results act holds federal agencies accountable for achieving program results and requires federal agencies to clarify their missions , set program goals , and measure performance toward achieving these goals . 525 would require the new council to publish a domestic terrorism preparedness plan with objectives and priorities ; an implementation plan ; a description of roles of federal , state , and local activities ; and a defined end state with measurable standards for preparedness . combating terrorism: issues in managing counterterrorist programs ( gao / t - nsiad - 00-145 , apr . combating terrorism: need to eliminate duplicate federal weapons of mass destruction training ( gao / nsiad - 00-64 , mar . critical infrastructure protection: comprehensive strategy can draw on year 2000 experiences ( gao / aimd - 00-1 , oct. 1 , 1999 ) . combating terrorism: need for comprehensive threat and risk assessments of chemical and biological attack ( gao / nsiad - 99-163 , sept. 7 , 1999 ) . combating terrorism: observations on growth in federal programs ( gao / t - nsiad - 99-181 , june 9 , 1999 ) . combating terrorism: issues to be resolved to improve counterterrorist operations ( gao / nsiad - 99-135 , may 13 , 1999 ) . 1158 would require the annual development of a federal response plan for homeland security and emergency preparedness and would require the director to provide overall planning and guidance to federal agencies concerning homeland security . the bill would require the director to work with state and local governments , but it would not explicitly require that the plan include the roles of state and local governments . 1292 would require the president to develop a strategy and multiyear phased implementation plan and budget for antiterrorism and consequence management . the bill requires the inclusion of specific , measurable objectives based on findings identified in a threat and risk assessment .