gsa has not examined these regulations . as a result , gsa may be missing an opportunity to help ensure that agencies are appropriately justifying all vehicles in their fleet and determining if their leased vehicle fleet contains vehicles that should be eliminated . in written comments , the department of defense ( dod ) concurred with the recommendation directed to it and stated that it would publish a policy memorandum in the second quarter of fiscal year 2016 that will direct dod fleet managers to ensure that each leased vehicle in the agency's fleet meets agency utilization criteria or has readily - available justification documentation . if implemented as planned , this action should meet the intent of the recommendation . in the absence of an fpmr requirement , federal internal control standards can help agencies use their authority to be responsible stewards of government resources . however , because some agencies' processes do not consistently facilitate the identification of underutilized vehicles , these agencies may not know which vehicles should be eliminated . specifically , without readily accessible written justification , agencies are limited in their ability to exercise oversight over key vehicle retention decisions for vehicles that cost millions of dollars annually . additionally , some agencies have not eliminated or reassigned vehicles that did not meet utilization criteria or pass a justification review . by not taking corrective action , agencies could be spending millions of dollars on vehicles that may not be needed . to help improve the accuracy of drive - thru data to allow agencies to better manage their leased - vehicle fleet data , we recommend that the administrator of gsa evaluate the 9,999-mile / month electronic safeguard for drive - thru odometer readings to determine if a lower threshold could improve the accuracy of customer data and adjust this safeguard accordingly . to provide better assurance that fleet service representatives ( fsr ) are having conversations with leasing customers about utilization in accordance with gsa expectations , we recommend that the administrator of gsa develop a mechanism to help ensure that these conversations occur . to help strengthen the leased - vehicle justification processes across federal agencies , we recommend that the administrator of gsa examine the fpmr to determine if these regulations should be amended to require that vehicle justifications are clearly documented and readily available , and adjust them accordingly . to improve the justification process , we recommend that the secretary of the department of defense should direct the secretary of the air force to modify the current process to ensure that each leased vehicle in the agency's fleet meets the agency's utilization criteria or has readily available justification documentation . to improve their justification process , we recommend that the secretary of the department of veterans affairs should direct the under secretary for health to modify the current process to ensure that each leased vehicle in the agency's fleet meets the agency's utilization criteria or has readily available justification documentation . see table 6 . specifically , we found that: nps retained 109 vehicles that did not meet agency - defined utilization criteria and did not pass the agency's justification process . the agency paid gsa $0.4 million in fiscal year 2014 for these vehicles .