gao - 04-810 . washington , d.c.: august 20 , 2004 . in the publication making it happen ! school nutrition success stories , key contacts in selected schools reported similar mixed revenue results from their efforts to improve the school nutrition environment . of the group of schools that reported on revenue changes , some experienced increases in revenue while others reported decreases or no change . these schools used approaches similar to those in the schools we visited , such as replacing less nutritious food with more nutritious choices , obtaining input from the students , and using marketing to encourage students to make healthy choices . in addition , several of the schools reported increases in school meal participation . our nation's schools are uniquely positioned to positively influence the eating habits of children , yet almost all schools sell readily available foods that are largely unregulated by the federal government in terms of nutritional content . while not all of these competitive foods are unhealthy , many are . although schools cannot be expected to solve the current problems with child nutrition and growing obesity alone , many states and districts have begun efforts to improve the nutritional environments in their schools . as districts across the country develop their required wellness policies by school year 2006-2007 , they will likely face decisions and challenges similar to those of the districts we studied and may benefit from their lessons learned . although each district took a different approach , all of them recognized the value of including those parties affected by the changes , such as parents , teachers , and other community members , when developing new policies . in addition , they recognized that students are the ultimate consumers of competitive foods and took steps to consider their opinions . because districts reported they typically lacked a source of recommended nutrition standards for competitive foods in schools , officials were faced with difficult decisions about the criteria they would use to determine which foods were considered adequately nutritious to offer . the technical assistance available from fns , including multiple examples of nutrition standards developed by other districts , as well as the institute of medicine's forthcoming recommendations on nutritional standards for foods in schools , should help district efforts to address this issue . in addition , given the multiple groups that rely on sales of competitive foods for revenue , districts may choose to consider the possible revenue effects of changes in food offerings as they develop and implement new policies . since competitive food revenues are often critical to food service operations and provide principals with flexible funds relied on for a multitude of discretionary purposes , making changes to competitive foods entails risks for both groups . districts we visited took varied steps that may mitigate potential revenue changes , such as substituting healthy foods for less healthy ones instead of removing all competitive foods , asking students to taste and approve the more nutritious foods , offering alternate means for fund - raising , or implementing change gradually . lack of support from the groups that use revenue from competitive food sales can scuttle policy changes .