while some progress has been made , more work remains . we identified fragmentation in multiple programs we reviewed . for example , the department of defense ( dod ) does not have a consolidated agency - wide strategy to contract for health care professionals , resulting in a contracting approach that is largely fragmented . although some of the military departments have attempted to consolidate their health care staffing requirements through joint - use contracts , such contracts only accounted for approximately 8 percent of the $1.14 billion in obligations for health care professionals in fiscal year 2011 . moreover , in may 2013 , we identified several instances in which numerous task orders were awarded by a single military department for the same type of health care professional in the same area or facility . for example , we identified 24 separate task orders for contracted medical assistants at the same military treatment facility . by not consolidating its requirements , this facility missed the opportunity to achieve potential cost savings and other efficiencies . to reduce fragmentation and achieve greater efficiencies , dod should develop a consolidated agency - wide strategy to contract for health care professionals . fragmentation can also be a harbinger for overlap or duplication . in other areas of our work , we found evidence of duplication , which occurs when two or more agencies or programs are engaged in the same activities or provide the same services to the same beneficiaries . examples of duplicative , or potentially duplicative , federal efforts include dod's use of dedicated satellite control operations . we reported in april 2013 that dod has increasingly deployed dedicated satellite control operations networks as opposed to shared networks that support multiple kinds of satellites . for example , at one air force base in 2013 , eight separate control centers operated 10 satellite programs . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . subject to certain exceptions , the provision also prohibits the military departments from adopting new pattern designs or uniform fabrics unless they will be adopted by all services or the uniform is already in use by another service . we estimate that executive branch and congressional efforts to address these and other actions from fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2013 have resulted in over $10 billion in realized cost savings to date , and projections of these efforts have estimated that billions of dollars more in savings will accrue over the next 10 years . although congress and executive branch agencies have made notable progress toward addressing the actions we have identified , further steps are needed to fully address the remaining actions , as shown in table 3 . more specifically , over 60 percent of actions directed to congress and executive branch agencies identified in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 remain partially addressed or not addressed .