institutional analysis . an institutional analysis is an in - depth assessment of the local institutions and systems most critical to the implementation of the project's development interventions , including an assessment of the quality of their leadership , structure , and staff ; and identification of their administrative and financial management strengths and weaknesses . using the analysis , usaid is to develop a plan for project activities that are necessary and sufficient to bring these institutions up to the level of performance or engagement as partners appropriate for their roles in the project's implementation and their eligibility for direct usaid funding . analytical stage . during the analytical stage , the design team seeks to understand the problem or constraints identified during the conceptual stage , and identify and assess critical assumptions . the team is to conduct a series of targeted assessments , including required gender , environmental , and sustainability analyses and other social , political , and institutional analyses . of these analyses , we identified two that pertain directly to pfm systems , as follows: sustainability analysis . the sustainability analysis assesses the partner government's ability to manage the continuation of the project after the project has concluded . according to usaid guidance , to build sustainability into a project , the design should consider how the country office will increase the skills and capacity of local stakeholders involved in maintaining development gains after the project ends — as well as how usaid will ensure that relevant activities or services are gradually tied to sustainable financing models through private sector participation or through sustainable , publicly managed arrangements and government processes . according to usaid guidance , the analytical stage results in a project authorization document that will be the basis for project implementation , adaptation , and evaluation , which includes a summary of the analyses that underlie the rationale for the project design . approval stage . a successful project design results in an approved project authorization , which enables a project to move from the planning stage to implementation . the project authorization sets out the purpose and duration of the project , defines fundamental terms and conditions of the assistance when a partner country agreement is anticipated , and approves an overall total budget level , subject to the availability of funds . in addition to the above analyses , usaid has developed a pfm risk - assessment framework ( pfmraf ) to measure the fiduciary risk , or the risk of funds being misspent or mismanaged , when usaid plans to provide aid through the country's finance systems . usaid guidance commits country offices to offer , if appropriate , a usaid assessment of partner country pfm systems with the goal of providing funding for project implementation through the use of those systems . if the offer is accepted , the assessment must be carried out using the pfmraf . whenever possible , usaid should begin conducting the pfmraf during the conceptual stage of the project design process . the pfmraf consists of the following five stages: 1 .