states . states receiving hea funds must submit the reports as a condition of receiving hea funding . none listed . grant program is a partnership between two universities and two school districts . the program activities vary on the two university campuses , but include a recruitment strategy for increasing the number of teachers in mathematics , science , foreign languages , and special education . scholarships are given to teacher candidates who are enrolled in the teacher training programs and are interested in teaching these subjects . the grant also funds professional development for teachers . $1,051,241 trip is an accelerated teacher training program for mid - career professionals . the majority of grant funds pay for tuition assistance for the program , and the salaries for four full - time master teachers — who are on loan from the local school district — to serve as mentors . these mentors supervise the student - teaching component of the program , as well as support new teachers . $844,357 the focus of the milwaukee public schools grant is to reduce teacher shortages by recruiting mid - career professionals who already have a bachelor's degree and are committed to working in an urban setting . in addition , the grant funds recruitment efforts by providing introductory education courses on high school campuses . university faculty teach these courses , and the high school students earn college credit if they pass the course . title ii , section 207 of the higher education act requires the annual preparation and submission of three reports on teacher preparation and qualifications: a report from institutions to states , a report from states to the secretary of education , and a report from the secretary of education to congress and the public . the legislation also requires that the commissioner of the national center for education statistics ( department of education ) , in consultation with the states and institutions of higher education , develop definitions for key terms , and uniform reporting methods ( including the definitions for the consistent reporting of pass rates ) , related to the performance of teacher preparation programs . the reports mandated in the legislation are required of the following: 1 . institutions of higher education . institutions that conduct teacher preparation programs enrolling students who receive federal assistance under the title iv of hea must submit timely and accurate reports or risk imposition of a fine up to $25,000 . the secretary of education . the secretary of education must compile the information into a national report . a comparison of the program's pass rate with the average pass rate for programs in the state . for the most recent year for which the information is available , the pass rate of the institution's graduates on the teacher certification or licensure assessments of the state in which the institution is located , but only for those students who took those assessments within 3 years of completing the program .