initiation ) . naval sea systems command officials explained that crewing alternatives for the cg ( x ) are still under development . in addition to the standard ship and crew employment cycle , the range of navy crewing alternatives falls into three major categories: ( 1 ) sea swap , ( 2 ) horizon , and ( 3 ) blue - gold . each of these alternatives can be implemented in varying ways and may have different advantages and disadvantages and effects on life - cycle costs , but the navy's actual experience with nonstandard crewing alternatives on surface ships is limited . sea swap is the only crewing alternative that has been used on ships as large as surface combatants . standard crews use one crew per ship . most of the crewmembers are assigned to the ship for 4 years , and it is common for crewmembers to deploy overseas on the same ship more than once . ships deploy to forward operating areas for periods of 6 or more months on average . on a 6 month deployment to the arabian gulf ships spend 3 to 4 months of that deployment actually on station depending on whether the ship deploys from the east or west coast of the united states . when not deployed , the ships fulfill surge deployment requirements , undergo maintenance availabilities and conduct training and certifications to maintain mission capability . most navy ships and their crews employ the standard crew deployment option . the sea swap option uses one deploying ship but multiple sequentially deploying crews . newly deploying crews swap ships with the crew on the forward - deployed ship . nondeployed crews train and perform maintenance on a ship in the home port . sea swap normally operates in a multiple of two , three , or four ships and crews . the crews rotate through the ships in the assigned group . notionally under this option , one of the ships deploys two , three , or four times longer than the standard time by rotating crews every 6 months at an overseas location . ideally , all of the sea swap ships share an identical configuration , so crew performance and capability are not degraded because of ship differences . because crews do not return to the ships on which they trained , under a four - ship sea swap option , some crews could serve on three different ships in just over 6 months and be expected to demonstrate combat proficiency on each one . a limited number of destroyers have employed the sea swap option in recent years . the horizon option involves one or two more crews than ships , such as four crews for three ships or five crews for three ships . crews serve for no more than 6 months on ships that are deployed for 18 months or more . under a three - ship horizon option , crews could serve on at least two ships in just over 6 months and be expected to demonstrate combat proficiency on each one . in addition , each crew would be without a ship for a period of time and stay ashore at a readiness , or training , center .