as of november 2004 , this recommendation had not been implemented . we did not use cost estimates for which supporting information was not provided . through initial registration and change of address notifications , all aliens are to provide their identity and an address where they can be located while in the united states . uscis receives and maintains alien address information for benefits administration and immigration law enforcement , and can share this information to help other law enforcement agencies identify and locate aliens for national security purposes . generally , nonimmigrant aliens provide their identity and address information at the time of their entry and during their stay in the united states using 1 of 12 different forms . for example , nonimmigrant aliens arriving in the united states are generally required to complete the two - part arrival and departure record ( form i - 94 ) . the first part records nonimmigrant aliens' arrivals and includes the nonimmigrant alien's address in the united states . the second part is to be surrendered when nonimmigrant aliens leave the country . dhs is to match the first and second parts of the form i - 94 to identify those nonimmigrant aliens who have left the country . however , as we reported in may 2004 and doj's inspector general reported in 1997 and 2002 , legacy ins lacked many form i - 94 departure records , and as a result , ins could not identify all of the nonimmigrant aliens who had left the country . over the years , congress established various requirements for immigrant and nonimmigrant aliens to report their addresses while residing in the united states . currently , aliens are generally required to report their change of address to uscis within 10 days of moving . failure to report a change of address can result in an alien being taken into custody and placed in removal proceedings before an immigration judge . we performed our work between june and november 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to determine the feasibility and utility of implementing a requirement that each nonimmigrant alien annually report a current address , we reviewed available documents concerning nonimmigrant alien address reporting requirements and interviewed headquarters officials from uscis and ice . at uscis headquarters , we interviewed senior officials who were responsible for alien records management and benefit administration . at ice headquarters , we interviewed two senior officials who were responsible for ice compliance enforcement activities related to aliens . we also interviewed 15 ice assistant special - agents - in - charge , supervisors , and special agents who are responsible for immigration enforcement activities in their detroit , michigan ; houston , texas ; los angeles , california ; miami , florida ; and new york , new york field offices . these offices , according to dhs data , are located in geographic regions where almost half of nonimmigrants likely to be subject to an annual address reporting requirement reside . the results of our interviews with agents in these five field offices may not be representative of the views and opinions of those in other field offices nationwide .