award . dha established a source selection team to evaluate the proposals received in response to the rfp . the source selection authority selects the winning proposals using a best value tradeoff process after considering reports written by other members of the source selection team . post - award activities . dha provides a 12-month transition period between its outgoing and incoming contractors to ensure that its incoming contractors are prepared for their new responsibilities . the transition period for the t - 2017 contracts began on january 1 , 2017 , and ended on december 31 , 2017 . the incoming contractors assumed full responsibility for health care delivery on january 1 , 2018 . the ndaa 2017 required a number of changes to the tricare program through its contracts . specifically , section 705 ( a ) of the ndaa 2017 required dod to develop and implement value - based incentive programs in its contracts to help improve the quality of health care services provided to eligible tricare beneficiaries by rewarding civilian providers with additional payments for improved performance based on certain metrics . in addition , section 705 ( c ) of the ndaa 2017 directed the department to develop and implement a strategy — by january 1 , 2018 — for its tricare contracts that includes 13 specific elements , such as telehealth services and beneficiary referrals , among others ( see table 1 ) . the act required dod to modify its tricare contracts to ensure consistency with the required strategy providing for the 13 elements . dha made selective changes between the t - 3 and t - 2017 contracts and acquisition strategy . according to dha officials , the contracts are generally the same , and changes were made to clarify or streamline tricare requirements and administrative processes . the t - 2017 acquisition strategy states that the t - 2017 performance work statement , which identifies the tricare requirements to be implemented by the contractors , is essentially unchanged from the t - 3 contracts . dha officials explained that their leadership prioritized the continuation of beneficiary services during the t - 2017 planning process over making significant changes to contract requirements that could potentially be disruptive . we found that some of the changes that were made to the t - 2017 contracts are consistent with specific provisions and themes we identified in prior ndaa legislation . although the ndaa 2017 was enacted after the t - 2017 contracts had been awarded , some of the contract changes for t - 2017 may be consistent with specific provisions outlined in section 705 ( c ) ( 1 ) , such as provisions related to improving access to care , health outcomes , health care quality , beneficiaries' experience , as well as lowering health care costs . however , dha officials stated that because health care delivery under the t - 2017 contracts began in 2018 , it is too early to measure any benefits from these changes . these contract changes include ( 1 ) the consolidation of contract regions , ( 2 ) the combining of administrative costs , and ( 3 ) the introduction of new contract incentives . consolidation of contract regions .