gao - 04-882r . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2004 . we provided a draft of this report to naic . the chief operating officer and chief legal officer of naic provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii . in commenting on a draft of this report , naic's chief operating officer and chief legal officer agreed with our recommendation . naic also made some general comments about the benefits of state - based regulation . in the area of producer licensing , naic noted that while we acknowledged that 47 states had been certified as reciprocal , we also described reciprocity as limited . as we discuss in the report , while naic has made progress in some areas , we continue to view overall progress on uniformity and reciprocity as limited . naic and the states have made progress with reciprocity , but the certification process does not include a review of whether states are also complying with the urls , which added some standards that were not included in plma but which naic believed were important for meaningful uniformity and reciprocity as noted in the report . for example , the certification process does not require criminal background checks . also related to this issue , naic noted that one procedural issue has been a significant impediment , fbi administrative standards related to fingerprinting . we have added this new information to the report . naic also noted a number of other efforts that they have taken in the area of producer licensing including the state producer licensing database . in the product approval area , naic commented on a variety of issues and provided some updated data on the interstate compact and activities of interstate insurance product regulation commission ( iiprc ) , both of which are discussed in the report . moreover , they noted that they have continued to make progress in adopting uniform standards in certain property lines and that more companies are registering . the letter also provides naic's views on the flexibility and improvements afforded states regarding product approval , an issue raised during the course of our work and discussed in the report . naic also discusses the compact approval process and transparency . as we noted in the report , consumer groups we spoke with expressed concern that the product approval process was not more transparent . naic commented about suitability and consumer protection issues associated with the compact by noting that state insurance regulators retain the authority to protect consumers and the compact preserves consumers' rights to pursue legal remedies not specifically directed to the content of the product . finally , with respect to market conduct regulation , naic highlighted its efforts in this area and noted that it continues to pursue standardized data collection practices , the development of a market regulation accreditation program , and participation by all states in mcas data collection by 2010 . in addition , naic provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date of issue .