coast guard installations do not have slot machines . in appendix i , we included a summary of the number and location of dod slot machines and the total revenue generated from these slot machines in fiscal years 2011 through 2015 . in 2013 , the american psychiatric association identified gambling as an addiction similar to substance - use disorders , such as those associated with alcohol and drugs . according to dod instruction 6490.07 , individuals with clinical psychiatric disorders with residual symptoms that impair duty performance are precluded from contingency deployment unless a waiver is granted . in addition , a 2013 assistant secretary of defense for health affairs memorandum that supplements this instruction also states that individuals with mental disorders should demonstrate a pattern of stability without significant symptoms or impairment for at least 3 months prior to deployment , unless a waiver is granted . it also states that servicemembers diagnosed with substance - use disorders should not deploy if doing so would interrupt active treatment . therefore , for servicemembers with gambling disorder , it may be difficult to maintain individual deployment readiness and perform duties effectively . for example , according to the 2013 diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , gambling disorder is a risk factor for suicide attempts , with roughly 17 percent of those in treatment attempting suicide at some point . in addition , data from the dod suicide event report show there were 8 suicides and 13 suicide attempts related to gambling behavior by servicemembers in fiscal years 2011 – 2015 . additionally , gambling disorder is difficult to detect because there are no objective laboratory tests , such as urinalysis for substance use , to identify individuals with potential gambling disorder , according to the american society of addiction medicine . for this reason , screening is even more important to identifying servicemembers that may need assistance . in addition , military servicemembers may also be reluctant to seek mental - health treatment because of perceived stigma . according to the 2013 diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , less than 10 percent of individuals with gambling disorder seek treatment . similarly , the substance abuse and mental health services administration has indicated that screening is important because few seek treatment directly for gambling disorder , and they instead seek treatment for other problems such as depression . gambling disorder can also be easier to hide than other addictions , according to the american society of addiction medicine . without proactively asking gambling disorder questions as part of screening to help detect gambling disorder , dod and the coast guard risk not identifying affected servicemembers and providing assistance for the disorder . when coupled with higher suicide rates , high rate of co - occurrence of other mental disorders , and the potential for critical financial situations , the effect that gambling disorder can have on individual readiness and the military family could be significant .