omb circular no . a - 129 , policies for federal credit programs and non - tax receivables , requires agencies to provide benefit - cost analyses as part of biennial program reviews . these reviews are also intended to take account of changes in program risks and costs . in this context , the fair value approach aggregate risk premium could be classified as a cost imposed by a program and included in total societal costs along with the cash costs to the government . it is in this setting that several proponents of fcra believed , and we concur , that the fair value approach would be most appropriately considered by decision makers , rather than in budget estimates . reflecting a different concern , some proponents of the fair value approach to budgeting for federal credit programs , cited as motivation the perceived over - reliance on federal credit as a policy tool and the desire to correct any bias toward underestimated costs under fcra . consistent with this view , some proponents of the fair value approach generally supported the approach for initial subsidy cost estimates that are used by congressional decision makers to determine loan levels to approve . after loan levels are approved , these proponents of the fair value approach generally expressed no preferences for the methodology used to determine subsidy cost estimates for existing credit program portfolios . the effects of the 2008 financial crisis on parts of the federal credit portfolio demonstrated the sensitivity of loan performance to conditions in the macroeconomy . subsidy cost estimates of loan guarantee programs related to housing and small business and agriculture , in particular , had not anticipated the possibility of large losses associated with the crisis in the mortgage market and extreme weakness in market demand for goods and services experienced during the 2008 financial crisis . repayment of student loans also declined significantly during this period . some proponents of the fair value approach told us that adopting the fair value approach would help address concerns about the over - reliance on federal credit programs by raising the subsidy cost of credit programs , likely resulting in fewer loans being made . also , according to some proponents of the fair value approach , raising the cost of credit programs would weigh against any bias in underestimating costs . in contrast , proponents of the fcra methodology stated that to the extent that agencies were underestimating subsidy costs under fcra , this would be more appropriately addressed through improvements in the subsidy estimation process rather than application of the fair value approach . going forward , there are some reasons to expect that agencies' estimates of expected loan losses will better reflect the possibility of a rise in defaults in a macroeconomic downturn . typically , agencies project future losses based on historical experience . before the 2008 financial crisis , program experience generally did not include the effect of a significant economic downturn . therefore , expected loss projections made prior to 2008 would have likely underestimated the actual losses . now , the depressing effects of the 2008 financial crisis across the government's credit portfolio are included in each program's historical data .