uscis has not yet revised the petition . uscis officials told us that they have been reviewing and consolidating suggested revisions to the i - 129f , including imbra - related changes , and expect publication of the new form i - 129f in the federal register in mid - june 2006 . department of state officials told us that they had drafted guidance for consular officers that addresses the disclosure of a petitioner's criminal sexual offender background under the compelling circumstances exception to the privacy act . according to the department of state , the draft guidance was essentially ready for issuance when imbra , which mandates disclosure of a petitioner's criminal history to certain beneficiaries , was enacted . as a result , it decided to revise its draft guidance to take the new statutory requirements into account . therefore , to be deemed a match for our purposes , the name , date of birth , and several data elements needed to match to provide a high level of assurance that the petitioner and the registered sex offender were the same person . for example , if the name , date of birth and street address , city , and zip code were the same , we considered it a match . we also analyzed the uscis data set to determine the number of petitioners that may have filed more than one petition to arrive at the number of unique sex offenders . to identify the number of convicted sex offenders who filed family - based petitions , we conducted a computer match of u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) family - based petitioner data with data on individuals contained in the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) national crime information center ( ncic ) convicted sexual offender registry file , known as the national sex offender registry . the uscis petitioner data file contained records on 667,023 individuals who filed petitions for noncitizen relatives , such as a spouse or child , and 66,658 individuals who filed petitions for noncitizen fiancé ( e ) s in fiscal year 2005 . the fbi's ncic national sex offender registry contained data on the 412,773 convicted sex offenders as of december 2005 . the uscis and fbi data files contained seven common data elements: ( 1 ) name ( 2 ) date of birth , ( 3 ) social security number , ( 4 ) street address , ( 5 ) city , ( 6 ) state , and ( 7 ) zip code that we could attempt to match in order to determine which petitioners were registered sex offenders . the name and date of birth were always present in both datasets , but in some cases the other data elements in either the uscis or fbi dataset were either missing or not entered correctly . in order to increase the possibility of a valid match , we first applied acceptable data - cleaning steps . for example , we eliminated certain extraneous characters from the names and addresses , such as dashes , periods and hyphens and other nonessential characters that would otherwise impede our matching .