coverage . widespread network coverage can attract more users , and thus user fee revenue , but is expensive to construct and maintain . some of the public safety entities we spoke with said that the network's coverage would play a role in whether they adopt the public safety network , noting in particular that the coverage should be at least as good as existing commercial services . one public safety entity we spoke with said that existing commercial coverage is inadequate , while two other entities said that commercial service can become unusable during large events because of the number of users on the network . however , as noted above , providing extensive coverage can be very costly . indeed , a few spocs noted in survey responses that providing rural coverage in their states will be challenging , with one commenting that “it is inconceivable that firstnet will be able to deploy a terrestrial network in the vast areas that are unpopulated or sparsely populated.” reliability . although firstnet is required to construct a resilient network , practices to ensure this can be costly . some public safety officials we spoke with said that the network's reliability would play a role in whether they adopt the public safety network . a few officials specifically said that if the network did not reliably work when first utilized by public safety , adoption would suffer , since public safety has a low tolerance for unreliable technology . however , as noted above , ensuring reliability requires significant capital expenses . our ongoing work also found that firstnet can generate revenue through commercial partnerships , but the extent of commercial interest in these partnerships , and thus the value of this authority for firstnet , is unknown . under the 2012 act , firstnet can receive payment for the use of the public safety network's capacity by non - public safety users as well as use of the network's infrastructure . the value of secondary access to the network's capacity depends in part on the availability of the spectrum , which itself will be determined by the capacity available given the network's design . according to one major carrier we spoke with , no business is likely to enter into a partnership with firstnet because its public - safety user base has not been defined , and thus the network capacity available to secondary ( commercial ) users is unknown . according to this carrier , the risk would be too high for a commercial entity to enter into an agreement without knowing exactly how the entity will be able to use firstnet's network . if public safety preempts all commercial traffic , then the commercial entity will struggle to generate income from this venture and may lose favor with its customers . however , another major carrier we spoke with maintained that firstnet will have to partner with at least one commercial carrier to be financially sustainable and that given the significant investments in long term evolution ( lte ) infrastructure made by commercial carriers , firstnet would do well to utilize some of this infrastructure through commercial partnerships .