meals and incidental expenses are reimbursed to the traveler . like secret service's personnel , dod personnel must obtain approval from an authorizing official prior to the trip to exceed the general services administration per diem lodging rate , consistent with the federal travel regulation and joint travel regulations . according to officials from the defense travel management office , dod typically would not reimburse expenses above the approved lodging rate if lodging at the approved rate was available within the region . however , officials from the defense finance and accounting service indicated that presidential trips may require such a deviation . these approvals are to be tracked in the defense travel system . the white house military office , which includes the white house communications agency , also sends personnel with the president when he travels . white house communications agency officials told us that its lodging and operational space for these personnel are typically coordinated by the white house travel office and that dod personnel pay for the associated costs and seek reimbursement from dod after the trip is complete . according to officials from the white house communications agency , some personnel are required to remain at , or near , the mar - a - lago property . if they are not required to stay at or near the property , they will try to obtain lodging at hotels in the area at the general services administration's per diem rate for lodging . dod officials told us that according to the joint travel regulations , dod is not authorized to pay or reimburse daily expenses above the 300 percent ceiling . in connection with the president's travel to mar - a - lago between february 3 , 2017 and march 5 , 2017 , dod personnel exceeded the general services administration per diem rate but did not exceed the 300 percent threshold . according to officials from the defense travel management office , operational space used for official business is governed by the federal acquisition regulation . white house communications agency officials told us that they have generally used space near the mar - a - lago property but leased property , effective september 2017 , near mar - a - lago to reduce the cost of supporting the president's trips to the property . treasury has regular processes for receiving payments designated as gifts to the united states and gifts to reduce the public debt . treasury officials stated that any payments received from the trump organization or the president that are designated as gifts would be handled using these processes . under federal law , treasury may receive general gifts to the u.s. government and may also receive gifts to reduce the public debt . treasury has developed processes to accept these types of payments , as shown in figure 3 . treasury officials said there are three accounts available to receive payments as gifts — a general gift account , a general fund receipts account , and an account for gifts to reduce the public debt . any of these accounts could receive payments designated as gifts by the president or the trump organization .