gao - 06-883 . washington , d.c.: september 14 , 2006 . we have documented these problems for decades . most recently , we reported that 27 major weapon programs we have assessed since they began product development have experienced cost increases of nearly 34 percent over their original research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) estimates , and increases of almost 24 percent in acquisition cycle time ( see table 1 ) . when cost and schedule problems occur in one program , dod often attempts to pay for the poorly performing program by taking funds from others . doing so has destabilized other programs and reduced the overall buying power of the defense dollar as dod and the military services are forced to cut back on planned quantities or capabilities to stay within budget limitations . the f - 22a raptor program is a case in point: as costs escalated in the program , the number of aircraft the air force planned to buy was drastically reduced from 648 to 183 . similarly , as the joint tactical radio system ( jtrs ) encountered development problems , the number of requirements was reduced or deferred by about one - third . as a result , several programs that were dependent on jtrs also had to make adjustments and go forward with alternative , less capable solutions . dod's approach to managing weapon system investments ultimately results in less funding being available for other competing needs in dod as well as other federal priorities , as the expenditure of tax dollars within dod reduces the amount of funding available for those priorities . taking into account the differences between commercial product development and weapons acquisitions , we have recommended that dod adopt a knowledge - based , incremental approach to developing and producing weapon systems . this type of an approach requires program officials to demonstrate that critical technologies are mature , product designs are stable , and production processes are in control at key junctures in the acquisition process . dod has three major processes involved in making weapon system investment decisions . these processes , depicted in figure 1 , are the joint capabilities integration and development system ( jcids ) , for identifying warfighting needs ; the planning , programming , budgeting and execution ( ppbe ) system , for allocating resources ; and the defense acquisition system ( das ) , for managing product development and procurement . much of our prior work has focused on identifying commercial best practices that could be used to improve the defense acquisition system — from the point just before product development starts onward . in this report , however , we look at earlier stages in dod's investment process — from the point where gaps in warfighting capability are assessed in jcids through the point where alternative solutions to resolve those gaps are analyzed under the das ( see fig . to ensure they achieve a balanced mix of executable development programs , the successful commercial companies we reviewed use a disciplined and integrated approach to prioritize market needs and allocate resources .