( see fig . 1 for the number of hearings requested and held nationwide from 1996 through 2000. ) however , while the number of due process hearings held nationwide decreased over the 5-year period , much of the decline occurred in new york , which experienced a substantial reduction in due process hearings held . over the 5-year period , the number of due process hearings held in new york declined from 1,600 to 1,052 . in addition , according to the nasdse study , most due process hearings were held in a few locations . nearly 80 percent of all hearings were held in 5 states — california , maryland , new jersey , new york , and pennsylvania — and the district of columbia . the rates of due process hearings per 10,000 students in these states ranged from 3 in california to 24 in new york ; in the district of columbia the rate was 336 due process hearings per 10,000 . see figure 2 for the total numbers of due process hearings held in the 5 states and the district of columbia compared with the rest of the nation over a 5-year period . using data from its nationwide sample survey of the 1998-99 school year , seep reported that the prevalence of dispute activity among school districts varied by certain demographic characteristics . for example , the percentage of urban school districts that reported having at least 1 due process case — request or hearing — for the year was significantly higher than either suburban or rural districts ( an estimated 50 percent , 20 percent , and 9 percent , respectively ) . similarly , large school districts reported significantly more due process cases , compared with smaller districts . however , when the study made adjustments for the number of students served by examining the rate of due process cases per 10,000 special education students , no statistically significant differences were found in rates for either urbanicity or size . seep also analyzed due process data by district income levels and found a significant difference — an estimated 52 percent of the highest income school districts reported at least 1 due process case , 13 times the percentage of lowest income districts ( 4 percent ) . according to limited national data available from three studies , the rates of mediations and complaints per 10,000 students with disabilities were generally low , but somewhat higher than the rates of due process hearings . sliidea reported that in the 1999-2000 school year more formal disputes between parents and schools were resolved through mediation than due process hearings . based on survey results from all 50 states and the district of columbia , this study reported that the median number of mediations for states was 4 for every 10,000 students with disabilities . the study also reported that 87 percent of the school districts surveyed said they did not have any mediation cases in the 1999-2000 school year . two other studies also reported low numbers nationally of mediation cases and complaints . this study was conducted by the national association of state directors of special education ( nasdse ) of state dispute resolution activities between february and april 1999 .