i would be happy to respond to any questions . other problems were traceable to the discretion provided in section 212 itself . under the statute , agencies can designate a previously published document as its small entity compliance guide , or develop and publish a guide with no input from small entities years after the rule takes effect . last year we issued two reports on the implementation of sbrefa . one report examined section 223 of the act , which required federal agencies to establish a policy for the reduction and / or waiver of civil penalties on small entities . all of the agencies' penalty relief policies that we reviewed were within the discretion that congress provided , but the policies varied considerably . some of the policies covered only a portion of the agencies' civil penalty enforcement actions , and some provided small entities with no greater penalty relief than large entities . for example , some agencies did not consider their rules to have a significant impact because they believed the underlying statutes , not the agency - developed regulations , caused the effect on small entities . there was also confusion regarding whether the agencies were supposed to review rules that had a significant impact on small entities at the time the rules were first published in the federal register or those that currently have such an impact . the questions that remain unanswered are numerous and varied . for example , does congress believe that the economic impact of a rule should be measured in terms of compliance costs as a percentage of businesses' annual revenues or the percentage of work hours available to the firms ? should agencies review rules that had a significant impact at the time they were originally published , or only those that currently have that effect ? should agencies conduct regulatory flexibility analyses for rules that have a positive economic impact on small entities , or only for rules with a negative impact ? these questions are not simply matters of administrative conjecture within the agencies . they lie at the heart of the rfa and sbrefa , and the answers to the questions can have a substantive effect on the amount of regulatory relief provided through those statutes . because congress did not answer these questions when the statutes were enacted , agencies have had to develop their own answers — and those answers differ . if congress does not like the answers that the agencies have developed , it needs to either amend the underlying statutes and provide what it believes are the correct answers or give some other entity the authority to issue guidance on these issues . the implications of the current lack of clarity with regard to the term “significant impact” and the discretion that agencies have to define it were clearly illustrated in a report that we prepared for the senate committee on small business 2 years ago . one part of our report focused on a proposed rule that epa published in august 1999 that would , upon implementation , lower certain reporting thresholds for lead and lead compounds under the toxics release inventory program from as high as 25,000 pounds to 10 pounds .