gao - 05-490 . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2005 . other goals varied widely . for example , maya angelou , a high school serving at - risk youth , included among its 5-year goals both an 85 percent graduation rate , as well as a significant reduction in violent behavior by students . jos - arz , a high school serving students with emotional and behavioral problems , included as a goal that at least half of its students would acquire skills that would allow them to function independently and would earn a high school diploma or the equivalent . d.c. charter schools receive funding from a wide range of sources . charter schools in d.c. receive funding on a per - pupil basis using the same allocation formula for operating expenses that is applied to traditional d.c. public schools . in the 2004-2005 school year , charter and traditional public schools in d.c. received $6,904 to $8,077 for a regular education student depending on grade level . d.c. charter schools received an additional allotment — equal to $2,380 per non - residential student and $6,426 per residential student — to help cover the cost of school facilities . in addition to the per - pupil allotments , charter schools in d.c. , like all public schools that meet federal criteria , are eligible for other federal funds , such as funding under the no child left behind act and the individuals with disabilities education improvement act . a few charter schools also receive additional funding from foundation grants and other fundraising efforts . the two d.c. authorizers' revenue , staff , and use of available d.c. services differed , but the authorizers spent their funds on similar activities . the boe office of charter schools had less revenue and fewer schools and staff to oversee them than the pcsb . to help fulfill its oversight responsibilities , the boe office of charter schools occasionally called upon d.c. agencies for financial operations reviews and used some d.c. public school services . the pcsb , which had more staff and oversaw more schools , had total revenue that was more than twice that of the boe office of charter schools' and employed a larger staff . the pcsb also received more revenue per school than the boe office of charter schools . unlike the boe office of charter schools , the pcsb did not use d.c. public schools services , which were available to it , but did use d.c. government services on one occasion . despite these differences , both authorizers used their financial resources similarly . both spent most of their fiscal year 2004 funds on board operations , including personnel costs , and their remaining funds on consultants to help with monitoring , application review and school closures . the boe office of charter schools received less funding from its two main sources of revenue — the local funds allocated to it by the boe and the administrative fees it was permitted to charge the schools it oversaw — than the corresponding amounts received by the pcsb ( see table 2 ) .