however , these efforts vary from state to state . this equates to more than one quarter of the army guard's force . in addition , army guard members have experienced lengthy deployments . for example , as of february 2004 , over 57,000 soldiers ( about 16 percent of the army guard ) had been away from home for more than 220 days in the past year . dod reports that the steady state for the next 3 to 5 years will require a total of about 100,000 to 150,000 reserve personnel to support on - going operations , and that many of these personnel will come from the army guard and reserve . dod also expects that mobilizations of up to 1 year or more will be the norm for reserve component members during the next 3 to 5 years . in addition to its overall high use , particular specialties within the army national guard have been used extensively and at rates that dod reports cannot be sustained for long durations . dod has reported that using more than 17 percent of the personnel in a career field annually indicates an unsustainably high pace of operations in the career field and we believe could indicate a need for additional capability . however , as figure 3 shows , usage rates for personnel in some army guard career fields exceeded 50 percent in the last 2-1 / 2 years . capabilities key to both overseas and homeland missions such as military police , transportation , and combat units are among those experiencing a high pace of operations . we will publish a final report on these issues later this year . my remarks today are based on the work we have completed to date with respect to ( 1 ) the extent and purpose of the national guard's use since the september 11 attacks , ( 2 ) the effects of that use on the guard's readiness for future missions , and ( 3 ) the challenges that the department of defense ( dod ) , the states , and congress face in organizing and equipping the guard to be able to support both overseas and homeland security missions . to assess these issues , we analyzed data on national guard utilization and readiness since september 11 . we interviewed officials in the departments of defense , the army , the air force , and the national guard bureau and supplemented this information with visits to army and air force commands and army mobilization stations . we also developed case studies of recent federal and state national guard operations in four states – georgia , new jersey , oregon , and texas . in each of these states , we visited the adjutant general and the national guard headquarters , as well as army and air national guard units that had been or will be involved in domestic or overseas missions . we identified future challenges based on our analysis of the guard's current status and discussions with national guard officials . we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between april 2003 and april 2004 .