dod also commented that no further guidance was needed . while we recognize that some of this inventory should be retained for economic or contingency reasons , we believe that added scrutiny should be applied to the air force's review of its stockage retention policy to ensure that it is not retaining assets that are not needed to support current and future operational needs . based on our work , we believe that the air force has a tremendous potential for reducing its inventory because much of the inventory has no projected recurring demands , meaning that it is unlikely that this inventory will ever be used . in other cases , inventories may not be needed because many years of supply are on hand . dod's planned actions are a step in the right direction ; however , unless and until the air force makes appropriate adjustments to its inventory retention levels , there are no assurances that significant improvements will be made to reduce the air force's on - hand inventory not needed to support requirements . in responding to our second recommendation , dod did not address the portion of the recommendation directing the air force to consider establishing requirements for items that support weapon systems that have lengthy projected life spans . demand includes both recurring and nonrecurring demands . a one - time event , such as the initial upgrading of selected parts of a weapon system , is considered to be a nonrecurring demand . in our 1997 report , a decrease in demand or demand not materializing was also the primary reason for dod having unneeded on - order and on - hand inventory , representing 24 percent and 11 percent , respectively , for the items sampled . similarly , in 2000 , we reported that while dod inventory managers made inventory purchases that were supported by requirements at the time they were contracted , subsequent requirement decreases resulted in the purchases being in excess of requirements . during our analysis , air force officials acknowledged that they are aware that decreases in demand have resulted in having more inventory than is needed to support requirements ; however , the air force has not evaluated why it continues to experience these decreases in demand or taken actions to mitigate the effect of these changes . until the air force evaluates why it continues to have long - standing changes in demand , it will continue to have on - order and on - hand inventory that is not needed to support requirements , which may result in unnecessary increased storage costs and obligation of funds earlier than necessary . dod agreed that the air force experiences changes in demand levels and stated that these changes can be attributed to changes in air force missions , reliability and technology improvements , and modifications of inventory items . dod stated that the air force plans to review the computation forecasting model and make any changes required to help ensure future requirements reflect actual demands . dod plans to provide a status update on the implementation of this recommendation by the end of september 2007 . we believe that these actions are generally responsive to our recommendation .