none located . school teachers and officials who know or have reasonable cause to suspect child abuse or neglect must notify law enforcement or the child and family services agency . periodic ( every 5 years ) fingerprint - based fbi and state criminal history checks are required of all public school teachers and employees and contractual employees who have direct contact with students or are permitted access to school grounds when students are present . he has since resigned . in august 1998 , this man was employed as an administrative employee in a california public school district . in february 2000 , he molested a minor and the arresting officer charged the offender with a felony sex offense . a message was placed in the offender's personnel file noting the need for him to complete the fingerprint criminal history check , but there was no indication of any additional follow - up by school officials on the subject . in january 2002 , the offender was arrested for sexually abusing a young female student between december 2001 and january 2002 . the offender was alleged to have touched the girl at the school and to have sent the girl sexually explicit letters . officers investigating the case found multiple letters between the offender and the girl containing mature sexual content , some in a gym bag the offender was carrying at the time of his arrest . police also found a home video recording of girls changing into bathing suits and walking around naked in a restroom . the offender could be heard adjusting the camera and talking on this video , which the arizona police suspected was shot at a pool where the offender had previously worked as a manager . the offender was found guilty of felony sexual abuse and luring a minor for sexual exploitation in 2002 . he was sentenced to 4 years in prison , as well as 15 years probation . in 2010 , he was convicted for failing to register as a sex offender as required . he was sentenced to 12 years in prison , and is currently incarcerated . case 13: in june 1998 , this man was convicted for the second time for misdemeanor indecent exposure and was required to register as a sex offender . he was a teacher in texas at the time , and remained there until may 2001 , when his teaching certification was permanently revoked for engaging in a pattern of sexually inappropriate behavior . at least two schools in louisiana , one private and one public , subsequently hired him without conducting criminal history checks . he continued to teach at the public school until october 2007 , when he voluntarily resigned after being accused of having inappropriate sexual conversations with students . with the loss of his texas teaching license in 2001 , the offender taught in mexico temporarily then moved to louisiana . according to his resume , he worked at a series of louisiana public and private schools from august 2002 until june 2006 ; we were unable to verify the circumstances leading to this employment . in june 2006 , he was hired by a high school in a louisiana private school district .