iii ) . in dhs's response , the director of the departmental gao / oig liaison office stated that dhs agrees that strengthening cybersecurity is central to protecting the nation's critical infrastructures and that much remains to be done . in addition , dhs concurred with our recommendation to engage stakeholders in prioritizing its key cybersecurity responsibilities . the director stated that continued and expanded stakeholder involvement is critical and identified some of ncsd's significant activities — many of which are discussed in the body of this report . however , the director noted that dhs does not agree that the challenges it has experienced have prevented it from achieving significant results in improving the nation's cybersecurity posture . in addition , dhs did not concur with our recommendations to ( 1 ) develop a prioritized list of key activities for addressing the underlying challenges and ( 2 ) identify performance measures and milestones for fulfilling its prioritized responsibilities and for performing activities to address its challenges and track organizational progress . specifically , the director reported that dhs already uses a prioritized list , performance measures , and milestones to guide and track its activities and sought additional clarification of these recommendations . the director also noted that our report makes a reference to previous recommendations involving cyber - related information sharing and strategic analysis and warning capabilities that have not been fully implemented , but he disagreed that there were any valid outstanding recommendations . because most of the nation's information infrastructure is owned by the private - sector , developing trusted partnerships and information - sharing relationships between the federal government and the private sector are critical . we agree that dhs has initiated many efforts as a focal point for the nation's efforts to secure cyberspace and have acknowledged these in our report , but the challenges it faces — including achieving organizational stability , achieving two - way information sharing with stakeholders , and demonstrating value — have hindered its progress to date . this view was reiterated by the federal and nonfederal stakeholders we interviewed . regarding our recommendations , while we agree with dhs that its strategic plan for cybersecurity identifies a number of activities ( along with some performance metrics and milestones ) that will begin to address the challenges , this plan does not include specific initiatives that would ensure that the challenges are addressed in a prioritized and comprehensive manner . for example , the strategic plan for cybersecurity does not include initiatives to help stabilize and build authority for the organization . a discussion of each follows . the homeland security act of 2002 , signed by the president on november 25 , 2002 , established dhs and gave it lead responsibility for preventing terrorist attacks in the united states , reducing the vulnerability of the united states to terrorist attacks , and minimizing the damage and assisting in recovery from attacks that do occur . to help dhs accomplish its mission , the act establishes , among other entities , five under secretaries with responsibility over directorates for management , science and technology , information analysis and infrastructure protection , border and transportation security , and emergency preparedness and response .