dot concurred with our recommendation . in our recent discussions with dot officials after passage of the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , they told us that dot now plans to meet the new statutory deadline and issue the strategy by february 2020 . stakeholders we spoke with for our august 2018 report identified two primary challenges to ensuring that the u.s. - flag fleet would continue to meet dod's national defense needs . first , they described maintaining the financial viability of u.s. - flag vessels participating in msp as a challenge . second , stakeholders identified a potential shortage of u.s. citizen mariners available to crew the government - owned reserve fleet during a military activation as a challenge , in part due to the declining numbers of u.s. - flag vessels that employ these mariners . in our august report , we noted that marad had identified some options to address the competitiveness of u.s. - flag vessels and the long - term viability of the u.s. - citizen mariners — issues that are very similar to the key challenges identified by stakeholders . however , dot and marad officials had stated that they were not yet ready to address the feasibility of these options , or formally propose them . according to marad officials , the relative cost of operating a u.s. - flag vessel compared to a foreign - flag vessel has increased in recent years , making it more challenging for vessel operators to remain economically viable under the u.s. flag . in our august report we found that financial support to u.s. - flag vessels through both the msp stipend and the government cargo preference requirements has helped ensure a sufficient number of internationally trading u.s. - flag vessels are available to meet dod's most recently stated cargo capacity needs from such vessels . on the other hand , according to marad officials , the additional cost of operating a u.s. flag vessel compared to a foreign - flag vessel has increased — from about $4.9 million annually in 2009 and 2010 to about $6.2 to $6.5 million currently — making it harder for such vessels to remain financially viable . this cost differential results primarily from the rising relative costs of employing u.s. versus foreign mariners as crew . compounding the increasing costs of operating u.s. flag vessels , the volume of government cargo — a key source of revenue for many u.s. - flagged vessels — has fallen in recent years as the international military presence of the united states and funding for food aid overseas have both declined . in response to these challenges , congress increased the msp stipend from $3.5 million to $4.99 million per vessel from fiscal year 2016 to 2017 . marad officials said this increase has temporarily stabilized the financial situation of msp vessel operators . however , they added that trends in operating costs and government cargo suggest that the ability to retain an adequate number of financially - viable u.s. - flagged vessels will remain an ongoing challenge .