( see fig . of the funds made available by fema to the states for permanent rebuilding , localities have only received a portion of these funds since many projects have not yet been completed . specifically , in louisiana and mississippi , 26 and 22 percent of obligated funds , respectively , have been paid by the state to applicants for these projects . the total cost of pa funding for the gulf coast hurricanes will likely exceed the approximately $8.2 billion already made available to the states for two reasons: ( 1 ) the funds do not reflect all current and future projects , and ( 2 ) the cost of some of these projects will likely be higher than fema's original estimates . according to fema , as of the middle of july 2007 , an additional 1,916 project worksheets were in process ( these projects are in addition to the 67,253 approved project worksheets mentioned above ) . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . for information about this testimony , please contact stanley j. czerwinski , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or czerwinskis@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include kathleen boggs , peter del toro , jeffrey miller , carol patey , brenda rabinowitz , michelle sager , and robert yetvin . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . fema expects that another 2,730 project worksheets will be written . fema expects these worksheets to increase the total cost by about $2.1 billion , resulting in a total expected pa cost of about $10.3 billion . some state and local officials have also expressed concerns about unrealistically low cost estimates contained in project worksheets , which could lead to even higher than anticipated costs to the federal government . a senior official within the louisiana governor's office of homeland security and emergency preparedness recently testified that some of the projects were underestimated by a factor of 4 or 5 times compared to the actual cost . for example , the lowest bids on 11 project worksheets for repairing or rebuilding state - owned facilities , such as universities and hospitals , totaled $5.5 million while fema approved $1.9 million for these projects . the extent to which the number of new project worksheets and actual costs that exceed estimated costs will result in demands for additional federal funds remains unknown . in addition , pa costs may increase until a disaster is closed , which can take many years in the case of a catastrophic disaster .