the department of state had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the secretary of state . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or farbj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . house report 114-537 associated with the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 included a provision for us to review the afghan national defense and security forces' ( andsf ) capability and capacity to operate and sustain u.s. - purchased weapon systems and equipment . this report is a public version of a sensitive report that we issued on september 20 , 2018 . our september report included three objectives , including one on the extent to which dod considers andsf input and meets their needs when identifying equipment requirements . dod deemed the information related to that objective to be sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . consequently , we removed that objective and a related recommendation from this public report . this version includes information on the other two objectives: ( 1 ) what has been reported about andsf capabilities and capability gaps and ( 2 ) the extent to which dod has information about the andsf's ability to operate and maintain u.s. - purchased equipment . although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report uses the same methodology for the two objectives as the sensitive report . to identify what has been reported about andsf capabilities and capability gaps , we reviewed north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) and dod documents and reports , such as dod's semiannual section 1225 reports to congress , produced after the start of the nato - led resolute support mission on january 1 , 2015 . to determine what steps dod and nato have taken to try to address gaps , we reviewed reports the center for naval analyses produced for dod , as well as dod and nato documents and reports produced after january 1 , 2015 , and reports from gao , the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) , and the dod inspector general . we also interviewed center for naval analyses representatives and dod officials in the united states and afghanistan , including dod officials at the combined security transition command – afghanistan ( cstc - a ) and in the office of the undersecretary of defense for policy ( osd - p ) who helped create the dod reporting we reviewed . to determine the extent to which dod has information about the andsf's ability to operate and maintain u.s. - purchased equipment , we reviewed dod documents and reports and interviewed dod officials in the united states and afghanistan , including dod officials who advise the andsf .