gao - 08-141 . washington , d.c.: dec. 10 , 2007 . this is an increase in inspections from prior years . their comment however , did not indicate that each facility received a spot check and an annual exam . further , since the spot check guidance was not issued until july of 2007 , it is not clear how many of the spot checks were conducted following the new guidance . without this information the implications for staffing are still uncertain . the coast guard has not assessed how its mtsa compliance inspection program is working . our work across many types of federal programs shows that for program planning and performance management to be effective , federal managers need to use performance information to identify performance problems and look for solutions , develop approaches that improve results , and make other important management decisions . the coast guard's ability to assess its compliance program is complicated by omissions , duplications , and other flaws in the data it would most likely use in measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of different monitoring and oversight approaches . in 2004 , when we first examined the coast guard's efforts to deal with mtsa requirements , we reported that development of a sound long - term strategy was a critical step in bringing about effective monitoring and oversight . our work assessing such other areas as airport security and regulatory compliance had identified approaches for ensuring compliance and strengthening security . these approaches included such steps as unscheduled and unannounced inspections , and inspections on weekends or after normal working hours . at the time , local coast guard officials said that unscheduled inspections would be a positive component of a longer - term strategy because informing owners or operators of annual inspections can allow them to mask security problems by preparing for inspections in ways that do not represent the normal course of business . we recommended that , after the initial “surge” involved in reviewing security plans and conducting the first round of inspections , the coast guard should conduct a formal evaluation of its efforts and use the evaluation as a means to strengthen the compliance process for the longer term . in the 1990s , a statutory management framework for strengthening government performance and accountability was enacted into law . in particular , the government performance and results act ( results act ) calls for an increased reliance upon program performance information in assessing program efficiency and effectiveness . the results act notes that federal managers are seriously disadvantaged in their efforts to improve program efficiency and effectiveness because of insufficient articulation of program goals and inadequate information on program performance , and that spending decisions and program oversight are seriously handicapped by insufficient attention to program performance and results . although the results act's provisions apply primarily to tracking and reporting performance at the overall agency level , the same sound management principles apply to management of individual programs such as the facility compliance program . in other work , we have identified instances in which agencies can use performance information to improve programs and results .