dhs concurred with this recommendation and is taking steps to address it . specifically , dhs reported in april 2016 that tsa is ( 1 ) examining airports with the best tip scores to develop best practices that can be shared with other airports , ( 2 ) examining airports with low tip scores to better understand challenges and options for improving tip performance , ( 3 ) planning to analyze data nationwide to determine what training best improves tip scores , and ( 4 ) developing a process to examine which categories of images most often present challenges to the screening workforce which will inform training efforts . tsa also plans to assess tip training and assessments over a one - year period ending in may 2017 to determine if performance improvements have been realized and what contributed to the improvement . tsa's plan for analysis is commendable , but until the tip data is largely complete , any nationwide review will be limited . as we also reported in may 2016 , tsa determined that asap pass rate results data were unreliable , which caused them to question the extent to which asap tests accurately measure tso performance . according to tsa officials , they hired a contractor to perform independent asap testing at 40 airports in fiscal year 2015 to verify the reliability of the results of testing previously performed by tsa personnel at those airports . tsa found differences in the test results for most of the 40 airports when compared to the contractor's results . specifically , tsa officials found that tsos at these 40 airports performed more poorly in the asap tests conducted by the contractor personnel as compared to the prior asap testing done by the local tsa personnel — indicating that these prior - year pass rates were likely showing a higher level of tso performance in screening passengers and baggage for prohibited items than was actually the case . while tsa officials are still in the process of determining root causes for the variances of the testing results between the contractor and tsa personnel at the airports , they acknowledged that initial results from the contractor appeared to confirm their prior concerns that problems existed with maintaining the covert nature of the tests . these prior concerns had been based on higher detection rates at some airports when compared to other airports on the same tests performed . in order to address the concerns stemming from the contractor's test results , tsa initiated the following actions after reviewing results of the contractor's initial round of testing in fiscal year 2015: conducted briefings with fsds on the contractor's findings and ongoing asap testing which included expectations that the fsds use the information as input in overseeing their local asap testing programs . the tests are designed to assess the operational effectiveness of screeners .