mt . rushmore , which is located in the black hills of southwestern south dakota , typifies how difficult it can be for interior to protect icons and monuments that are located in remote and often rugged environments . mt . rushmore is the world's largest sculpture and is one of the most widely recognized symbols of the united states . in addition to its cultural and symbolic significance , size , and location , mt . rushmore hosts a large number of visitors each year , including numerous dignitaries . the monument has a visitor center , restaurant , gift shop , and amphitheatre that are used for various events . each fourth of july , the park hosts a holiday celebration with fireworks and other activities that attracts tens of thousands of visitors . the monument is also about 50 miles south of sturgis , the site of an annual motorcycle rally that can bring over 500,000 tourists to the area — many of whom visit mt . rushmore . approximately 2.9 million tourists visit the monument annually , with up to 40,000 visiting on some days during the summer months . mt . rushmore has a history prior to september 11 of security incidents involving domestic terrorists , political demonstrators , and bomb threats , according to park service officials . the threats and related incidents have included the following: between 1970 and 1973 there were multiple efforts by the american indian movement to occupy the mountain and deface the monument . in 1975 , a bomb was detonated in front of the visitor center — there were no injuries because the detonation occurred early in the morning . in 1987 , the environmental group greenpeace illegally climbed the mountain and attempted to unfurl a protest banner . in 1991 , the park service received multiple , credible threats to assassinate then - president george h.w . bush during the 50th anniversary celebration of the monument . in 1999 , a colorado man was arrested for making a threat to blow up mt . rushmore . according to park service officials , because of these incidents , the park service took actions , including a security assessment in 1997 that recommended a range of countermeasures costing approximately $2.9 million , most of which were subsequently implemented . however , park service officials told us that prior to september 11 , the focus of their security efforts was directed at protecting the monument . in light of the september 11 attacks , park service officials are now including visitors and employees in their protection at mt . rushmore . with increases in funding for security after september 11 , park service officials told us in mid - 2004 that they were in the process of adding protection park rangers and other employees . in addition , the park service made other security enhancements , including the installation of security fencing , lighting , and gates at multiple locations ; improvements to existing mechanical systems for dispatch and incident management ; and the purchase of all - terrain vehicles for use in patrols and at special events . figure 9 shows a security camera mounted near the amphitheatre at the base of the monument .