ed . bruce e. cain , todd donovan , and caroline j. tolbert . washington , d.c.: brookings institution , 2008 . “who votes by mail ? a dynamic model of the individual - level consequences of voting - by - mail systems.” the public opinion quarterly , vol . burden , barry c. , david t. canon , kenneth r. mayer , and donald p. moynihan . “election laws , mobilization , and turnout: the unanticipated consequences of election reform,” april 12 , 2011 . social science research network elibrary . accessed may 19 , 2011. http: / / ssrn.com / abstract=1690723 fitzgerald , mary . “greater convenience but not greater turnout — the impact of alternative voting methods on electoral participation in the united states.” american politics research , vol . giammo , joseph d. , and brian j. brox . “reducing the costs of participation: are states getting a return on early voting ? ” political research quarterly , vol . gronke , paul , and daniel krantz toffey , “the psychological and institutional determinants of early voting.” journal of social issues , vol . gronke , paul , eva galanes - rosenbaum , and peter a. miller . “early voting and turnout.” ps: political science and politics , vol . gronke , paul , eva galanes - rosenbaum , and peter a. miller . “early voting and voter turnout.” in democracy in the states: experiments in election reform . gronke , paul , and peter a.m. miller . “voting by mail and turnout: a replication and extension.” paper presented at the 2007 annual meeting of the american political science association , chicago , ill. hanmer , michael j. , and michael w. traugott . “the impact of voting by mail on voter behavior.” american politics research , vol . hill , david , and michael d. martinez . “the interactive effects of electoral reform , competitiveness and age on turnout.” paper presented at the 2008 annual meeting of the american political science association , boston , mass . juenke , eric gonzalez , and juliemarie shepherd . “vote centers and voter turnout.” in democracy in the states: experiments in election reform . ed . bruce e. cain , todd donovan , and caroline j. tolbert . washington , d.c.: brookings institution , 2008 . karp , jeffrey a. , and susan a. banducci . “going postal: how all - mail elections influence turnout.” political behavior , vol . kousser , thad and megan mullin . “does voting by mail increase participation ? using matching to analyze a natural experiment.” political analysis , vol . leighley , jan e. , and jonathan nagler . “electoral laws and turnout , 1972-2008.” paper presented at the 4th annual conference on empirical legal studies , los angeles , calif. , november 2009 . magleby , david b . “participation in mail ballot elections.” the western political quarterly , vol . miller , peter a. , and neilan s. chaturvedi . “get out the early vote: minority use of convenience voting in 2008.” paper presented at the 2010 annual meeting of the american political science association , washington , d.c. miller , peter a.m. , and paul gronke .