epa . epa's diesel emissions reduction act program collects information on the number of diesel engines it replaces , retrofits , and rebuilds as well as information on the estimated tons of particulate matter , nitrogen oxide , carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , and hydrocarbon emissions it reduces . according to agency documents , in fiscal year 2008 — the most recent year for which data were reported — the program reduced approximately 46,000 tons of nitrogen oxide emissions and 2,200 tons of particulate matter emissions . epa documents show that the cost for these emissions reductions ranged from $400 to $2,000 per ton of nitrogen oxide emissions reduced and from $9,000 to $27,700 per ton of particulate matter emissions reduced . doe . doe's clean cities program collects information on reductions in gasoline and diesel fuel use that the program achieves to measure progress toward its program goal of reducing national petroleum use by 2.5 billion gallons by 2020 . doe's energy efficiency and conservation block grant and state energy programs estimate emissions reductions that result from program activities , but neither of these programs separately tracks diesel emissions from other emissions reductions . dot's federal aviation administration . the federal aviation administration's voluntary airport low emissions program collects information on the total amount of criteria pollutant emissions each project will reduce , but it does not currently track reductions in diesel emissions . dot's federal highway administration . the federal highway administration's congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program collects information from grant recipients on the type and quantity of emissions reduced through each project the program funds . however , the program does not review or compile this information at the national level . the ferry boat discretionary and state infrastructure banks programs do not collect performance information related to diesel emissions reductions . dot's federal transit administration . the federal transit administration's transit investments for greenhouse gas and energy reduction program obtains information from grant applicants on the amount of energy use and greenhouse gas emissions each project is to reduce , but the program does not separately track reductions in diesel energy use or diesel emissions . the remaining five federal transit administration programs that fund diesel emissions reduction activities — bus and bus facilities , clean fuels grant , national fuel cell bus technology development , transit in parks , and urbanized area formula grants — do not collect performance information related to diesel emissions reductions . efforts to measure the effects of programs that decrease diesel emissions are also hindered by the absence of a baseline assessment of nationwide diesel emissions from which agencies could measure progress . epa has assessed national levels of nitrogen oxide and particulate matter pollution from some mobile diesel sources , including highway vehicles and some nonroad equipment , and dot maintains data on the number of diesel transit vehicles currently in use . however , no agency has comprehensively assessed existing diesel pollution to identify the most significant mobile sources of diesel emissions and the specific areas that face the greatest health risks from diesel pollution .