, price elasticity . the department of labor did not provide comments on the report . chipra also increased the federal excise tax rate on large cigars . large cigars are unique among tobacco products in that the tax rate is ad valorem — calculated as a percentage of the manufacturer's or importer's sale price — up to a maximum tax ( currently $402.60 ) per thousand sticks . chipra increased the ad valorem rate for large cigars from 20.72 percent to 52.75 percent of the manufacturer's or importer's sale price , up to a maximum of $402.60 per thousand sticks ( see table 2 ) . figure 1 shows a sample of these smoking tobacco products . as shown in figure 2 , while the cigarette share of the smoking tobacco market has decreased , cigarette sales continue to dominate the market for smoking tobacco products . cigarette sales fell from 350.3 billion cigarettes in fiscal year 2008 to 236.9 billion cigarettes in fiscal year 2018 , and its percentage of the smoking tobacco market declined from 93.5 percent to 87.3 percent . during this same period , the combined sales of roll - your - own tobacco , pipe tobacco , small cigars , and large cigars increased from the equivalent of 24.5 billion sticks in fiscal year 2008 to 34.6 billion sticks in fiscal year 2018 , an increase from 6.5 percent to 12.8 percent of the total market for smoking tobacco products . although electronic cigarettes are growing in popularity among u.s. youth according to the fda , they are not included in the sales data on smoking tobacco products represented in figure 2 . electronic cigarettes are not currently taxed under the internal revenue code as a tobacco product . accordingly , corresponding data on electronic cigarettes sales are not available . for objective one , we identified market shifts among smoking tobacco products by analyzing ttb domestic removals data and cbp imports data to identify sales trends across the different domestic and imported tobacco products before and after chipra took effect . for objectives two and three , we estimated the federal revenue effects of differences in federal excise tax rates for tobacco products by analyzing ttb's and cbp's revenue data and bls price data for smoking tobacco products . we estimated what the effect on tax revenue collection would have been if the sales trends for roll - your - own and pipe tobacco and for small and large cigars had not been affected by substitution between the products but had been affected by the increase in price due to the tax — in other words , if the market shifts resulting from the substitution of higher - taxed products with lower - taxed products had not occurred . in this report , we refer to this estimated effect on federal tax revenue collection as revenue losses . in addition , we analyzed what is known about the effects on federal revenue if congress were to eliminate current tax disparities between smoking tobacco products .