you also asked that we collect data on the accounting industry . according to the 2004 eeo - 1 data , minorities held 13.5 percent , and white women held 32.4 percent of all “officials and managers” positions in the accounting industry . minorities' rapid growth as a percentage of the overall u.s. population and increased global competition have convinced some financial services firms that workforce diversity is a critical business strategy . officials from the firms with whom we spoke said that their top leadership was committed to implementing workforce diversity initiatives , but noted that they faced challenges in making such initiatives work . in particular , they cited ongoing difficulties in recruiting and retaining minority candidates and in gaining employees' “buy - in” for diversity initiatives , especially at the middle management level . since the mid - 1990s , some financial services firms have implemented a variety of initiatives designed to recruit and retain minority and women candidates to fill key positions . officials from several banks said that they had developed scholarship and internship programs to encourage minority students to consider careers in banking . some firms and trade organizations have also developed partnerships with groups that represent minority professionals and with local communities to recruit candidates through events such as conferences and career fairs . to help retain minorities and women , firms have established employee networks , mentoring programs , diversity training , and leadership and career development programs . officials from some financial services firms we contacted , as well as industry studies , noted that that financial services firms' senior managers were involved in diversity initiatives . for example , according to an official from an investment bank , the head of the firm meets with every minority and female senior executive to discuss his or her career development . officials from a few commercial banks said that the banks had established diversity “councils” of senior leaders to set the vision , strategy , and direction of diversity initiatives . a 2005 industry trade group study and some officials also noted that some companies were linking managers' compensation with their progress in hiring , promoting , and retaining minority and women employees . a few firms have also developed performance indicators to measure progress in achieving diversity goals . these indicators include workforce representation , turnover , promotion of minority and women employees , and employee satisfaction survey responses . officials from several financial services firms stated that measuring the results of diversity efforts over time was critical to the credibility of the initiatives and to justifying the investment in the resources such initiatives demanded . the financial services firms and trade organizations we contacted that had launched diversity initiatives cited a variety of challenges that may have limited the success of their efforts . first , officials said that the industry faced ongoing challenges in recruiting minority and women candidates . according to industry officials , the industry lacks a critical mass of minority employees , especially at the senior levels , to serve as role models to attract and retain other minorities .