mms is addressing this issue . while oil and gas company representatives with whom we spoke reported that they generally have little difficulty understanding key data required to complete the form mms - 2014 , most state auditors with whom we spoke identified some problems with company submitted data . all 10 of the representatives we contacted explained that the major data fields , such as the sales value , sales volume , and royalty value , are easy to understand and complete . eight of the representatives added that major royalty reporting codes , such as those that define product types and that provide more information on the nature of the sale of oil and gas , are also easy to understand . only , two representatives reported some difficulty with using certain codes . however , 8 of the 11 state and tribal royalty auditors that we contacted identified a specific product code that creates difficulty for oil and gas companies in reporting royalties . specifically , state auditors told us that product code 39 for coalbed methane is inconsistently used by payors reporting royalties , creating difficulty in auditing leases . during our analysis of mms's royalty data , we also noted that some companies claim a processing allowance for coalbed methane , which is not processed , possibly indicating confusion on use of this code . additionally , these auditors told us that a certain code used to explain adjustments , known as adjustment reason code 10 , is commonly used by royalty payors for all types of adjustments . they said that not having specific adjustment reason codes for volume adjustments , price changes , royalty adjustments , processing allowance adjustments , and transportation allowance adjustments , makes it difficult for auditors to clearly determine why a royalty payment was adjusted . royalties paid to the federal government for the extraction of oil and natural gas from federal lands and waters remain both a large source of revenue to the federal government and a key element in the discussion on how to balance the use of these lands . our past work has consistently raised questions about how mms oversees the collection of these royalties and ensures that the country receives fair value for the resources removed . mms has ongoing efforts to improve the reasonableness and accuracy of its royalty data . however , the agency still has more to do to ensure that key data used to report , pay , and audit federal royalties are accurate . in our view , mms still lacks some effective controls to ( 1 ) prevent erroneous data on allowances from being accepted into the system , ( 2 ) detect errors in data once they are accepted into the system , and ( 3 ) ensure that key data needed for complex oil and gas units are consistently provided , and this can make the auditing and other compliance work done by mms staff more difficult and could result in the federal government not receiving all the royalties it is due .