oversight . weaknesses in usaid's oversight of its assistance grants during the preaward , award , implementation , and closeout phases increased the risk of grantees' improper use of grant funds and noncompliance with applicable laws and regulations . on june 30 , 2008 , gad's executive director had informed usaid that , in following up on deficiencies that usaid's financial services contractor and we had identified earlier that month , he had determined that one of gad's employees had used the organization's credit card to make unauthorized purchases for his personal use ; the employee had signed a statement admitting to these actions and had promised to repay the cost of these items and had been fired . usaid suspended the grant on july 2 and referred the matter to the usaid inspector general for investigation ; as of november 2008 , the grant remained suspended , pending conclusion of the inspector general's investigation and the results of a financial system review by the financial review services contractor . the grant was scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2008 , but usaid extended the grant to march 31 , 2009 , to permit completion of the investigation and review . on july 18 , 2008 , usaid announced that , to determine whether financial vulnerabilities exist at grantees and how best to address them , it would initiate reviews of the cuba program grantees' procurement systems under the april 2008 contract and subsequently conduct audits of grantees' incurred cost under the usaid inspector general . in addition , usaid reported that it had partially suspended two smaller grants pending the outcomes of the procurement reviews . the program's other grants remained active , based on usaid's review of the grantees' a - 133 audits and other relevant information , but pending the results of the procurement reviews and incurred cost audits announced in july 2008 . reviews of grantees' procurement systems . in july 2008 , usaid instructed the financial services contractor hired in april 2008 to accelerate planned reviews of current grantees' procurement systems . the procurement reviews , completed in august 2008 , identified internal control , financial management , and procurement weaknesses at three grantees . on september 24 , 2008 , usaid lifted one of the two partial suspensions after the grantee agreed to take several corrective actions . usaid is assessing whether to lift the other partial suspension based on grantee corrective actions , a change in grantee management , and other factors . gad , the third grantee where the review found weaknesses , remains suspended . as of october 2008 , the acceleration of the procurement reviews had used nearly half ( about $450,000 ) of the $1 million set aside for the 2-year financial services contract signed in april . further , usaid had not committed the additional funds needed to continue the planned reviews of grantees' internal controls , procurement practices , and expenditures — key elements of the program's approach to reducing grantee risks — over the contract's remaining 18 months . audits of grantees' incurred cost . the usaid inspector general will oversee the audits of grantees' incurred cost , to be conducted under a separate contract with another firm .