gao - 11-79 . washington , d.c.: october 18 , 2010 . private pensions: long - standing challenges remain for multiemployer pension plans . gao - 10-708t . washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2010 . none had a board as small as pbgc's . in addition , the size of pbgc's board also prevents the members from establishing standing oversight committees , which are commonly used by both government corporations and private corporate boards . for example , other government corporations , such as the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) and the federal deposit insurance corporation have established standing committees to conduct oversight of certain functions , such as audits and case file reviews . pbgc's governance structure is also vulnerable to disruptive transitions with each administration change . the board , its representatives , and the director typically change with each presidential transition , thus limiting the board's institutional knowledge of the challenges facing the corporation . other government corporations have board structures with staggered terms for their directors , which arguably avoid gaps in their organization's institutional knowledge . for instance , opic's directors may be appointed for a term of no more than 3 years , and the terms of no more than 3 of the 15 directors can expire in any given year . our prior work has also found that pbgc's board members often have limited time and resources to dedicate to pbgc matters given their numerous other responsibilities in their roles as cabinet secretaries . according to corporate governance guidelines , boards should meet regularly and focus principally on broader issues , such as corporate philosophy and mission , broad policy , strategic management , oversight and monitoring of management , and company performance against business plans . however , we found that since pbgc's inception , the board has met infrequently , even when pressing strategic and operational issues were at play . in 2003 , after several high - profile pension plan terminations , pbgc's board began meeting twice a year ( see fig . but pbgc officials have told us that it is a challenge to find a time when all three cabinet secretaries are able to meet , and when they do meet , the meetings generally only last about an hour . the current board has recently begun to meet more frequently , meeting three times since february 2010 . the secretary of labor serves as the chairman of the board . the board is required to direct and oversee the corporation , in part , by approving all policy decisions affecting american employers and workers as well as reviewing and approving its budget , strategic plans , and financial performance . each board member can designate an official to serve on his or her behalf in most instances . this designee is referred to as the board member's “representative.” in addition , erisa established an advisory committee , whose seven members are appointed by the president to represent the interests of labor , employers , and the general public . the committee has an advisory role but has no statutory authority to set pbgc policy or conduct formal oversight .