( see app . i for further details on our proposed cost adjustments. ) we compared our adjusted estimate of $35.4 million with ssa's original estimate of $54 million . we eliminated the costs associated with the subcategory “atfee misc” from the costs . when these costs were subtracted from the estimate , the original estimate was reduced by $5.5 million ( 13.7 percent ) to $32.3 million . because some of the work included in this subcategory was likely to be directly related to the fee processing , eliminating this subcategory most likely understated some of ssa's actual costs . while we can appreciate the need to fully consider the plan for improvement in establishing final processing goals , we believe that measures such as disability claims processing times are not going to provide enough information to track attorney fee processing in the interim . other , more specific information could be used to measure performance in the interim . for example , ssa could continue to capture the specific information on timeliness — for example , payment processing times from date of oha approval to date of attorney fee payment — which was presented to us as part of this review . ssa also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . ssa's comments are printed in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the acting commissioner of social security and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512- 7215 . individuals who made key contributions to this report include shirley abel , kelsey bright , nancy peters , and bob sampson . to perform our work , we reviewed the social security administration's ( ssa ) administration of the fee services , including interviewing officials in the office of central operations ( oco ) , the office of hearings and appeals ( oha ) , office of budget , the office of financial policy and operations , the office of systems , and other offices . we observed the attorney fee payment practices at two of ssa's process service centers and examined ssa data on these services , focusing particularly on information concerning costs ( detailed below ) and payment timeliness . in determining whether to express the user fee as a fixed amount or a percentage , we analyzed ssa data on attorney fee payments and the user fee . in determining whether to raise the cap on attorney fees , we primarily analyzed payments made to attorneys to see if the current cap was being reached frequently . additionally , we interviewed oco and oha officials regarding this issue . in analyzing the possibility of extending attorney fee withholding to ssi claims , we interviewed oha and office of system staff to determine what policy and practical considerations might arise from such a move . additionally , we interviewed an official at nosscr , various claimant advocacy groups , representatives from the legal services community , private attorneys , and an official from the association of administrative law judges to help flesh out pros and cons to extending attorney fee withholding to the ssi program .