( see figure 4. ) the number of unauthorized workers arrested during worksite enforcement operations has also declined since fiscal year 1999 . efforts to enforce these sanctions are referred to as worksite enforcement . in the nearly 20 years since the passage of irca , the employment eligibility verification process and worksite enforcement program have remained largely unchanged . following the passage of the act , the u.s. commission on immigration reform and various immigration experts concluded that deterring illegal immigration requires , among other things , strategies that focus on disrupting the ability of illegal aliens to gain employment through a more reliable employment eligibility verification process and a more robust worksite enforcement capacity . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) and ice , and officials from the social security administration ( ssa ) in headquarters and selected field locations . we obtained from them information on the form i - 9 process and the basic pilot program , a voluntary program through which participating employers verify employees' work eligibility by electronically checking information on employees' forms i - 9 with information in ssa and dhs databases . we analyzed information from these agencies , as well as related laws and regulations , to determine how the current form i - 9 process functions , identify any challenges in the current form i - 9 process , and examine dhs plans to modify the process . we also interviewed representatives of 23 employers ; 12 employer , employee , and advocacy groups ; and 6 immigration experts to obtain their views on the form i - 9 process and the basic pilot program . we selected the employers to interview based on a mix of criteria , such as the number of employers' pilot program queries and geographic location . we selected the employer , employee , and advocacy groups to interview based on a mix of criteria , such as industry representation and range of views on immigration issues . in addition , we examined uscis and ssa guidance , instructions , and agreements for the basic pilot program and the results and methodology of an independent evaluation of the program completed by the institute for survey research at temple university and westat in june 2002 . we analyzed data on employer participation in and use of the basic pilot program to determine how participation and use have changed since fiscal year 2000 . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing them for accuracy and completeness , interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and examining documentation on how the data are entered , categorized , and verified in the databases . we determined that the independent evaluation and these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . to obtain information on the worksite enforcement program priorities and resources , we interviewed officials from ice , the ssa office of the inspector general , the department of labor , the federal bureau of investigation , and the office of special counsel for immigration - related unfair unemployment practices .