the third ecn did not provide comments . the respondents generally agreed with the conclusions and recommendations in the draft report , however , three respondents expressed additional concerns . sec officials endorsed our recommendations and indicated that the agency would work closely with nasd and nyse to implement them . nasd , which also agreed with our recommendations , highlighted its efforts to resolve issues caused by differences in rules or rules interpretations through it rule modernization project . nasd noted that its authority is limited to addressing nasd rules and cited the importance of sec participation to further efforts to reduce inconsistencies in rules . nasdaq commented that the draft report generally provided an accurate characterization both of the debate about conflicts of interest between the primary sros — nyse and nasdaq — and their respective markets and of some of the steps that are being taken to mitigate those conflicts . however , nasdaq also said that the report largely overlooked a serious challenge to the integrity of the self - regulatory system — that is , the alignment of regional stock exchanges with ecns for trading nasdaq stocks . nasdaq commented that these alignments have copied nasdaq's “competing dealer” market structure without also adopting the safeguards necessary to regulate such a market . while this issue may deserve additional attention , our report focused on concerns about potential abuses of regulatory authority by sros that regulate members against which they compete for order flow rather than on the broader issues of competition among markets or the quality of self - regulation sros provide . the draft report did note that sec assesses the quality of all the sros' regulatory programs , which includes those of the regional exchanges . it also stated that the concerns addressed were identified through a variety of means , including discussions with nasdaq officials and other market participants , and that they did not represent all existing concerns . sia agreed with the report's conclusions and recommendations but also expressed concern that sros often file rule changes with sec without prior public notice or opportunity for comment . as a result , affected firms learn of proposed rule changes only when the rules are published for comment in the federal register . sia expressed a similar concern about rule interpretations or clarifications that inadvertently impose new substantive obligations on members , noting that sros also issue these changes without any public notice or opportunity for comment . accordingly , sia suggested that market participants be engaged at the outset of the regulatory dialogue in order to produce more balanced , resource - efficient regulation . we recognize that the need for public comment must be balanced against the need for sros to expeditiously implement rules that can affect their competitiveness and that sec and the industry have been attempting to balance these sometimes conflicting demands . to the extent that the timing of the public comment process is a factor causing differences in rules and their interpretations , this issue could be explored as part of sec's and the industry's efforts to implement our recommendations .