reciprocity . the country must offer visa - free travel for u.s. citizens . figure 1 shows the number of foreign nationals admitted to the united states under the program in recent years ( see app . iii for more detailed admissions statistics ) . persons entering the united states under the visa waiver program must have a valid passport issued by the participating country and be a national be seeking entry for 90 days or less as a temporary visitor for business or have been determined by cbp at the u.s. port of entry to represent no threat to the welfare , health , safety , or security of the united states ; have complied with conditions of any previous admission under the program ( for example , individuals must have stayed in the united states for 90 days or less during prior visa waiver visits ) ; if entering by air or sea , possess a round - trip transportation ticket issued by a carrier that has signed an agreement with the u.s. government to participate in the program , and must have arrived in the united states aboard such a carrier ; and if entering by land , have proof of financial solvency and a domicile abroad to which they intend to return . following the events of september 11 , 2001 , congress passed additional laws to strengthen border security policies and procedures , and dhs and state instituted other policy changes that have affected a country's qualifications for participating in the visa waiver program . for example , all passports issued after october 26 , 2005 , must contain a digital photograph printed in the document ; passports issued to visa waiver travelers after october 26 , 2006 , must be electronic ( e - passports ) . e - passports aim to enhance border security by making it more difficult to misuse the passport to gain entry into the united states . travelers with passports issued after the deadline that do not meet these requirements must obtain a visa from a u.s. embassy or consulate overseas before departing for the united states . in addition , the may 2002 enhanced border security and visa reform act required that participating countries certify that the theft of their blank passports is reported to the u.s. government in a timely manner . moreover , the act increased the frequency — from once every 5 years to once every 2 years — of mandated assessments of the effect of each country's continued participation in the visa waiver program on u.s. security , law enforcement , and immigration interests . the visa waiver program has many benefits , including facilitating international travel for millions of foreign citizens seeking to visit the united states each year , creating substantial economic benefits to the united states , and allowing state to allocate resources to visa - issuing posts in countries with higher - risk applicant pools . however , there are inherent security and law enforcement risks in the program that pose challenges to the united states . the visa waiver program was created to facilitate international travel without jeopardizing the welfare or security of the united states , according to the program's legislative history .