dhs and the coast guard concurred with all of our recommendations . for our january 2016 report , we reviewed the nsc's program documentation , including test reports , and key metrics the coast guard uses to evaluate assets . we interviewed coast guard officials and officials from the navy's commander , operational test and evaluation force ( cotf ) — which conducted the nsc testing — to determine areas where the nsc is or is not meeting required capabilities and performance metrics . to add important context to our review , we toured the nsc used for iot&e ( stratton ) and interviewed the commanding officer concerning his experiences operating the vessel and its capabilities . to assess the coast guard's plans for fot&e , we reviewed coast guard and dhs guidance and coast guard documents . we interviewed coast guard officials to determine the timeline for fot&e , identify what systems will be tested , and determine what , if any , changes are planned for the nsc fleet based on iot&e and operations . to assess the performance of the nsc during regular operations , we reviewed after action reports and engineering reports , which are prepared by the cutters' commanding officers , to identify any equipment casualties ( i.e. , equipment failures ) the cutters are experiencing on a regular basis and the effect that these casualties are having on operations . we also toured the huntington ingalls industry shipyard in pascagoula , mississippi , where the nscs are built to gain an understanding of how design changes are incorporated into the production process . for our april 2015 review that included the opc and frc , we reviewed the programs' schedules , cost estimates , and acquisition plans and interviewed program officials . for our june 2014 report , we reviewed the acquisition program baseline for programs in the coast guard's portfolio as well as the coast guard's budget and discussed the acquisition portfolio with coast guard , dhs , and office of management and budget officials and followed up on previous efforts to address affordability . this statement also draws from our prior work on commercial best practices in shipbuilding . more information about the scope and methodology of this past work can be found in these reports . we also obtained updated information from the coast guard on the acquisition status of the frc and opc , which we incorporated as appropriate throughout the statement , and shared with coast guard officials our observations on the frc and planned opc acquisition approaches . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . following iot&e , dhs held an acquisition review board ( arb ) to discuss the outcome of iot&e , which resulted in dhs approving the nsc program for full rate production in october 2014 . arbs review major acquisition programs for proper management , oversight , accountability , and alignment with dhs's strategic functions at acquisition decision events and other meetings as needed . table 2 shows the 10 deficiencies .