more use of the internet . in the early 1990s , the full impact of the internet as a global communications tool was not yet envisioned . officials indicated that the bureau did not have sufficient time and funding during the planning phase to fully understand and test all the implications of using the internet as a vehicle for census responses . in addition , the bureau's major concern was that computer security issues had not been adequately addressed , particularly since census information must be protected and significant penalties may be imposed for unauthorized disclosure . also , the public perception of using the internet as a response medium had not been fully explored . nevertheless , in february 1999 , the bureau established a means for respondents to complete the 2000 census short forms on the internet protected by a 22-digit identification number . according to bureau officials , they received about 60,000 short forms via the internet . the rapid evolution of the internet has the potential to significantly reduce bureau workload and the large volume of paper forms for the 2010 census . although the bureau conceded that planning efforts could be improved , the lack of funding did not appear to be a significant issue , except as it affected the ability to earlier plan the dress rehearsal . the bureau's experience in preparing for the 2000 census underscores the importance of solid , upfront planning and adequate funding levels to carry out those plans . as we have reported in the past , planning a decennial census that is acceptable to stakeholders includes analyzing the lessons learned from past practices , identifying initiatives that show promise for producing a better census while controlling costs , testing these initiatives to ensure their feasibility , and convincing stakeholders of the value of proposed plans . contributing factors to the funding reductions for the 2000 census were the bureau's persistent lack of comprehensive planning and priority setting , coupled with minimal research , testing , and evaluation documentation to promote informed and timely decision making . over the course of the decade , the congress , gao , and others criticized the bureau for not fully addressing such areas as ( 1 ) capitalizing on its experiences from past decennial censuses to serve as lessons to be learned in future planning , ( 2 ) documenting its planning efforts , particularly early in the process , ( 3 ) concentrating its efforts on a few critical projects that significantly affected the census count , such as obtaining a complete and accurate address list , ( 4 ) presenting key implementation issues with decision milestones , and ( 5 ) identifying key performance measures for success . capitalizing on experiences from past censuses . in a fiscal year 1993 conference report , the congress stated that the bureau should direct its resources towards a more cost - effective census design that would produce more accurate results than those from the 1990 census .