participants . the chcc has demonstrated our key collaboration practice of including relevant participants . we previously reported on the importance of ensuring that relevant participants are included in and have the appropriate knowledge and abilities to contribute to the collaborative effort . the chcc invited and included several entities as participants of the committee and its working groups . some participants noted that not having dedicated resources could present certain challenges to chcc activities . for example , one chcc participant noted that cultural preservation training programs are resource dependent and are , therefore , difficult to plan without funding . however , this participant also noted that collaborative efforts on the chcc have helped participants coordinate interagency training , which has helped to mitigate these challenges . moreover , participants generally noted that even without dedicated financial resources , they were committed to participate in chcc activities as a collateral duty to their work . another aspect of managing resources among interagency groups is the development of technological systems and compatible tools . chcc participants have taken steps to explore the development of technological resources to enhance collaboration . for instance , several technology working group participants noted that they have discussed the possibilities involved in establishing compatible technological systems among the chcc's members . according to one participant , the working group is in the process of obtaining the status of existing technological systems of participants and is planning on vetting new technologies . outcomes and accountability . the chcc could benefit from addressing the key collaboration practice of organizational outcomes and accountability , which includes clearly defining short - term and long - term goals , and developing a way to track and monitor progress toward these goals . in the first formal meeting in november 2016 , the chair of the committee articulated that the chcc's role was to coordinate antitrafficking efforts and to tackle a wide range of cultural heritage challenges worldwide . however , subsequent to that meeting , the chcc has not produced documents identifying specific chcc outcomes or goals . chcc participants also indicated that no clear consensus on the chcc's stated goals has emerged from chcc meetings . many chcc participants noted that the chcc had not developed short - term and long - term goals , with some adding that the chcc was working on doing so . other officials had different views of the short - term and long - term goals . for example , one participant stated that a short - term chcc goal was to establish working groups and understand the roles of the different entities , while another participant said that a long - term goal was to solidify information sharing among participants . the chcc's three working groups varied in their development of goals . one participant of the chcc's technology working group noted that the working group has developed short - term , medium - term , and long - term goals , including target time frames for achieving them . for example , the technology group has a short - term goal to evaluate the technological strengths and weaknesses of the members relative to their mission . however , not all of the participants in that working group were aware of these goals .