addressed by division policy ? addressed by division policy ? addressed by division policy ? addressed by division policy ? in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report included nabajyoti barkakarti , katherine chu - hickman , lester diamond , elena epps , nancy glover , paula moore , and megan secrest . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) . each weekday , gao posts newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence on its web site . to have gao e - mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to updates. table 3 summarizes our analysis . more specifically , our analysis for each of the modernization planning elements showed the following: with respect to the first element , two divisions — cyber and the program management office — consistently linked their projects to either the bureau's strategic plan or its top 10 priorities . the other divisions linked at least some of their individual projects to bureau - level strategy . linking individual projects to the fbi's strategic plan is an essential step to ensuring that the bureau it initiatives do not overlap or leave gaps in mission functions and goals . only two divisions ( cjis and security ) identified and demonstrated gaps in existing capabilities . cjis undertook an analysis of system deficiencies and technology trends to identify and specify improvements to its law enforcement systems . security relied on prior reviews of security incidents and comparisons of existing practices with best practices to identify needed improvements in system security requirements . other divisions largely stated the need for improvements in system capabilities and capacity without corresponding data on current or projected mission shortfalls . this is crucial because without supporting data to derive performance gaps , proposed improvements may be unnecessary , insufficient , or not identified at all . in addition , our research and experience with federal it modernizations show that projects with inadequately defined improvements are likely to require more resources to plan and manage — including planning and management of interdependencies — than those that have been based on reliable performance data and thorough analysis . all of the divisions addressed the third element , in part , but only two divisions — cyber and cjis — fully identified interdependencies for all of their projects . for example , cjis identified interrelationships among business processes , systems , databases , networks , components , and tools .