ii. ) when we examined the open new access point competition , which did not target specific areas , we found that the south census region also received a greater number of awards than any other region under that competition . specifically , the south census region was granted nearly 40 percent of awards ; in contrast , the midwest received only 17 percent of awards . ( see table 4. ) hrsa oversees cooperative agreement recipients , but the agency's oversight is limited because it does not have standardized performance measures to assess the performance of the cooperative agreement recipients in assisting new access point applicants and the agency is unlikely to meet its policy timeline for conducting comprehensive on - site reviews . although hrsa officials told us that they were developing standardized performance measures , they provided no details on the specific measures that may be implemented . moreover , more than a third of the summary statements sent to unsuccessful applicants for new access point competitions held in fiscal years 2005 and 2007 contained unclear feedback . hrsa oversees the activities of its cooperative agreement recipients using a number of methods . hrsa officials told us that over the course of a budget period , project officers use regular telephone and electronic communications to discuss cooperative agreement recipients' activities as specified in work plans , review the status of these activities , and help set priorities . according to hrsa officials , there is no standard protocol for these communications , and their frequency , duration , and content vary over the course of a budget period and by recipient . hrsa staff also reviews annual noncompeting continuation applications to determine whether the cooperative agreement recipients provided an update on their progress , described their activities and challenges , and developed a suitable work plan and budget for the upcoming budget period . the progress reports submitted by cooperative agreement recipients in these annual applications serve as hrsa's primary form of documentation on the status of cooperative agreement recipients' activities . hrsa's oversight of training and ta cooperative agreement recipients is based on performance measures tailored to the individual organization rather than performance measures that are standardized across all recipients . specifically , hrsa uses individualized performance measures in cooperative agreement recipients' work plans and comprehensive on - site reviews to assess recipients' performance . for cooperative agreement recipients' work plans , recipients propose training and technical assistance activities in response to hrsa's cooperative agreement application guidance , in which the agency provides general guidelines and goals for the provision of training and technical assistance to health center grant applicants . the guidance requires recipients to develop performance measures for each activity in their work plans . when we analyzed the work plans of the 8 national organizations and 10 pcas with training and ta cooperative agreements , we found that these measures varied by cooperative agreement recipient . for example , we found that for national organizations , performance measures varied from ( 1 ) documenting that the organization's marketing materials were sent to pcas to ( 2 ) recording the number of specific technical assistance requests the organization received to ( 3 ) producing monthly reports for hrsa detailing information about potential applicants .