accountability . the life - cycle cost for a decennial census spans a decade , and decisions made early in the decade about the next decennial census guide the research , investments , and tests carried out throughout the entire 10-year period . institutionalizing accountability over an extended period may help long - term decennial initiatives provide meaningful and sustainable results . what was the intended goal ? have significant changes occurred that affect its purpose ? does it use prevailing leading practices ? as one example , a critical factor affecting the cost of the census is the necessity for the bureau to follow up on nonresponding housing units . the hourly wages of enumerators , their productivity , mileage reimbursement , and the need , in some cases , to return several times to an address to obtain a response can all drive up costs . administrative records from other government agencies including driver licenses and school records can , if used in lieu of making multiple visits to a housing unit , significantly control costs . however , the bureau would first need to resolve a number of questions including the quality and the coverage of the information supplied by the records and the policy and legal implications of accessing them . on the basis of our earlier work on high - performing organizations , fundamental reforms will mean ensuring that the bureau's organizational culture and structure , as well as its approach to strategic planning , human - capital management , internal collaboration , knowledge sharing , capital decision making , risk and change management , and other internal functions are aligned toward delivering more cost - effective outcomes . indeed , some of the operational problems that occurred during the 2010 and prior censuses are symptomatic of deeper organizational issues . for example , the lack of staff skilled in cost - estimation during the 2010 census points to inadequate human - capital planning , while it problems stemmed from not fully and consistently performing certain functions including it investment management . going forward , it will be important for the bureau , congress , and other stakeholders to reach consensus on a number of reexamination areas , including the following , which have particular implications for controlling costs and improving accuracy: which data collection approaches , the internet and administrative records among them , have potential to improve data quality without compromising other bureau goals and mandates such as confidentiality and timeliness ? to what extent can private - sector and other sources of information such as maps , address lists , and geographic databases be employed to help support the census ? how can the bureau enhance how it partners with government and nongovernmental organizations , data users , grassroots organizations , and advisory groups to obtain their input and possibly better leverage their knowledge and services ? what is the best way of maintaining congressional and stakeholder involvement and dialog throughout the course of the decade ? what opportunities exist for the bureau to leverage innovations in technology and social media to more fully engage census stakeholders and the general public throughout the decade on census issues , possibly identifying more cost - effective methods ?