the benefits have been enormous . vast amounts of information are now literally at our fingertips , facilitating research on virtually every topic imaginable ; financial and other business transactions can be executed almost instantaneously , often 24 hours a day ; and electronic mail , internet web sites , and computer bulletin boards allow us to communicate quickly and easily with virtually an unlimited number of individuals and groups . in addition to such benefits , however , this widespread interconnectivity poses significant risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support . for example , telecommunications , power distribution , public health , national defense ( including the military's warfighting capability ) , law enforcement , government , and emergency services all depend on the security of their computer operations . likewise , the speed and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age , if not properly controlled , allow individuals and organizations to inexpensively eavesdrop on or interfere with these operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage . reports of attacks and disruptions are growing . the number of computer security incidents reported to the cert® coordination center rose from 9,859 in 1999 to 21,756 in 2000 and 34,754 for just the first 9 months of 2001.and these are only the reported attacks . the cert® coordination center estimates that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents go unreported , in most cases because the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated or because there were no indications of penetration or attack . as the number of individuals with computer skills has increased , more intrusion or “hacking” tools have become readily available and relatively easy to use . a potential hacker can literally download tools from the internet and “point and click” to start a hack . according to a recent national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) publication , hackers post 30 to 40 new tools to hacking sites on the internet every month . experts also agree that there has been a steady advance in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology . intruders quickly develop attacks to exploit vulnerabilities discovered in products , use these attacks to compromise computers , and share them with other attackers . in addition , they can combine these attacks with other forms of technology to develop programs that automatically scan the network for vulnerable systems , attack them , compromise them , and use them to spread the attack even further . attacks over the past several months illustrate the risks . as we reported to this subcommittee in august 2001 , the attacks referred to as code red , code red ii , and sircam have affected millions of computer users , shut down web sites , slowed internet service , and disrupted business and government operations , and have reportedly caused billions of dollars in damage . more recently , the nimda worm appeared using some of the most significant attack profile aspects of code red ii and 1999's infamous melissa virus , allowing it to spread widely in a short amount of time .