no travel authorization . in a number of instances , agencies were not able to provide a travel authorization corresponding to a trip in our sample . subordinate authorizations . the ftr does not forbid subordinates from approving their superior's premium class travel . however , applying the criteria set forth in our internal control standards and sensitive payments guidelines , premium class transactions that were approved by subordinates reduced scrutiny of premium class travel and amounted to self - approval , and thus would fail the control test . table 2 also shows that an estimated 67 percent of transactions failed the justification test . as the ftr requires specific authorization for all premium class travel , the 28 percent of transactions that failed the authorization test automatically failed the justification test . thirty - six additional transactions ( 38 percent ) failed justification , mostly due to improper use of the 14 hour - rule . the failures are as follows: in four instances , travelers used the 14-hour rule to justify premium class travel , even though supporting documentation showed that flight time was less than 14 hours . in 29 instances , the traveler had a rest stop en route or rest period upon arrival at the destination city , upon returning home , or both . travelers with rest stops en route or at destination are not qualified for premium class travel . despite our request , agencies did not provide supporting documentation in these instances to indicate that the travelers reported to work and thus met the 14-hour criterion . in three instances , the premium class flights failed justification because the agency did not provide us with supporting documentation required by the agency's own premium class policy as justification for premium class travel . our sensitive payments guide states that senior government executives are subject to intense scrutiny in the event of “any impropriety or conflict of interest , real or perceived , regardless of how much money , if any , is involved.” according to the guide , travel by high - ranking officials , for example members of the senior executive service ( ses ) , generals , admirals , and political appointees , is a sensitive payment area because it poses a high level of risk of impropriety . however , our sample indicated that high - ranking officials , including ses ( career senior executives ) and presidential appointees , were using premium class travel at a higher rate than other federal employees . these high - ranking officials made up about one - half of 1 percent of the federal workforce yet accounted for 15 percent of premium class travel in our sample population . as stated previously , we consider premium class authorizations that were signed by subordinates to be tantamount to self - authorization . this is particularly true when travel by government executives is authorized by subordinates . nevertheless , we found that some premium class flights taken by executives we looked at were approved by subordinates of the travelers . for example , a presidential appointee at the department of the treasury ( treasury ) took 12 trips during the audit period that were authorized by a subordinate .