monitor risks weekly . irs provided evidence of a weekly review meeting for risks . determine risk levels for each recorded risk ; evaluate and select risk mitigation strategies ; assign risk ownership ; establish performance thresholds that offer early warning that chosen mitigation strategies do not work . this inconsistency could stem from the lack of guidance , as previously discussed , on how to do mitigation evaluations , including documenting why a mitigation strategy is selected over the alternatives considered . as for the two sample provisions that counsel was responsible for implementing , the risk management plan was not used . when asked about efforts to identify risks for one of the provisions , a counsel official said that this responsibility rested with the bods who ultimately would implement the provision . however , the s&e pmo overseeing the work in the bods told us that counsel was responsible for the provision's implementation , including managing the related risks . as a result of confusion as to who should take the lead in identifying and mitigating risks for provisions in which counsel had lead responsibility , risks may not be identified and mitigated . irs officials acknowledged that the risk plan was not used for these provisions , noting that the provisions were not expected to have an impact on irs operations . however , one of the two provisions , an imposition of penalties for underpayments attributable to transactions lacking economic substance , had an operational impact in areas such as tax forms , customer service , and compliance checks , indicating that the risk plan should have been used . looking more broadly beyond the provisions in our sample , we found that irs generally implemented its risk management plan in four crosscutting areas: ( 1 ) resource allocation , ( 2 ) collaboration with other agencies , ( 3 ) decisions to extend deadlines or provide transitional relief , and ( 4 ) challenges related to addressing compliance and burden . however , irs did not have a formal system for managing risks when coordinating with hhs . while we noted in table 3 that most activities in project plans were not assigned specific resources , irs's risk plan does facilitate knowledge sharing among the entities involved in allocating resources to the program , with the exception previously stated that it does not provide guidance on verifying that resources are available for selected mitigation strategies . the cfo , along with irs management , allocates irs's appropriation to irs teams doing the implementation work . by involving the cfo in reviewing identified risks , the risk plan ensures that the cfo is aware of any risks related to the availability of resources . risk levels were determined ; risk ownership was assigned ; little evidence of mitigation strategy evaluation ; provisions with earlier effective dates were more likely to have established early warning indicators . regularly scheduled reports reviewed at meetings by irs management committees . irs provided evidence of taking these steps . ii for the full text included in fig . as figure 3 indicates , the risk plan's discussion of evaluating potential risk mitigations is brief , with some processes and responsibilities left undefined .