refugee admissions program . specifically , the order directed agencies to conduct a worldwide review to identify any additional information needed from each foreign country to adjudicate visas and other immigration benefits to ensure that individuals applying for such benefits are not a security or public - safety threat . the order also instituted visa entry restrictions for nationals from certain listed countries for a 90-day period ; directed agencies to develop a uniform baseline for screening and vetting standards and procedures ; and suspended the u.s . refugee admissions program for 120 days in order to review refugee application and adjudication procedures . the order further directed dhs to expedite the completion and implementation of a biometric entry - exit tracking system for travelers to the united states . implementation of executive order 13780 entry restrictions for visa travelers and refugees commenced on june 29 , 2017 , subject to a june 26 ruling of the u.s. supreme court prohibiting enforcement of such restrictions against foreign nationals with a credible claim of a bona fide relationship to a person or entity in the united states . the federal budget process provides the means for the president and congress to make informed decisions between competing national needs and policies , allocate resources among federal agencies , and ensure laws are executed according to established priorities . from february 2017 through february 2018 , state hired 134 new consular fellows , according to ca officials . additionally , state officials said that they expect to hire 120 more consular fellows for the remainder of fiscal year 2018 . in august 2017 , the foreign service institute created a 12-week spanish language program for consular fellows who received certain scores on the spanish language exam , according to ca officials . eleven consular fellows completed the program in january 2018 and 20 more are expected to complete the program in july 2018 , according to ca officials . as of january 2018 , five consular fellows were being trained in a language outside their core linguistic ability , according to ca officials . while these actions were taken to support implementation of the executive order , ca officials also told us that hiring consular fellows has been a state priority for some time . ca officials said that the bureau has hired an increasing number of consular fellows to meet worldwide visa demand since 2012 , and that providing consular services is one of state's highest priorities , as well as a national security imperative . according to ca officials , because the consular fellows program is entirely funded by non - appropriated consular fees , subject to fluctuating demand for passports and visas , the expansion of the program did not have appropriations impacts . however , officials did provide per unit costs associated with aspects of expanding the consular fellows program . for example , consular fellows salaries range from approximately $48,000 to approximately $98,000 and foreign service institute language courses last from 24 to 36 weeks , at a cost of $1,700 per week , per student .