to date , congress has not acted on our recommendations . the apa provides for both formal and informal rulemaking . formal rulemaking is used in ratemaking proceedings and in certain other cases when rules are required by statute to be made “on the record” after an opportunity for a trial - type agency hearing . informal or “notice and comment” rulemaking is used much more frequently , and is the focus of my comments here today . in informal rulemaking , the apa generally requires that agencies publish a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register . the notice must contain ( 1 ) a statement of the time , place , and nature of public rulemaking proceedings ; ( 2 ) reference to the legal authority under which the rule is proposed ; and ( 3 ) either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved . another part of the executive order requires agencies to prepare an agenda of all regulations under development or review and a plan describing in greater detail the most important regulatory actions that the agency expects to issue in proposed or final form in the next fiscal year or thereafter . the order also requires agencies to identify for the public in a complete , clear , and simple manner the substantive changes that are made to rules while under review at oira and , separately , the changes made at the suggestion or recommendation of oira . in january 1998 we reported on the implementation of this requirement , and concluded that the four agencies we reviewed had complete documentation available to the public of these changes for only about one - quarter of the 122 regulatory actions that we reviewed . the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) , enacted in 1980 in response to concerns about the effect that federal regulations can have on small entities , is another example of a broadly - based rulemaking requirement . under the rfa , independent and non - independent regulatory agencies must prepare an initial regulatory flexibility analysis at the time proposed rules are issued unless the head of the issuing agency determines that the proposed rule would not have a “significant economic impact upon a substantial number of small entities.” the regulatory flexibility analysis must include a description of , among other things , ( 1 ) the reasons why the regulatory action is being considered ; ( 2 ) the small entities to which the proposed rule will apply and , where feasible , an estimate of their number ; ( 3 ) the projected reporting , recordkeeping , and other compliance requirements of the proposed rule , and ( 4 ) any significant alternatives to the proposed rule that accomplish the statutory objectives and minimize any significant economic impact on small entities . the rfa also requires agencies to ensure that small entities have an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking process , and requires the chief counsel of the small business administration's ( sba ) office of advocacy to monitor agencies' compliance with the act .