maryland . maryland health benefit exchange is a public corporation and independent state agency that was established in 2011 and began operations in plan year 2014 . the marketplace works with three state executive - branch agencies: the department of health and mental hygiene , the department of human resources , and the maryland insurance administration . in accordance with federal law , applicants can apply for health coverage through an online portal operated by the marketplace and through other methods such as broker enrollments . maryland health benefit exchange maintains eligibility and enrollment data for all individuals with qualified health - plan coverage . rhode island . originally established through executive order in 2011 , healthsource ri was formally established in statute in 2015 and operates as a division of the rhode island department of administration . the marketplace began operations in plan year 2014 . applicants can apply for health coverage through a single online portal operated by the marketplace . healthsource ri maintains eligibility and enrollment data for all individuals with qualified health - plan coverage . healthsource ri is also the system of record for premium payment information , since applicants make premium payments directly to the marketplace . in plan year 2015 , 14 states , including the district of columbia , operated their own state - based marketplaces . the remaining 37 states relied on healthcare.gov , the federally facilitated marketplace . cms is responsible for operating healthcare.gov and overseeing the marketplaces operated by the states . combined , state - based marketplaces accounted for about 28 percent of the over 9.3 million enrollments in all marketplaces as of september 2015 , or about 2.6 million enrollments . california and new york together made up about 64 percent of state - based marketplace enrollments , or about 1.7 million enrollments . our selected state - based marketplaces made up about 9 percent , about 237,000 enrollments , of the total state - based marketplace enrollments . figure 1 shows states operating their own marketplace platforms and their percentages of the total state - based marketplace enrollments as of september 2015 . ppaca generally requires that individuals maintain minimum essential health - care coverage . minimum essential health - care coverage can include eligible employer - sponsored minimum essential coverage , such as plans offered by an individual's employer ; and non - employer - sponsored coverage , such as individual health coverage purchased directly from an insurance company , a qualified health plan purchased through a state - based or federally facilitated health - insurance marketplace , or coverage received through government - sponsored programs . under ppaca , to be eligible to enroll in a qualified health plan offered through a state - based or federally facilitated marketplace , an individual must be a u.s. citizen or national , or otherwise lawfully present in the united states ; reside in the marketplace service area ; and not be incarcerated ( unless incarcerated while awaiting disposition of charges ) . individuals must meet additional eligibility requirements to receive subsidies for qualified health plans , such as meeting certain household - income thresholds .