conducted . combined with the 32 rules we identified in our first report , we identified 98 dodd - frank act rules in effect as of july 23 , 2012 . to assess the regulatory analyses of the agencies , we reviewed the 66 rules that were issued and became effective between july 21 , 2011 , and july 23 , 2012 . of these rules , 54 are substantive regulations while 12 are interpretive rules ; general statements of policy ; and rules that deal with agency organization , procedure , or practice . unlike interpretive rules , general statements of policy , and rules that deal with agency organization , procedure , or practice , substantive regulations are subject to the notice - and - comment rulemaking requirements of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) and generally include some form of regulatory analysis . thus , our review focused on the 54 substantive regulations for our analysis . of the 54 regulations , 19 rules were determined by the regulators and omb to be “major” rules that could have an annual impact on the economy of $100 million or more . for agencies subject to e.o . 12866 , such major rules would be considered significant regulatory actions and subject to formal benefit - cost analysis . three federal financial regulators issued 18 of the 19 major rules: the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , and securities and exchange commission ( sec ) . in addition , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , which is subject to e.o . 12,866 , issued the other major rule pursuant to the dodd - frank act . we selected four major rules for in - depth review and compared the analyses conducted to the principles outlined in omb circular a - 4 , which provides guidance to federal agencies on the development of regulatory analysis . within our scope period , the federal reserve and treasury each issued one major rule that we selected . we selected the lone sec major rule during the period that implemented new statutory authority . cftc issued several major rules , and we selected a rule based on our discussions with current and former cftc staff . we interviewed agency staffs and reviewed documentation from the agencies to assess the quality of the benefit - cost or similar analyses . we also reviewed statutes , regulations , agency guidance , and other documentation to identify the analyses federal financial regulators were required to conduct and how the agency intended to conduct them . to examine interagency coordination among or between federal financial regulators in developing rules , we reviewed the 66 dodd - frank rules that were issued and became effective between july 21 , 2011 , and july 23 , 2012 , to identify which required interagency coordination and document whether such coordination occurred . we identified 19 rules that required interagency coordination . of the rules requiring interagency coordination , we selected three for case studies to examine the extent to which and how agencies coordinated to avoid conflict and duplication in rulemaking .