gao - 11-903r . washington , d.c.: september 14 , 2011 . joint strike fighter: restructuring places program on firmer footing , but progress is still lagging . gao - 11-677t . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2011 . each was delivered more than 1 year late . the manufacturing effort still has thousands of aircraft planned for production over the next 25 years and the rate of production is expected to increase substantially starting in 2015 . this will make it vital that the contractor achieve an efficient manufacturing process . pratt & whitney , the engine manufacturer , had delivered 42 production engines and 12 lift fans at the time of our review . system , the propulsion system is still under development working to complete testing and fix deficiencies while concurrently delivering engines under the initial procurement contracts . the program office's estimated cost for the system development and demonstration of the engine has increased by 75 percent , from $4.8 billion to $8.4 billion , since the start of development . engine deliveries continue to miss expected contract due dates but still met aircraft need dates because of longer slips in aircraft like the aircraft production . supplier performance problems and design changes are driving cost increases and late engines . lift fan system components and processes are driving the major share of cost and schedule problems . going forward , lockheed martin's ability to manage its expanding global supplier network is fundamental to meeting production rates and throughput expectations . dod's independent manufacturing review team earlier identified global supply chain management as the most critical challenge for meeting production expectations . the cooperative aspect of the supply chain provides both benefits and challenges . the international program structure is based on a complex set of relationships involving both government and industry from the united states and eight other countries . overseas suppliers are playing a major and increasing role in jsf manufacturing and logistics . for example , center fuselage and wings will be manufactured by turkish and italian suppliers , respectively , as second sources . in addition to ongoing supplier challenges – parts shortages , failed parts , and late deliveries – incorporating international suppliers presents additional challenges . in addition , the program must deal with exchange rate fluctuations , disagreements over work shares , technology transfer concerns , different accounting methods , and transportation requirements that have already caused some delays . also , suppliers have sometimes struggled to develop critical and complex parts while others have had problems with limited production capacity . lockheed martin has implemented a stricter supplier assessment program to help manage supplier performance . we and several defense offices cautioned the department years ago about the risks posed by the extremely high degree of concurrency , or overlap , among the jsf development , testing , and production activities.to date , the government has incurred an estimated $373 million in retrofit costs on already - built aircraft to correct deficiencies discovered in development testing . this is in addition to the $672 million for the government's share of contract cost overruns . the program office projects additional retrofit costs through lot 10 , but at decreasing amounts .