exist . this property right is distinct from the right to perform copyright - protected material embedded in the broadcast signal . retransmission consent applies only to commercial local broadcast television stations and allows them to grant permission to cable and satellite operators to retransmit their signals , usually in return for a negotiated payment . by opting for retransmission consent , commercial local broadcast television stations give up the guarantee of carriage in exchange for the right to negotiate compensation for carriage of their signal . what is known about the potential feasibility of a phaseout of the statutory licenses ? what are selected stakeholders' views on the implications of a phaseout of the statutory licenses ? to address these questions , we reviewed relevant statutes and regulations ; reports on related subjects by the u.s . copyright office , congressional research service , and gao ; and related documentation on how the statutory licenses work . we analyzed federal communications commission's ( fcc ) 2010 to 2014 cable price survey data , u.s . copyright office statement of account data on satellite subscribers' use of distant signals for calendar year 2014 , and computer - processed data from bloomberg analytics on nationwide use of cable and satellite video services and trends in cable and satellite subscription rates between 2010 and 2014 , the most recent available data . our data analysis provided context on how the video marketplace operates , such as the number of local broadcast stations carried by cable operators , and the potential impacts on consumers in the event of a phaseout . we assessed the reliability of the data used in this report by reviewing existing information about the data and the systems that produced them . for fcc and u.s . copyright office data , we also interviewed officials from fcc and the u.s . copyright office about measures taken to ensure the reliability of the data . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we reviewed fcc , u.s . copyright office , congressional research service , gao , and industry reports on changes in the video marketplace to understand the factors influencing changes in the consumption and distribution of video content . finally , we interviewed 42 selected stakeholders — including experts , industry associations , and industry participants ( broadcast networks and station owners , cable and satellite operators , online video distributors , and content producers / copyright owners ) — to understand how the video marketplace has changed in the last 5 years , the potential feasibility of a phaseout of the statutory licenses , and potential implications of a phaseout for the requirements governing the carriage of local broadcast television stations ( “carriage requirements” ) and consumer access to programming and prices paid for cable and satellite services . we selected these stakeholders to include those with expertise on this topic as well as those representing a range of key roles in the video marketplace . we selected these individuals and organizations based on published literature , including u.s . copyright office filings and reports , our previous work , and stakeholders' recognition and affiliation with a segment of the video marketplace , and recommendations from other stakeholders we interviewed .