we did not include subcontractor data . we obtained the funding codes for organizations that are transitioning to army futures command , which includes the former army research , development , and engineering command and the army medical research and materiel command , portions of which are transitioning to the new command . to determine the proportion of contracts and associated obligations that supported these organizations , we used their funding codes to identify the number of contracts and associated obligations during our selected time period . to assess the reliability of the federal procurement data system - next generation data , we electronically tested for missing data , outliers , and inconsistent coding . based on these steps , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for identifying and analyzing army contracts awarded from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 for research and development efforts and their obligations . we obtained data on grants , cooperative agreements , and other types of agreements using the defense assistance awards data system . we conducted initial analysis on the data and discussed reliability and validity of the data with agency officials . as a result , we determined that the data were not sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this engagement and we excluded them from our review . to describe analyses the army conducted on the potential effect modernization efforts could have on small businesses , we collected and reviewed available studies and analyses the army conducted . we reviewed the army's science and technology portfolio analysis , studies related to the establishment and future organizational structure of army futures command , and the army's modernization strategy to determine if the army analyzed how small businesses could be affected . to describe how army futures command is engaging with small businesses to support research and development efforts , we reviewed policies , procedures , and guidance from the department of defense , department of the army , army futures command , and other relevant army organizations on small business engagement . we also reviewed relevant sections of the federal acquisition regulation , as well as defense and army supplements to the federal acquisition regulation , to understand the framework for small business participation in support of research and development efforts . we also reviewed relevant statutes , regulations , and policies regarding research and development and small business programs . we collected and analyzed documentation on how army futures command engages with small businesses , including its roles and responsibilities , outreach efforts , and award documentation as well as those of its subordinate components . to assess how army futures command coordinates with other army organizations , we reviewed policy documentation , such as a memorandum of understanding on coordinating contract support and for small business engagement , in addition to operational orders outlining roles and responsibilities . we assessed the information we collected against federal standards for internal control related to organizational structure , reporting lines , roles and responsibilities , and using quality information . to assess how army futures command plans to track and measure its engagement with small businesses , we reviewed policies from the department of defense and army on engagement with small businesses .