education portfolio . administration of criminal justice program . enhance the capability of egypt's prosecutor general's office through a series of activities , including the automation of nine public prosecution offices and the development of a prosecution information center . were the consequences positive or negative ? what factors explain the intended or unintended consequences of the assistance ? what project activities should be sustained , if any ? what project activities should be expanded or contracted , if at all ? what lessons can be learned from the project experience ? state solicited proposals for this evaluation in may 2014 but did not receive any responses from the eligible evaluation firms . according to the state official overseeing the solicitation process , some of the eligible firms reported having concerns about being able to carry out an evaluation given the uncertain security environment in egypt . state officials also noted that the department has never before attempted to holistically evaluate security assistance to egypt or any other country , and the size and complexity of security assistance to egypt make it especially challenging to conduct a formal evaluation . the state official overseeing the solicitation process for the proposed evaluation noted the difficulty of determining how security assistance contributes to broader strategic goals and said that there is limited information to serve as the basis for an evaluation because neither state nor dod has established performance metrics , nor has either agency consistently collected performance data on the fmf program . in addition , this official noted that a foreign military such as the egyptian armed forces might be reluctant to cooperate on an evaluation of military capabilities , as it might be perceived as intelligence gathering . because of such challenges and the nonresponsiveness of eligible evaluation firms , a state bureau of political - military affairs official reported in october 2014 that the department had decided to take a different approach to the evaluation . state's bureau of political - military affairs is in the process of developing a global security assistance evaluation and monitoring strategy and plans to hire additional staff members with expertise in program evaluation to develop a methodological framework that could be applied to evaluations of security assistance globally . one of the goals of this methodological framework would be to clearly define the objectives of security assistance and create a logic model linking the components of security assistance programs to these objectives . according to the state official overseeing these efforts , the bureau is seeking to have the new staff members in place early in 2015 to begin developing the framework . the bureau also hired a contractor to conduct an evaluation of security assistance to lebanon , which it expects will help inform future evaluations of security assistance to egypt and other countries . according to state officials , state remains committed to evaluating security assistance to egypt and conducting an evaluation as soon as practicable . however , the state official in charge of this process noted that there are no set time frames for when this will occur . standard practices in program management include , among other things , developing a plan to execute projects within a specific time frame .