( see app . in response to budget reductions , sba streamlined its field structure during the 1990s by downsizing regional and district offices and shifting supervisory responsibilities to headquarters . the 10 regional offices originally acted as intermediaries between headquarters and the field and served as communication channels for critical information , policy guidance , and instructions . we have previously reported about the complexity of some of these relationships . you asked us to review sba's current organizational structure , with a focus on the regional offices . specifically , this report ( 1 ) examines any challenges related to sba's organizational structure ; ( 2 ) describes the specific responsibilities of the regional offices ; and ( 3 ) discusses the budgetary effects of closing the regional offices and sba managers' and staff's views on other possible effects of closures . for each report objective , we interviewed sba officials at headquarters , the 10 regional administrators , management and nonmanagement staff at 10 district offices , and union representatives . to examine the organizational structure of sba , we reviewed prior gao and sba office of inspector general ( oig ) reports that documented , among other things , the effect of the agency's structure on its human capital management and program oversight and documentation on changes to sba's organizational structure from fiscal years 2005 through 2014 ( the period after sba's last major reorganization in 2004 ) . additionally , we reviewed documentation on sba's plans to assess its organizational structure and compared these plans to internal control standards . to determine the specific responsibilities of the regional offices , we reviewed position descriptions and interviewed officials at headquarters , regional , and district offices . we also analyzed data on field office goals and performance measures in fiscal year 2014 . to determine how closing sba's regional offices could affect sba , we analyzed data on operating expenses and compensation and benefits for the regional offices in fiscal year 2013 ( the most recent data available when sba provided the information ) . we reviewed documentation on and interviewed knowledgeable officials about the data we used and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of reporting on sba's field office performance and regional office costs . we also interviewed sba officials about the potential effects of transferring the responsibilities of the regional offices to the district offices . i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) in conducting this review , we focused on the role of regional offices . a related , soon - to - be - released gao report addresses a range of sba management issues , including strategic planning , human capital management , organizational structure , enterprise risk management , procedural guidance , and information technology . we conducted our work from june 2014 through september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .