reporting requirements for medicare dmps . although the medicare dmps are currently voluntary , the framework places reporting requirements on plan sponsors that choose to establish dmps . medicare dmps are integrated with the opioid drug utilization review policy and overutilization monitoring system to improve medication safety . plan sponsors must report to cms , through the overutilization monitoring system , the results of case management for each potential at - risk beneficiary identified . for each beneficiary deemed to be at risk , the coverage limitation tools – frequently abused drugs prescriber lock - in , frequently abused drugs - dispensing pharmacy lock - in , and beneficiary specific point - of - sale claims edit – that will be used to limit the beneficiary's access to frequently abused drugs must also be reported . other required information to be reported to cms includes dates of the initial and second notification letters , and the date that the plan sponsor decides to terminate a potential at - risk or at - risk status . this data allows cms to track beneficiary - level data for those beneficiaries placed in dmps . input about medicare dmp framework from plan sponsors and experts . although the at - risk determination is the responsibility of the plan sponsor , four of the five plan sponsors we interviewed stated they would rely on results from case management , including the beneficiary's primary health - care provider's input , to make the determination . one plan sponsor told us it has a panel of physicians and pharmacists that makes the at - risk determination for beneficiaries . these patients are considered potentially at - risk beneficiaries . additional supplemental criteria can also be used by plan sponsors to identify other potential at - risk beneficiaries , such as those who use seven or more pharmacies for opioid prescriptions . use of higher numbers of prescribers and pharmacies may put the beneficiary at more risk . the pharmacy must be in their plan sponsor's network . when a pharmacy has different locations that share real - time electronic data , such as chain pharmacies , all locations of the pharmacy will be treated as one pharmacy . beneficiary specific point - of - sale claim edit . this means that a plan sponsor must not cover a prescription for the frequently abused drug for an at - risk beneficiary that is in excess of the limit in the edit . pharmacists will receive a message when a beneficiary attempts to fill a prescription if the prescription exceeds the limit in place for that beneficiary . after a 30-day period from the date of the initial notification letter , there are two possible outcomes: either the plan sponsor will determine that the beneficiary is at risk for misuse or abuse of frequently abused drugs and will proceed with the coverage limitation under its dmp , or the sponsor will determine that the beneficiary is not at risk . if the potentially at - risk beneficiary is found to be at risk , a second notification letter is sent to the beneficiary as soon as possible after the 30-day period but no later than 60 days from the date of the initial notification letter .