plo no . 1613 also prohibited the use of the lands within the easements for other than the highways except with the permission of the secretary of the interior . the ibla concluded that the legislative approval of sabon's claim constituted permission under plo no . however , while plo no . 1613 permitted sabon to commence use and occupancy in 1958 , it also made that use and occupancy subject to the highway easement . accordingly , the ibla reversed blm's decision as to the portions of the right - of - way that were located within the easement established by plo no . 1613 and ruled that the sabon allotment must be subject to any portion of the state's right - of - way within the easement . the ibla decisions concerning the relation back doctrine generally cannot be appealed in the federal courts because the courts lack jurisdiction under the quiet title act . the quiet title act waives the sovereign immunity of the united states in actions to adjudicate title disputes involving real property in which the united states claims an interest . however , the quiet title act does not apply to “trust or restricted indian lands.” federal courts have ruled that , under this exception , federal courts do not have jurisdiction to review the ibla's decisions concerning application of the relation back doctrine to rights - of - way over native allotments . alaska v. babbitt ( albert allotment ) , 38 f.3d 1068 ( 9th cir . 1994 ) the state of alaska brought suit against the department of the interior seeking judicial review of the ibla's decision , applying the relation back doctrine , that alaska's rights - of - way over a native allotment were null and void . the court of appeals for the ninth circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of the lawsuit and held that sovereign immunity was not waived under the quiet title act . the appeals court also addressed the ibla's application of the relation back doctrine and stated that the ibla's analysis of relation back in its adjudication of the albert allotment was not arbitrary or frivolous . alaska v. babbitt ( foster i ) , 67 f.3d 864 ( 9th cir . 1995 ) ( amended and superseded by 75 f.3d 449 ( 9th cir . 1996 ) ) the state of alaska brought suit against the department of the interior seeking judicial review of an ibla decision that a native allotment applicant's right to land took preference over the state's highway right - of - way . the court of appeals for the ninth circuit held that the government was immune from suit under the quiet title act . in addition , the court rejected the state's assertion that the ibla had restricted the relation back doctrine . alaska v. babbitt ( foster ii ) , 75 f.3d 449 ( 9th cir . 1996 ) ( amended and superseded foster i decision ) the state of alaska brought action against the department of the interior , seeking judicial review of an ibla decision that a native allotment applicant's preference right to land took preference over the state's highway right - of - way .