invention begins . once basic principles are observed , practical applications can be invented . the application is speculative , and there is no proof or detailed analysis to support the assumption . examples are still limited to paper studies . active research and development is initiated . this includes analytical studies and laboratory studies to physically validate analytical predictions of separate elements of the technology . examples include components that are not yet integrated or representative basic technological components are integrated to establish that the pieces will work together . this is relatively “low fidelity” compared with the eventual system . examples include integration of “ad hoc” hardware in a laboratory . fidelity of breadboard technology increases significantly . the basic technological components are integrated with reasonably realistic supporting elements so that the technology can be tested in a simulated environment . examples include “high fidelity” laboratory integration of components . representative model or prototype system , which is well beyond the breadboard tested for technology readiness level five , is tested in a relevant environment . represents a major step up in a technology's demonstrated readiness . examples include testing a prototype in a high - fidelity laboratory environment or in simulated operational environment . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from technology readiness level six , requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment , such as in an aircraft , vehicle , or space . examples include testing the prototype in a test bed aircraft . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this technology readiness level represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . in almost all cases , this is the end of the last “bug fixing” aspects of true system development . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . in addition to the contact named above , christina chaplain , marcus ferguson , tom gordon , subrata ghoshroy , barbara haynes , matt lea , hai tran , adam vodraska , and john warren made key contributions to this report . ( see fig . they recognize that the focus and cost of activities change over time and that less rework is required if all activities with the same focus are completed before beginning other activities . in successful development programs , decisions are made when the knowledge is available to support those decisions . the first decision point , or knowledge point , occurs when the focus of a developer's activities changes from technology development to system integration — the first phase of product development . the criterion for deciding to move forward is having the knowledge to match requirements and available resources ( time , technology , and funds ) . the fundamental problem is twofold .