security . election officials are responsible for establishing and managing security and privacy controls to protect against threats to the integrity of elections . threats to election results and voter confidentiality include potential modification or loss of electronic voting data ; loss , theft , or modification of physical ballots ; and unauthorized access to software and electronic equipment . different types of controls can be used to counter these threats . physical access controls are important for securing voting equipment , vote tabulation equipment , and ballots . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 07-576t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . in gao's view , the challenges faced in acquiring and operating electronic voting systems are not unlike those faced by any technology user — adoption and application of well - defined system standards ; effective integration of the technology with the people who operate it and the processes that govern this operation ; rigorous and disciplined performance of system security and testing activities ; reliable measurement of system performance ; and the analytical basis for making informed , economically justified decisions about voting system investment options . these challenges are complicated by other conditions such as the distribution of responsibilities among various organizations and funding opportunities and constraints . given the diffused and decentralized allocation of voting system roles and responsibilities across all levels of government , addressing these challenges will require the combined efforts of all levels of government , under the leadership of the eac . to assist the eac in executing its leadership role , gao has previously made recommendations to the commission aimed at better planning its ongoing and future activities relative to , for example , system standards and information sharing . while the eac agreed with the recommendations , it stated that its ability to effectively execute its role is resource constrained . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the election assistance commission ( eac ) and the integrity of the elections process . as requested , my testimony will focus on the challenges associated with the use of electronic voting systems during elections , including the eac's efforts to address these challenges . during the 2000 national elections , concerns were raised about “hanging chads” and “butterfly ballots.” in the 2004 and 2006 elections , concerns shifted to “software bugs” and “voter verifiable paper trails.” in light of these and other election concerns , we produced a series of reports between 2001 and 2006 in which we examined virtually every aspect of the election process , including types of voting technology . we reported that the particular technology used to cast and count votes is a critical part of how elections are conducted , but it is only one facet of a multifaceted election process that involves the interplay of people , processes , and technology . accordingly , we have long held the position that no voting technology , however well designed , can be a magic bullet that will solve all election problems .