naval shipyards . fly - away teams also need sufficient infrastructure and equipment at the location at which they will conduct voyage repairs . because the uss frank cable and the emergent repair facility both face limitations , fly - away teams that deploy to guam cannot be assured that these facilities would be available to provide needed infrastructure or equipment . without more clearly defined repair requirements and further examination of equipment and personnel necessary to meet those requirements , the viability of using fly - away teams to provide future voyage repairs is uncertain . building a new navy depot - level repair capability would require years of planning and additional infrastructure , equipment , personnel , and funding . if the lease on the property at the former naval ship repair facility , guam , is allowed to expire , establishing a new navy - owned ship repair capability at that location would require the navy to address infrastructure , equipment , and personnel requirements to create the capability needed to meet surface voyage repair requirements on guam . the navy would have to determine what capability is needed and then take action to acquire the equipment to provide that capability . this report responds to that request . to determine the extent to which the navy has identified future repair requirements for ships operating in the guam area and identified and assessed options to address those requirements , we reviewed documents related to past ship repair requirements in guam , contracts associated with ship repairs , and navy records related to ship repair facilities and activities . in addition , we interviewed officials at guam shipyard and another private ship repair provider , gulf copper , inc. ; guam government officials ; navy officials in washington , d.c. , hawaii , and guam ; and msc officials in washington , d.c. , norfolk , virginia , san diego , california , and guam . we conducted this performance audit from july 2007 to march 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . however , the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 amended section 7310 of title 10 of the u.s. code to prohibit u.s. naval ships home - ported in guam from being repaired in shipyards outside the united states or guam , other than in the case of voyage repairs . since the closure of the navy ship repair facility , guam , the navy and msc have relied on four different sources to provide voyage repairs in guam . first , the navy submarine tender uss frank cable , which is a ship home - ported in guam , has provided voyage repair capabilities for submarines when needed . second , the navy has relied on its emergent repair facility to repair submarines by using a repair crew left behind from the uss frank cable when that ship is deployed . third , fly - away teams from u.s . naval shipyards have been sent to guam to conduct voyage repairs when needed .