wi . n.y. n.h. mass . wyo . mich. p. ner . r.i. conn. n.j. nev. ill. ind . del . clif . to view selected results of this survey , go to http: / / www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 06-400sp . we used data from nena , current as of january 2006 , to provide information on the progress made in deploying wireless e911 . to assess the reliability of nena's data regarding the number of psaps receiving phase ii data , we interviewed knowledgeable officials from nena about their data collection methods . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted our review between february 2005 and january 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . g. tex . l. fl . wash. mont . wi . n.y. n.h. mass . wyo . mich. ner . p. r.i. conn. n.j. nev. ill. ind . del . clif . k. v. mo . ky. md . okl . ark . s.c. miss . al . g. tex . l. fl . while progress is being made in wireless e911 implementation , the estimates from state contacts indicate that no clear picture is emerging on when phase ii will be fully deployed nationwide . as noted earlier , fcc has no authority to set deadlines for psaps to implement wireless e911 services . as a result , there is no federal requirement for full wireless e911 implementation and states may or may not have set their own deadlines for implementation . in our survey of state e911 contacts , we asked respondents to provide us with an estimate of when they believed their state would have wireless phase ii service fully in place with at least one wireless carrier per psap . we found that state e911 contacts offered a wide range of estimated phase ii completion dates . as shown in figure 3 , 10 of 44 state contacts who responded to our survey indicated that phase ii was already in place throughout their state . eight state contacts noted that they would have phase ii in place for all of their psaps with at least one wireless carrier within a year . thirteen state contacts provided a range of 1 to 5 years for phase ii to be implemented , with three state contacts responding that it would take more than 5 years . furthermore , five state contacts noted that their state might never be 100 percent complete for phase ii service . for example , one state contact noted that four rural counties opted not to apply for state funding to implement wireless e911 and two of these counties have only decided to implement wireline e911 . contacts in five states had no basis to judge when phase ii would be in place in their states . based on our survey results and nena data , we found most states obtain e911 funds through state - mandated surcharges collected by wireless carriers from the carriers' wireless subscribers . states have the discretion to determine how these funds will be managed and distributed .