kickbacks are generally illegal . in several states , state insurance regulators identified captive reinsurance arrangements that title insurers and agents were allegedly using to inappropriately compensate others , such as builders or lenders , for referrals . state and federal investigators have also alleged the existence of inappropriate or fraudulent affiliated business arrangements . these involve a “shell” title agency that generally has no physical location , employees , or assets , and does not actually perform title and settlement business . investigators alleged that the primary purpose of these shell companies was to provide kickbacks for business referrals . investigators have also looked at the various types of alleged kickbacks that title agents have provided , including gifts , entertainment , business support services , training , and printing costs . second , investigators have uncovered instances of alleged misappropriation or mishandling of customers' premiums by title agents . for example , one licensed title insurance agent who was the owner ( or partial owner ) of more than 10 title agencies allegedly failed to remit approximately $500,000 in premiums to the title insurer . as a result , the insurer allegedly did not issue 6,400 title policies to consumers who had paid for them . in response to the investigations , insurers and industry associations say they have begun to address some concerns raised by affiliated businesses , but that clearer regulations and stronger enforcement are needed . one title insurance industry association told us that recent federal and state enforcement actions had motivated title insurers to address potential kickbacks and rebates through , for example , increased oversight of title agents . in addition , the insurers and associations said that competition from companies that break the rules hurt companies that were operating legally and that these businesses welcome greater enforcement efforts . several associations also told us that clearer regulations regarding referral fees and affiliated business arrangements would aid the industry's compliance efforts . specifically , we were told that regulations need to be more transparent about the types of discounts and fees that are prohibited and the types that are allowed . over the past several years , regulators and others have suggested changes to regulations that would affect the way title insurance is sold , and further study of the issues raised by these potential changes could be beneficial . in 2002 , in order to simplify and improve the process of obtaining a home mortgage and to reduce settlement costs for consumers , hud proposed revisions to the regulations that implement respa . but hud later withdrew the proposal in response to considerable comments from the title industry , consumers , and other federal agencies . in june 2005 , hud announced that it was again considering revisions to the regulations . in addition , naic officials told us that the organization was considering changes to the model title insurance and agent laws to address current issues such as the growth of affiliated business arrangements and to more closely mirror respa's provisions on referral fees and sanctions for violators .