how will the information be used ? what purpose will be achieved ? threshold question 2: does the proposal consider reasonable alternatives ? any disclosure of tax information comes with costs and creates risks . these are discussed in detail in the policy - factor questions below . in order to consider a proposal , however , it is important that such consideration be done in light of any reasonable alternatives . assessing a proposal's alternatives could involve a separate evaluation of the alternatives using this guide , though much of this framework is specific to fti disclosures . one alternative for some proposals may be to obtain the information through taxpayer consent , as permitted under section 6103 ( c ) . for example , when applying for home loans , taxpayers often consent to have income information from their tax returns disclosed to a mortgage company for verification . these disclosures are not subject to the safeguards otherwise required by section 6103 as a condition for entities to receive tax information from irs . however , other restrictions on the information may apply , such as the privacy act in the case of federal agencies receiving tax information pursuant to taxpayer consent . the section 6103 safeguard requirements are discussed later in the safeguards policy - factor question and in appendix i . to whom will the information be disclosed ? what category or categories of taxpayers will be affected ? threshold question 3: is the tax information accurate , complete , and current enough for the stated purpose ? any proposal to disclose and use fti depends on the information being accurate and complete enough to use and available when it is needed . one challenge related to disclosure proposals stems from the errors that tax information can contain . consideration should also be given to whether tax information is sufficiently complete for the stated purpose . certain groups are underrepresented in irs tax data because not everyone is required to file income - tax returns . for tax year 2010 , single people under the age of 65 earning less than $9,350 , and married people both under the age of 65 jointly earning less than $18,700 , were not required to file tax returns . also , some individuals and businesses that are supposed to file returns fail to do so . additionally , tax information should be sufficiently current for the stated purpose when first used and for any later uses . some fti is only available for use outside of irs after a lag time of more than a year . taxpayers' tax returns and information from third parties are generally provided to the irs after a tax year , and the information provided may be as much as 17 months old . irs processing then takes more time , including time to go back to tax filers and third parties to correct errors that irs catches during processing . taxpayers can also obtain deadline extensions of up to 6 months . for some proposed uses of fti , these time lags could make fti insufficiently current .