annual capital budget . each year , wmata prepares an annual capital budget , which identifies projects wmata plans to undertake in the next fiscal year . wmata's fiscal year 2019 annual capital budget was approved by the board of directors at $1.3 billion . six - year capital improvement program . within wmata's annual capital budget , wmata includes a six - year capital improvement program identifying capital projects wmata plans to implement over a 6-year period . wmata's most recent six - year capital improvement program ( covering the fiscal year 2019 — 2024 period ) was approved by the board of directors at $8.5 billion . according to wmata officials , wmata is currently implementing a new capital planning process through which it will develop its fiscal year 2020 capital budget and fiscal year 2020-2025 six - year capital improvement program . wmata adopts and implements the capital budget by june 30 for the new fiscal year , which begins on july 1 . the fiscal year 2020 capital budget is scheduled to be adopted and implemented by june 30 , 2019 . among other things , the goals and objectives of this new capital planning process are to construct an objective , data - driven , and risk - based approach to estimate major rehabilitation and capital asset replacement needs ; build a capital investment prioritization methodology aligned with wmata's strategic goals and grounded in asset inventory and condition assessments ; and develop a process that will support the construction and ongoing stewardship of its transit asset management plan . the latter is discussed in more detail below . wmata has also recently undertaken efforts to address issues related to the condition and maintenance of its track . after safetrack concluded in june 2017 , wmata implemented what officials describe as its first track preventive maintenance program designed to incorporate industry - wide best practices related to track maintenance , in order to improve the rail system's long - term safety and reliability . the new program commenced in june 2017 , and wmata's board reduced late - night service to allow for longer maintenance work hours . specifically , coso internal control standards and leading practices identified by the project management institute's the standard for program management stresses the importance of identifying and assessing program risks and developing a program management plan . coso recommends that organizations identify risks to the achievement of its objectives and analyze risks as a basis for determining how the risks should be managed . furthermore , the risk identification is to be comprehensive . the standard for program management also recommends that when identifying risks , the assessments be both qualitative and quantitative in nature . regarding program management plans: the standard for program management recommends that organizations develop program management plans that align with organizational goals and objectives . this includes aligning the program management plan with the organization's overall strategic plan . elements of the plan are to provide a roadmap that identifies such things as milestones and decision points to guide program activities . in developing the track preventive maintenance program , wmata did not fully identify or quantitatively assess risks associated with the program .