advanced technology program . experts cited nist's advanced technology program — which competes 2007 repealed — as a success in terms of its efforts to support transformational research.experts cited several aspects of the program in discussing its success , including its support for ( 1 ) research that accelerated the development of high - risk technologies with the potential for broad - based economic benefits to the nation ; ( 2 ) information sharing across different sectors ; ( 3 ) active project management and workshops that taught awardees how to pitch their technology to venture capital investors , according to one expert . one expert noted that the program collaborated with nih to develop diagnostic approaches that advanced the genomic revolution . arpa - e . experts described arpa - e — which was modeled after darpa — as an important challenge - based federal effort to advance technologies in areas aligned with doe's mission . aspects of the arpa - e model one expert cited as important to the program's ability to support transformational technological advances included , among others , support for higher - risk research and the autonomy that program directors have in seeking expert input and selecting research projects . manufacturing usa institutes . one expert described the manufacturing usa institutes as an important federal effort to support emerging technologies across multiple stages of innovation . another expert explained that in order to continue to capture the economic benefits of the innovation system , the united states needs to embed the knowledge for technology production locally within the country . the first expert said the manufacturing usa institutes help increase the connectivity among different actors involved with specific technology areas and improve their ability to leverage advances in those areas . experts also discussed how other countries' long - term funding for research efforts may help them support technology development . for example , one expert discussed germany's fraunhofer institutes , where the government makes research investments over time frames of 5 or even 20 years and rewards successful projects with funding increases each year . in addition , one expert noted that other countries such as the netherlands and singapore also provide long - term research funding , allowing them to develop the broader research infrastructure necessary to support technology development . in the area of quantum computing , one expert stated that the netherlands' investment has contributed to one of the largest quantum computing - focused efforts in the world . according to one expert , if u.s. researchers do not conduct the research necessary over the long term to prove their research ideas , other countries will have the opportunity to pick up where u.s. researchers leave off and commercialize technologies based on this research . experts stated that tool development is critical to transformational technological advances and discussed a need for federal government support for tool development to maintain u.s. competitiveness . a tool is something — such as equipment used for a specific purpose , a modified biological system , or a computer program — that is used to perform a task or that is needed to practice a profession . according to one expert , tools are crucial supporting technologies that are necessary for the product development process .