lsc has completed action on 11 recommendations . for example , l sc established an audit committee function to provide oversight to lsc's financial reporting and audit process ; established a shorter time frame for issuing lsc's audited financial statements ; established a comprehensive and effective continuity of operations plan program ; and performed follow up on all improper or potentially improper uses of grant funds that we identified in our prior report . however , 6 out of 17 recommendations remain to be fully implemented . according to the lsc employee handbook , lsc's policy is that employee performance is to be evaluated annually at the beginning of the calendar year by the supervisor of record , based on job performance in the prior year . we believe the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our audit findings and conclusions . lsc relies heavily on its office of compliance and enforcement ( oce ) and its office of program performance ( opp ) to carry out activities related to grant awards , grantee program effectiveness , and grantee compliance responsibilities . according to lsc officials , lsc established oce in 1997 and opp in 1999 to ( 1 ) help ensure compliance with requirements of the lsc act , and ( 2 ) evaluate , fund , monitor and oversee grantee programs , including quality of services provided . figure 1 shows staffing levels for opp and oce and lsc overall between 1999 and 2009 . as shown in figure 2 , the directors of opp and oce report to the vice president for programs and compliance , who reports to the lsc president . lsc's president reports to an lsc board composed of 11 members . in april 2010 , the 11 member board was undergoing transition , with: 1 board member continuing , 6 of the remaining 10 being sworn in during april , 2 board members awaiting to be named , and 2 others awaiting senate confirmation . ( opp ) according to the lsc vice president of programs and compliance's goals and objectives document ( lsc workplan ) , the vice president for programs and compliance is responsible for coordinating opp and oce ; implementing efforts to improve lsc's oversight of grantees ; assessing lsc component directors' staffing allocations and assignments ; conducting quarterly joint staff meetings and training sessions ; and overseeing lsc's internal quality agenda , including providing staff training . in accordance with the lsc workplan , the vice president for programs and compliance also oversees lsc's grantee compliance and program functions , with emphasis on intra - office coordination , improved grantee guidance , and improved grantee follow - up activities by oce and opp . according to lsc's policy and the 2009 opp procedures manual , opp's responsibilities include designing and administering lsc's process for awarding competitive grants , and developing and implementing strategies to improve grantee program quality . in carrying out its responsibilities , opp is to issue requests for proposals , guide grant applicants through the application process , and evaluate applications against performance criteria .