dhs concurred with our recommendations . with regard to the first recommendation , that fps and the marshals service jointly lead an effort to update the moa on courthouse security , dhs stated that it agrees that the current moa should be reviewed and revised . dhs noted that it is committed to working collaboratively with all parties to further determine the conditions under which stakeholders may assume multiple and overlapping responsibilities . with regard to the second recommendation that fps and the marshals service work collaboratively to further assess costs and benefits of expanding the pilot program , dhs agreed that continued collaboration and further review of pilot program results would enhance security at federal courts . dhs also noted that it did not agree with any suggested expansion of the pilot program to include additional facilities . ( 2 ) to what extent have federal stakeholders collaborated in implementing their roles and responsibilities and in using risk management ? to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and obtained and analyzed documents from the federal stakeholders responsible for courthouse security , such as memoranda of agreement , facility security guidance , and risk assessments . we interviewed officials from the marshals service ; fps ; gsa ; and the judiciary , particularly aousc officials , federal judges , and other court officials , to obtain information on the security environment and the federal stakeholders' efforts to secure courthouses . we also visited 11 federal courthouse facilities to gain firsthand knowledge and understanding of efforts to protect them , as well as to document security risks and vulnerabilities . we selected these facilities based on a mix of criteria , including geographic dispersion , urban versus rural locations , age , size , and proximity to international borders . during the site visits , we interviewed officials from the marshals service , fps , and gsa , as well as judges and other court officials to obtain information and their views on courthouse security efforts at those 11 courthouses . we also toured the 11 courthouses to observe courthouse protective measures , and we relied on officials to bring security issues to our attention at the individual courthouses . therefore , we could not always determine whether these issues were present at other courthouses unless officials brought them to our attention . although information obtained from these site visits cannot be generalized to all federal courthouses , they provided us with insights into federal agencies' practices to secure courthouses and challenges agencies face in their security efforts . we assessed federal stakeholders' efforts to secure courthouses against key practices we have identified for federal collaboration and facility protection . ( appendix i contains additional information on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from january 2010 to september 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .