as needed . ferc uses the information to time period . determine whether a facility meets the necessary requirements and is entitled to various purpa benefits . publicly available . on or before april 30th for each preceding year . ferc collects this information to monitor public utilities' interlocking directorates for possible conflicts of interest . fpa section 305 , as amended , by section 211 of purpa . information on the 20 largest purchasers of electric energy . fpa section 205 ( f ) , as amended , by section 208 of purpa . this section authorizes the interrogatory established in form 580 to take place not less frequently than every 2 years . filed by jurisdictional public utilities or public utility holding companies engaged in the generation , transmission , and sale of electric power to report 20 of the largest purchases of electric energy . lists customers and their business addresses if they were 1 of the top 20 largest purchasers of electric energy , measured in kilowatt hours sold , for purposes other than resale , during any of 3 preceding calendar years . collects information from jurisdictional public utilities that own or operate power plants generating 50 megawatts or greater capacity . information on fuel cost and cost recovery practices under fuel adjustment clauses in cost - based rates . publicly available . on march 1 of the year following the reporting . used to identify large purchasers of electric energy and possible conflicts of interest . publicly available . filed biennially on june 1st for preceding calendar period . used to review public utility's fuel purchase and cost recovery practices under fuel adjustment clauses in cost - based . used to evaluate fuel costs in individual rate filings , to supplement periodic utility audits , and to monitor changes and trends in the electric wholesale market . used by doe's eia to study various aspects of coal , oil , and gas transportation rates . used by electric market participants and the public to assess the electric marketplace during the transition to a competitive marketplace . fpa sections 202 , 207 , 210 , 211 , 212 , and 213 , as amended , and sections 4 , 304 , 309 , and 311 of the same act . collects information from any public utility or group of public utilities operating as a control area that has a peak load greater than 200 megawatts based on energy for load . the information collected allows ferc to analyze power system operations in the course of its regulatory functions . the purpose of these analyses is to estimate the effect of changes in power system operations that result from the installation of a new generating unit or plant , transmission facilities , and energy transfers between systems and / or new points of interconnections . the analyses also serve to correlate rates and changes ; assess reliability and other operating attributes in regulatory proceedings ; monitor market trends and behaviors ; and determine the competitive impacts of proposed mergers , acquisitions , and dispositions .