dhs concurred with the recommendations . fema fully implemented our first recommendation by developing an incident management assistance team training and readiness manual and providing a training schedule for fiscal year 2017 . in response to the second recommendation , fema officials stated in july 2018 that they plan to develop policies that will provide guidance on a new workforce structure , incentives for incident management assistance team personnel , and pay - for - performance and all other human resource actions . we are continuing to monitor fema's efforts to address this recommendation . in november and december 2017 , we reported on staffing challenges in fema's public assistance program . in november 2017 , we reported on fema's efforts to address past workforce management challenges through its redesigned public assistance delivery model . as part of the redesign effort , fema created consolidated resource centers to standardize and centralize public assistance staff responsible for managing grant applications , and new specialized positions to ensure more consistent guidance to applicants . however , we found that fema had not assessed the workforce needed to fully implement the redesigned model , such as the number of staff needed to fill certain new positions , or to achieve staffing goals . further , in december 2017 , we reported on fema's management of its public assistance appeals process , including that fema increased staffing levels for the appeals process from 2015 to 2017 . however , we found that fema continued to face a number of workforce challenges , such as staff vacancies , turnover , and delays in training , which contributed to processing delays . based on our findings from our november and december 2017 reports , we recommended , among other things , that fema ( 1 ) complete workforce staffing assessments that identify the appropriate number of staff needed to implement the redesigned public assistance delivery model , and ( 2 ) document steps for hiring , training , and retaining key appeals staff , and address staff transitions resulting from deployments to disasters . fema concurred with our recommendations to address workforce management challenges in the public assistance program and have reported taking some actions in response . for example , to address the first recommendation , fema officials have developed preliminary models and estimates of staffing needs across various programs , including public assistance , and plan to reevaluate the appropriate number of staff needed and present recommendations to senior leadership by the end of june 2019 . to address the second recommendation , fema has collected information on the amount of time regional appeals analysts spend on appeals , and the inventory and timeliness of different types of appeals . fema officials stated in september 2018 that they plan to assess this information to prepare a detailed regional workforce plan . as of june 2019 , we are evaluating plans and documents provided by fema to determine whether they have fully addressed this recommendation . in our march 2019 report on the status of recovery efforts in puerto rico , we also reported puerto rico officials' concerns about fema staff turnover and lack of knowledge among fema staff about how the public assistance alternative procedures are to be applied in puerto rico .