the insurance industry has not yet achieved this goal . we observed after september 11 the crucial importance of reinsurers for the survival of the terrorism insurance market and reported that reinsurers' inability to price terrorism risks was a major factor in their departure from the market . additionally , most industry experts are tentative about predictions of the level of reinsurer and insurer participation in the terrorism insurance market after tria expires . unfortunately , insurers and reinsurers still have not found a reliable method for pricing terrorism insurance , and although tria has provided reinsurers the opportunity to reenter the market to a limited extent , industry participants have not developed a mechanism to replace tria . as a result , reinsurer and consequently , insurer , participation in the terrorism insurance market likely will decline significantly after tria expires . not only has no private - sector mechanism emerged for supplying terrorism insurance after tria expires , but to date there also has been little discussion of possible alternatives for ensuring the availability and affordability of terrorism coverage after tria expires . congress may benefit from an informed assessment of possible alternatives — including both wholly private alternatives and alternatives that could involve some government participation or action . such an assessment could be a part of treasury's tria - mandated study to “assess…the likely capacity of the property and casualty insurance industry to offer insurance for terrorism risk after termination of the program. as part of the response to the tria - mandated study that requires treasury to assess the effectiveness of tria and evaluate the capacity of the industry to offer terrorism insurance after tria expires , we recommend that the secretary of the treasury , after consulting with the insurance industry and other interested parties , identify for congress an array of alternatives that may exist for expanding the availability and affordability of terrorism insurance after tria expires . these alternatives could assist congress during its deliberations on how best to ensure the availability and affordability of terrorism insurance after december 2005 . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement , and i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for further information regarding this testimony please contact richard j. hillman , director , or lawrence d. cluff , assistant director , financial markets and community investment , ( 202 ) 512-8678 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include rachel demarcus , barry kirby , tarek mahmassani , angela pun , and barbara roesmann . under tria , treasury is responsible for reimbursing insurers for a portion of terrorism losses under certain conditions . payments are triggered when ( 1 ) the secretary of the treasury certifies that terrorists acting on behalf of foreign interests have carried out an act of terrorism and ( 2 ) aggregate insured losses for commercial property and casualty damages exceed $5,000,000 for a single event . tria specifies that an insurer is responsible ( that is , will not be reimbursed ) for the first dollars of its insured losses — its deductible amount .