objectivity . measure is reasonably free from significant bias or manipulation . reliability . measure produces the same result under similar conditions . core program activities . measure covers the activities that an entity is expected to perform to support the intent of the program . ( 2 ) how do ato's acquisition performance measures compare with key attributes of successful performance measures ? ( 3 ) what are the implications of using ato's existing performance measures to assess progress in the transition to nextgen ? to determine how ato established goals and performance measures for acquiring atc systems , we obtained and analyzed key acquisition documents and interviewed faa and ato officials . to determine how goals and performance are reported , we reviewed agency performance and accountability reports and discussed internal tracking and reporting methods with ato officials . while ato's 2006 portfolio of acquisitions contained 120 programs , we focused our analysis only on the programs determined by ato to be major acquisitions , and thus included in ato's performance reporting . to evaluate how ato's acquisition performance measures compare with key attributes of successful performance measures , we compared ato's performance measures with eight key attributes of successful performance measures that we identified in past gao work . we also obtained the perspectives of five aviation experts on the reasonableness of ato's acquisition performance measures . we selected these experts from government and industry to obtain a balanced perspective . to evaluate the implications of using ato's existing performance measures to assess progress in the transition to nextgen , we obtained and analyzed acquisition budget and schedule data for fiscal years 2003 through 2006 , and drew upon our past work that determined systemic causes of budget increases and schedule delays . through discussions with ato officials , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . see appendix i for a more detailed explanation of our scope and methods . we conducted our work from january 2007 through december 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . over the years , faa has taken a number of steps to better manage its atc modernization program . in 1995 , based on the premise that faa would be better able to manage atc modernization if it were not constrained by federal acquisition laws , faa requested and congress enacted legislation that exempted the agency from most federal procurement laws and regulations and directed faa to develop and implement a new acquisition management system that would address the unique needs of the agency . in 1996 , faa implemented its acquisition management system , which provides high - level acquisition policy and guidance for selecting and controlling atc system acquisitions through all phases of the acquisition life cycle . in february 2004 , faa created the performance - based ato to control and improve faa's investments and operations . ato incorporated faa's former research and acquisitions and air traffic services organizations — essentially those that develop and acquire systems and those that operate them — into a single organization . ato catalogues its acquisition programs in its capital investment plan ( cip ) . the fiscal year 2006 cip contained 120 funded acquisition programs and their anticipated total budgets .