open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to disclose in the financial statements all information that is necessary to inform users adequately about the reporting entity . such disclosures should clearly describe the reporting entity and explain the reason for excluding any components that are not included in the defined reporting entity . pending the results of actions taken pursuant to recommendation nos . 02-22 and 02-23 , treasury will enhance the current disclosure in the financial report related to the reporting entity . open . recommendation the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to help ensure that federal agencies provide adequate information in their legal representation letters regarding the expected outcomes of the cases . per treasury and omb treasury will work with the department of justice , omb , gao and the agencies to determine if further changes in policy and / or guidance ( eg , omb circular no . a - 136 ) are needed for all agencies to provide the required information regarding the expected outcomes of legal cases in their legal representations . per gao open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to establish written policies and procedures to help ensure that major treaty and other international agreement information is properly identified and reported in the cfs . closed . over the past few years , treasury has taken certain actions to address recommendations related to intragovernmental activity and balances . to provide recommendations that are better aligned with the remaining internal control deficiencies in this area , we have ( 1 ) closed this recommendation and ( 2 ) included in this report under “intragovernmental activity and balances” new recommendations for corrective action . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to design procedures that will account for the difference in intragovernmental assets and liabilities throughout the compilation process by means of formal consolidating and elimination accounting entries . in addition , the financial statements of most significant entities and many other federal entities received unqualified audit opinions . however , no additional analysis of treaties has been performed to reasonably ensure that all of the federal government's treaties are considered in agency analysis or that agencies are consistently analyzing treaties for recognition or disclosure . treasury will annually review agency financial statements , audit reports , and management representation letters for any references to treaties and international agreements , and if deemed material will disclose in the cfs . see the status of recommendation no . closed . over the past few years , treasury has taken certain actions to address recommendations related to intragovernmental activity and balances . to provide recommendations that are better aligned with the remaining internal control deficiencies in this area , we have ( 1 ) closed this recommendation and ( 2 ) included in this report under “intragovernmental activity and balances” new recommendations for corrective action .