bank of england . before 2009 , the united kingdom implemented a monetary policy approach based on a system of voluntary reserves . when active , banks must establish a reserve target and maintain that target to earn interest and are penalized for holding an amount outside the target range . banks can ensure the target is reached by using the bank of england's standing lending and borrowing facilities . these standing facilities form a ceiling and floor ( interest rate corridor ) around the policy rate . tables 28-34 present estimates for question 8a: which of the following methods do you use to notify customers ? before the establishment of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , reserve requirements , imposed by other laws , were used to ensure the liquidity of bank notes ( negotiable instruments issued by depository institutions that could be redeemed for gold or silver ) , which were the primary medium of exchange in the mid - to late - 1800s . to facilitate more widespread use of bank notes , the national bank act of 1863 allowed depository institutions to organize under a national charter and created a network of institutions to easily circulate their bank notes across the country . in exchange for a charter that promoted widespread use of their notes , nationally chartered institutions were required to hold 25 percent reserves against their notes and customer deposits . the role of reserve requirements continued to change after the federal reserve was created in1913 with the passage of the federal reserve act ( see fig . when the federal reserve was created , reserve requirements did not have a stated role in influencing the availability and cost of money and credit . in the years before the federal reserve act , a series of bank runs and financial panics made evident the need for a mechanism to accommodate temporary variations in the public's demand for cash . accordingly , the federal reserve act created a system of reserve banks to act as lenders of last resort and thereby provide temporary liquidity relief to the nationwide banking system during times of financial crisis . among other provisions , the federal reserve act sought to establish more effective supervision of banking , and the federal reserve was given the responsibility of supervising state - chartered and nationally - chartered depository institutions that chose to be members of the federal reserve . all member institutions were subject to reserve requirements . beginning in the 1920s , reserve requirements gradually became important for implementing monetary policy as the federal reserve moved toward a more proactive role in influencing credit conditions . as borrowing increased rapidly in the 1920s , the federal reserve determined that reserve requirements could be used to constrain the expansion of credit by requiring reserves against deposits used to fund loans . however , this objective was complicated in practice because reserve requirement ratios were established in the federal reserve act and not by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( board of governors ) and by the reliance on the discount rate as the primary tool for influencing the availability and cost of money and credit at the time .