security testing was not complete . while cms has undertaken , through its contractors and at the agency and state levels , a series of security - related testing activities for various healthcare.gov - related systems , these assessments did not effectively identify and test all relevant security controls prior to deploying the systems . for example , the assessments of the ffm did not include all the security controls specified by nist and cms , such as incident response controls and controls specified for physical and environmental protection . in addition , cms could not demonstrate that it had tested all the security controls specified in the ffm's october 2013 security plan , and it did not test all the system's components before deployment or test them on the integrated system . testing of all deployed eligibility and enrollment modules and plan management modules did not occur until march 2014 , and as of june 2014 ffm testing remained incomplete . without comprehensive testing , cms lacks assurance that security controls for the ffm system are working as intended . alternate processing site was not fully established . cms developed and documented contingency plans for the ffm and data hub that identified activities , resources , responsibilities , and procedures needed to carry out operations during prolonged disruptions of the systems . it also established system recovery priorities , a line of succession based on the type of disaster , and specific procedures on how to restore both systems and their associated applications in the event of a disaster . interconnection agreements were not all complete . cms had not completed security documentation governing its interconnection with equifax , inc. , but instead was relying on a draft data use agreement that had not been fully approved within cms . this makes it more difficult for agency officials to ensure that adequate security controls are in place to protect the connection . privacy risks were not assessed . in completing privacy impact assessments for the ffm and data hub , cms did not assess risks associated with the handling of pii or identify mitigating controls to address such risks . without such an analysis , cms cannot demonstrate that it thoroughly considered and addressed options for mitigating privacy risks associated with these systems . interagency agreements governing data exchanges were not complete . cms established computer matching agreements with dhs , dod , irs , ssa , and va for its data exchanges to verify eligibility for healthcare coverage and premium tax credits ; however , it had not established such agreements with opm or the peace corps . this increases the risk that appropriate protections will not be applied to the pii being exchanged with these agencies . however , although the contingency plans designated a site at which to recover the systems , this site had not been established . specifically , according to cms , data supporting the ffm were being backed up at the recovery site , but backup systems are not otherwise supported there , limiting the facility's ability to support disaster recovery efforts . cms did not effectively implement or securely configure key security controls on the systems supporting healthcare.gov . for example: strong passwords ( i.e.