responsibilities . in january 2019 , we reported that fps has facility - protection and physical - security responsibilities and law - enforcement , and contract - guard oversight responsibilities . dhs was similar to fps as it had responsibilities for physical security and performed law enforcement functions . as a part of its physical security activities , fps conducted facility security assessments , identified countermeasures ( eg , equipment and contract guards ) best suited to secure a facility , and oversaw contract guards . as a part of its law enforcement activities , fps proactively patrolled facilities , responded to incidents , and conducted criminal investigations . fps also provided additional operational law enforcement support , at the direction of the secretary of homeland security , to address emerging threats and homeland security incidents . one of fps's most critical activities was overseeing about 13,500 contract guards who were posted at federal facilities and were responsible for controlling access to facilities , responding to emergency situations involving facility safety and security , and performing other duties . fps was responsible for ensuring , among other things , that these guards are performing their assigned duties and have the necessary training and certifications . dhs , however , only used a limited number of contract guards and therefore had less responsibility . at the time of our review , dhs officials told us they procured about 130 guards . organizational culture . in january 2019 , we reported that while there are many areas relevant to organizational culture , law enforcement was a key aspect of fps's organizational culture , according to officials we interviewed from an association of security companies and a former , high - ranking official in nppd . dhs had a similar culture in that it was a law enforcement agency . information sharing and coordination . in january 2019 , we reported that component intelligence programs ( cip ) were organizations in dhs that collected , gathered , processed , analyzed , produced , or disseminated information related to national homeland security . in 2016 , dhs designated a division within fps as a cip , a move that allowed fps more access to information on threats other dhs agencies have identified and actions they plan to take . while dhs , like fps , had access to and could share information related to national homeland security , dhs did not have joint responsibility for coordinating facility protection with fps . rather , fps shared this responsibility with gsa , and these two agencies and marshals had joint responsibility for protecting courthouses . fps has faced challenges with coordinating with these agencies in the past . for example , in september 2011 , we reported that fps , marshals , and other agencies involved in protecting courthouses ( i.e. , gsa and the administrative office of the u.s. courts ) faced challenges related to coordination , such as in the implementation of roles and responsibilities and the use or participation in existing collaboration mechanisms . mission support . in january 2019 , we reported that mission support was comprised of financial management , human capital , information technology systems for financial management , and law enforcement training .