we did not further examine these collateral consequences . in addition , we did not remove these potential duplicates from the data presented in appendix ii , as there are reasons why these collateral consequences may be unique and not duplicative . however , we examined the potentially duplicative federal collateral consequences that could be triggered by nvdc , and determined that two were duplicates . we removed these two collateral consequences from our count of federal collateral consequences for nvdc . we assessed the reliability of the niccc data by obtaining information from aba officials responsible for managing the database on how the data are collected and used , and what internal controls the data are subject to . we examined the data and related controls and interviewed aba officials , and we concluded that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing federal collateral consequences for nvdc and their characteristics . to address our second objective , we analyzed niccc data ; reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and federal agency directives and guidance ; and interviewed selected federal officials and aba staff . to determine the number of federal collateral consequences for nvdc that had a related law or regulation that prescribed how a person could potentially obtain relief from the collateral consequence , we analyzed niccc data as of december 31 , 2016 . specifically , we analyzed each federal collateral consequence for nvdc to determine whether the niccc identified it as having relief available . our analysis was limited to the niccc's relief variable , which only includes relief mechanisms in laws and regulations related to a specific collateral consequence . therefore , our review did not include federal relief mechanisms that may be available in laws or regulations that were not specific to a federal collateral consequence for nvdc , and mechanisms in sources other than laws or regulations , such as federal agency policies . to identify examples of relief mechanisms , we analyzed the niccc description of the relief and the related laws and regulations . as discussed above , we determined that the niccc data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing federal collateral consequences for nvdc and their characteristics . to identify actions the federal interagency reentry council ( reentry council ) and its participating federal agencies took to mitigate federal collateral consequences , we analyzed reentry council reports and interviewed reentry council leadership . in addition , we selected four federal agencies — the department of justice , department of housing and urban development , department of health and human services , and department of labor . we selected these agencies because they participated on the reentry council , and reviewed at least some regulations or policies in an effort to mitigate federal collateral consequences . we also asked reentry council leadership for recommended agencies to include in our selections . further , we sought to select a group of agencies that oversee policy areas that often affect individuals with nvdc , including employment and government assistance ( eg , housing and education assistance ) . for selected agencies , we reviewed relevant agency directives and guidance and interviewed agency officials to better understand their actions to mitigate federal collateral consequences .