outlays . this section of the budgetary schedule shows the relationship between obligations and outlays ( also referred to as disbursements or expenditures ) and discloses payments made to liquidate obligations . obligations are usually liquidated by means of cash payments ( outlays ) , primarily by electronic fund transfers . this section reconciles outlays with obligations incurred and the change in obligated balances during the year . the content of this section is the same for the sbr and the budgetary schedule . automated information systems are essential for modern accounting and recordkeeping . the department of defense ( dod ) is developing its enterprise resource planning ( erp ) systems as the backbone of its financial management improvement , and they are critical for transforming its business operations . implementation of erp systems is critical to ensuring that the department meets its statutory requirement to prepare and submit audited department - wide financial statements for fiscal year 2018 . however , erp implementation has been delayed because of deficiencies in functional capability and the need for remedial corrective actions , which may affect dod's ability to achieve audit readiness . according to the may 2016 financial improvement and audit readiness ( fiar ) plan status report , while dod continues to make progress in addressing information technology system audit readiness challenges , many of these challenges will still exist for fiscal year 2018 , which is when dod is required to undergo a financial statement audit . according to dod officials , for the erp systems that will not be fully deployed prior to the financial statement audit readiness milestone , the dod components will need to identify effective work - around processes or modifications to legacy systems that will enable audit readiness . without fully deployed erps , the department will be challenged to produce reliable financial data and auditable financial statements without resorting to labor - intensive efforts , such as data calls or manual work - arounds , or to provide reliable financial data on a recurring basis . the department's ability to improve its accounting , including accounting for budgetary information , has historically been hindered by its reliance on fundamentally flawed financial management systems and processes . effective information systems help provide reasonable assurance to management and auditors that data reported in the financial statements are accurate and complete . when information system controls are effective , auditors can rely on these controls ; when information system controls are not effective , auditors must perform substantially more testing . dod has identified its information system control deficiencies as an impediment to its components being able to demonstrate audit readiness or successfully completing an audit because under such conditions , neither management nor auditors can rely on automated application controls or system - generated reports . in addition , without adequate financial management processes , systems , and controls , the military services are at risk of having inaccurate and incomplete data for financial reporting and management decision making and potentially exceeding authorized spending limits . the lack of effective internal controls hinders management's ability to provide reasonable assurance that allocated resources are used effectively , properly , and in compliance with budget and appropriations law .