omb circular no . a - 25 , which provides guidance for executive agencies on assessment of user charges , states that when not in conflict with the fee - authorizing statutes , and unless the agency has been granted an exception to the general policy , fees should be sufficient to recover the full cost of providing a service , which includes all costs to any part of the federal government , including accrued retirement costs not covered by employee contributions and the costs of collection . in other words , costs should be included regardless of which agency pays them . ( see app . ii for a list of applications and their fees. ) uscis expects that the increased application fees will cover the costs of its immigration application processing and adjudicating services . almost 96 percent of uscis's fiscal year 2008 budget of $2.6 billion was expected to have come from fee collections , with the residual coming from direct appropriations and from other federal agencies for work done by uscis on their behalf . this type of assignment did not consider any variation in complexity or processing time between application types . a uscis official told us that available production data for these activities were not sufficiently reliable to use as a basis for assigning costs to applications . also , according to uscis , pro rata allocation was used because these activities' costs were not significantly driven by the complexity of an application type . it is important that uscis reliably accumulate and analyze the costs of its application processing services as a basis for setting fees and recovering costs and to offer insights for managing its programs and activities . at your request , we reviewed the methodology uscis used in its fee review to develop the current fee schedule and controls uscis has put in place over the collection and use of the fees . specifically , this report addresses the consistency of the costing methodology uscis used to develop the current fee schedule with federal accounting standards and principles and other guidance , including whether uscis sufficiently justified and documented its assumptions and methods . the report also addresses internal controls in place over the collection and use of fees . in conducting our work , we considered federal accounting standards , office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance on user fees , and federal internal control standards . we reviewed uscis documents related to the fee review and its methodology . we obtained an understanding of the methodology and reviewed the design and operation of uscis's cost system , including its cost accumulation methods and how it assigned costs involved in adjudicating and processing various types of immigration applications . according to federal internal control standards , significant events are to be clearly documented . significant events can include key decisions about assumptions and methods underlying the assignment of costs . also , federal accounting standards require documentation of all managerial cost accounting activities , processes , and procedures used to associate costs with products , services , or activities .