it too issued a report with recommendations . we identified two critical factors that detracted from gipsa's investigative capability , as well as areas where gipsa could improve its efforts to develop and share key information . first , the agency's investigations were planned and conducted primarily by economists without the formal involvement of attorneys from ogc . second , gipsa's investigative practices were designed for traditional trade practices and financial issues the agency had emphasized for years and were not suited for the more complex competition - related concerns it was addressing . while not of a critical nature , we also found that despite prior dynamic changes in the livestock markets , gipsa's efforts to periodically update the industry and congress on competitive conditions and emerging fairness and equity issues were lacking . at the time of our review , ogc attorneys did not usually participate at the start or throughout the agency's investigations . assignment of ogc attorneys typically occurred after gipsa performed an investigation and forwarded a developed case file to them for review and action . thus , the agency's investigations were planned and conducted primarily by economists , most of whom had limited investigative experience . gipsa relied on ogc attorneys mainly for legal advice , and its ogc reviewed the results of gipsa's investigations to determine if violations of law might have occurred . in contrast , we noted that doj and ftc utilized integrated teams of attorneys and economists to perform investigations of anticompetitive practices . attorneys were assigned to lead and conduct investigations from the outset so that officials with a legal perspective focused on assessing potential violations of law . economists were routinely assigned as an integral part of the investigation teams . this approach ensured that a legal perspective was brought to bear on the interpretation of law , development of evidence , and preparation of cases for presentation in administrative and judicial proceedings . we also reported that ogc officials provided gipsa with only limited informal assistance which had declined over the years as the number of ogc attorneys assigned to assist gipsa decreased . in fact , the number of ogc attorneys assigned to gipsa cases had decreased from eight to five because of budget constraints , according to usda's general counsel . these attorneys were also not all assigned full - time to gipsa's financial , trade practice , and competition cases ; some had responsibilities in other usda areas as well . we concluded that gipsa's program needed additional steps to become more effective and efficient in performing investigations and recommended that gipsa develop a teamwork approach for investigations with gipsa's economists and ogc's attorneys working together to identify violations of the law . we also recommended that the secretary reassess current ogc staffing needs relative to current gipsa investigations , assign attorneys to lead or participate in more complex investigations , and increase the effectiveness of legal specialists by providing them with leadership opportunities and better supervision .