implement utilization metrics . develop guidance and overarching goals and metrics for savings . conduct a review of the benefits and disadvantages of standardized labor categories for primary strategic sourcing vehicles such as netcents . to improve efforts to strategically source it services within nasa , the administrator of nasa should direct its strategic sourcing accountable official to take the following three actions: use its 2014 spend analysis to determine the extent to which requirements can be addressed by i3p or other strategic sourcing approaches , and based on this analysis , reduce duplicative contracts . implement utilization metrics and mandatory use policies . develop guidance and overarching goals and metrics for savings . to improve efforts to strategically source it services within dhs , the secretary of homeland security should direct its strategic sourcing accountable official to take the following two actions: establish a utilization goal for the portfolio of strategic sourcing contracts related to it services . establish a savings goal for the portfolio of strategic sourcing contracts related to it services . we provided a draft of our report to the secretaries of dod and dhs , and the administrators of nasa and gsa . dod , dhs , and nasa concurred with our recommendations to improve efforts to strategically source it services within their agencies . the agencies' comments are summarized below and written comments from dod , dhs , and nasa are reproduced in appendixes iii , iv , and v respectively . we also received technical comments from dhs and nasa which we incorporated , as appropriate . in dod's written comments , the director , defense procurement and acquisition policy , agreed with our recommendations and identified the actions that the army , navy , and air force intended to take to improve efforts to strategically source it services . these actions include conducting spend analysis , developing policy and guidance regarding the utilization of existing strategic sourcing vehicles , and establishing goals and metrics to assess the use of the military departments' strategic sourcing vehicles and measuring savings . the director indicated that these actions are expected to be completed by the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2016 . in its written comments , dhs concurred with our recommendations and plans to establish utilization and savings goals for the portfolio of strategic sourcing contracts related to it services by the end of 2015 . dhs stated that is remains committed to ensuring that the needs of the chief information officer community are met through strategic sourcing vehicles which are cost effective , generate savings , and support the mission of the department . in nasa's written comments , the assistant administrator for procurement agreed with our recommendations to use nasa's 2014 spend analysis to identify contract duplication and opportunities to leverage existing strategic sourcing initiatives . the assistant administrator indicated these actions would be completed in february 2016 . nasa also agreed with our recommendation to develop guidance and overarching goals and metrics for savings and anticipated these actions will be completed in january 2017 . nasa partially concurred with our recommendation to implement utilization metrics and mandatory use policies .