individual costs . some of those who commented on the nonbank financial company rule noted that being designated would impose a significant regulatory burden on the designated companies . designated nonbank financial companies will be subject to supervision similar to that for large bank holding companies , required to prepare resolution plans , and assessed fees to fund the operation of ofr and fsoc . however , the impact of these dodd - frank act provisions on designated nonbank financial companies will not be known until the rules are applied . designated fmus could also experience increased costs . the dodd - frank act requires fsoc to rescind any designation if the institution no longer meets the fmu or nonbank financial company standards and specifically requires fsoc to reevaluate nonbank financial company designations at least annually . the final rule for designating certain nonbank financial companies for enhanced supervision says fsoc will notify a nonbank financial company prior to an annual reevaluation and provide the company up for review with an opportunity to submit written materials to contest the designation . however , the rule also notes that reevaluations will focus on material changes since a previous review rather than a full replication of the original designation process . in the interpretive guidance for the nonbank financial company designations , fsoc says that it also intends to review the appropriateness of both the stage one thresholds and the levels of the thresholds that are specified in dollars as needed , but at least every five years , and to adjust the thresholds and levels as it may deem advisable . however , fsoc has not set up processes to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the overall impact of designations . doing a comprehensive analysis to assess whether designations are having their intended impact of providing greater financial stability and the extent of any other impacts will be challenging . namely , establishing a baseline from which to evaluate the overall impact of various rules will likely be complex because the impact of being designated will depend on the application of a number of rules being written by multiple independent regulatory agencies and issued over a span of time . the cftc , federal reserve , and sec are writing will help determine the impact of being designated a systemically important fmu . similarly , the impact of being designated a nonbank financial company will be influenced by the rule the federal reserve is writing , to implement enhanced prudential standards ; the federal reserve and fdic rule on resolution planning ; and treasury's rule on assessments to fund fsoc and ofr . moreover , not all of these agencies are required to conduct cost - benefit analyses that might be useful in establishing a baseline for ongoing evaluation . for example , neither the federal reserve nor fdic are subject to the executive orders that require an economic analysis of the costs and benefits of certain rules . furthermore , while some regulatory agencies may conduct periodic retrospective reviews of their rules , these reviews tend to focus only on the rules issued by their agency . fsoc is uniquely positioned to address this challenge .