comprehensive . best practices state that — to be considered comprehensive — a cost estimate should include both government and contractor costs of the project over its full life cycle , from “cradle to grave.” this includes costs from the inception of the project through design , development , deployment , and operation and maintenance , to retirement of the project . a life cycle cost estimate can support budgetary decisions , key decision points , milestone reviews , and investment decisions . doe order 413.3b does not specifically require a life cycle cost estimate at cd - 0 . nonetheless , according to best practices , having a complete life cycle cost estimate helps ensure that all costs are fully accounted for and that resources are efficiently allocated to support the project . we found that the cost estimate to build a large centrifuge facility partially met the comprehensive characteristic because it included a high - level description of the work to be performed , and presented a brief summary description of the schedule , number of machines , and activities . however , the estimate was not a life cycle cost estimate because it excluded certain costs , such as retirement and close - out costs . in addition , other than noting a government oversight fee , the documentation does not specify whether the estimated costs are government or contractor costs . the estimate contains a 17 percent add - on , which an nnsa contractor told us accounts for doe and contractor oversight costs , but the estimate does not specify how those costs are allocated . we found that the cost estimate to build a small centrifuge facility also partially met the comprehensive characteristic . we found that the estimate included costs for manufacturing , design , testing of the centrifuges , and 11 years of operations but , similar to the large centrifuge facility estimate , did not include retirement and close - out costs . well - documented . best practices state that data are the foundation of every cost estimate and that the quality of the data affects an estimate's overall credibility . thus , the supporting documentation for an estimate should capture in writing the source data used , an assessment of the reliability of the data , and how the data were normalized to make them consistent with and comparable to other data used in the estimate . the documentation should describe in sufficient detail the calculations performed and the estimating methodology used to derive each project element's cost such that any cost analyst could understand what was done and replicate it . without good documentation , management may not be convinced that the estimate is credible ; supporting data will not be available for creating a historical database ; questions about the approach or data used to create the estimate cannot be answered ; lessons learned and a history for tracking why costs changed cannot be recorded ; and the scope of the analysis cannot be thoroughly defined . we found that the cost estimate to build a large centrifuge facility minimally met this characteristic . nnsa's contractor adjusted estimates previously provided by centrus for inflation and added an estimate for doe's oversight and fees .