both indicators are objective and measurable . while the performance overview discussed achievements and planned performance for strategic human capital and information security on an agency level , it generally did not discuss them within the selected key outcomes . in january 2001 , we reported on one additional management challenge specific to the agency . usaid faces challenges in developing reliable performance measures and accurately reporting the results of its programs . our past work , and that of the usaid inspector general , has identified a number of problems with the annual results data that usaid's operating units have been reporting . for example , in commenting on usaid's fiscal year 2000 performance plan , we noted that the plan provided limited confidence that the agency had the capacity to obtain credible , results - oriented program performance information . in addition , a 1999 inspector general review of data prepared by 18 missions for 1996 showed problems with the results reported for 83 percent , or 252 , of the 302 indicators . usaid has acknowledged that performance measurement is a challenge . in the performance overview , the agency reported the results of a number of efforts it undertook in 2000 to improve the quality and availability of performance data , most of which were objective and measurable . usaid also provided three performance goals and indicators for 2002 to continue addressing this challenge . however , the goals and indicators were general in scope , not readily measurable , and not well explained . in june 2000 , we reported on two additional challenges related to financial management: usaid had not implemented an integrated financial management system , and the agency's financial information was unreliable . in the performance overview , usaid stated it initiated a comprehensive study of its financial management operations worldwide , begun transitioning to a new accounting system , and begun configuring a commercial financial software package for the agency . in 2002 , usaid plans to install a fully operational , secure , core financial system compliant with federal requirements and that will integrate worldwide financial operations . usaid has made an attempt to address past criticisms of its performance indicators . for example , many indicators in past years were too broad to demonstrate the agency's actual contribution toward meeting performance goals . this year's approach sought to tie the agency's efforts more closely to the agency's desired outcomes by reporting performance data at the operating unit level . by using this approach , however , usaid did not adequately demonstrate progress toward the agency's selected key outcomes in its performance reporting documents . although usaid provided aggregate data of the number of strategic objectives met under an outcome area , additional information summarizing results at the unit level and linking it to agency goals is needed to help assess overall progress . for example , under economic development activities , it would have been useful for usaid to provide information on the number of units meeting performance targets related to the agency objective of expanding and strengthening critical private markets and associated activities , such as developing private enterprises . we recommend that the administrator of usaid take actions to provide clearer evidence of progress toward achieving agency outcomes .