in this report , we refer to all of these officials as ‘stakeholders.' we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , the administrator of tsa and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the contact named above , ellen wolfe , assistant director ; joel aldape , david alexander , chuck bausell , david beardwood , wendy dye , miriam hill , susan hsu , thomas lombardi , kevin newak , heidi nielson , and natalie swabb made significant contributions to this report . however , they provided important context about , and insights into , tsa's operations and coordination with stakeholders at airports . to determine how tsa modifies its staffing assumptions , we reviewed tsa guidance and policies , including the agency's plan for assessing the assumptions used in the rap , such as the frequency and methods for reviewing passenger and baggage screening processes . in addition , to determine whether tsa modified assumptions used in the rap , we reviewed tsa internal reports regarding the assumptions used in the rap in 2016 and 2017 as well as a 2016 assessment of tsa's approach to staffing at airports overall . to evaluate the extent to which tsa has mechanisms in place to tailor staffing allocations to individual airports' needs , we analyzed tsa procedures , such as annual reviews of individual airports' configurations conducted by airport - level officials that govern staffing allocation , including procedures for modifying the rap and tailoring staffing allocations to individual airports' needs . specifically , tsa assumed that 50 percent of airline passengers would use expedited screening in 2016 , but only an average of 27 percent of passengers used expedited screening that year . according to the officials , tsa modified this assumption in fiscal year 2017 and now uses tsa pre® program data specific to each individual airport in the model . similarly , officials told us that , since tsa was established in november 2001 , many employees will reach 15 years of service with the federal government in fiscal years 2016 and 2017 , resulting in increased annual leave allowances . in addition to the daily leadership report , tsa utilizes wait time and throughput data to monitor airport operations at 28 airports in near real time . in may 2016 , tsa established the airport operations center ( aoc ) that conducts near real time monitoring of the operations of 28 airports that , according to tsa headquarters officials , represent the majority of passenger throughput nationwide or are operationally significant .