collateral . treasury's goal in its negotiations with chrysler and gm prior to signing the loan agreements was to obtain senior liens whenever possible and , for assets already encumbered , to obtain junior liens . for chrysler , because most assets were already encumbered with senior liens , treasury was only able to obtain a senior lien on a portion of the company's parts inventory , known as mopar . for gm , treasury obtained a senior lien on cash , inventory , real property , equity in domestic and foreign subsidiaries , and intellectual property . treasury also received junior liens on additional assets from both companies . according to treasury officials , treasury cannot put an estimated dollar value on either company's pledged collateral because the value of certain items , such as cash and inventory , is constantly changing . treasury officials said that the limited amount of assets on which the government has senior liens could become an issue if the companies enter bankruptcy or otherwise liquidate their assets , although the situation differs somewhat for the two companies . according to treasury , in the case of chrysler , the sale of the assets would result in cash equal to only a small percentage of the value of the loans . moreover , because treasury placed liens on all unencumbered assets to secure the december loans , it will be difficult or impossible for the government to obtain additional collateral for any new loans that may be provided . in its restructuring plan , gm proposed that additional federal assistance could be in the form of a preferred equity investment in the company , a revolving facility , and a loan secured by the collateral already used to support the current $13.4 billion loan . chrysler did not propose collateral options for any additional federal assistance in its restructuring plan . in considering whether the federal government should provide additional assistance to chrysler and gm , it is important to assess the government's overall financial exposure should one or both of the automakers fail to achieve long - term viability . a potential area of significant financial exposure is the government's liability for terminated pension plans . specifically , the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) — a self - funded government corporation — insures private - sector defined benefit plans . when pbgc takes over a terminated pension plan , it assumes responsibility for future benefit payments to the plan's participants , up to the limits set in law . an underfunded pension plan that is insured by pbgc may be terminated only if certain statutory criteria are met . in general , an employer is permitted to terminate an underfunded plan only if it can demonstrate that it is in serious financial distress and cannot continue in business or reorganize ( if in bankruptcy ) unless the pension plan is terminated . the pension plans of chrysler and gm pose considerable financial uncertainty to pbgc .