unobligated balance provisions . hrsa cancelled and recovered $13,764,295 in combined grant year 2007 part b base and supplemental unobligated balances from 16 part b grantees with unobligated balances of greater than 2 percent . in addition , these 16 grantees' grant year 2009 awards were reduced by a total of $19,677,483 as a penalty for incurring an unobligated balance of greater than 2 percent in grant year 2007 . of this , $4,441,865 was from part b base grants and $15,235,618 was from adap base grants . prior to rwtma , hrsa used the ryan white hiv / aids program data report ( rdr ) to collect information on care act services from grantees and their service providers . however , rdr was unable to collect client - level data with unique identifying information . consequently , there was no way of knowing if the clients counted as being served by one provider were also included in the counts of those being served by other providers . therefore , totaling the number of clients receiving services across providers could result in clients being counted more than once . additionally , the lack of client - level data meant that hrsa was unable to assess the quality of care given to clients or sufficiently account for the use of care act funds . hrsa now collects client - level data to help ensure accountability of care act funds . we reviewed published information on adaps . we interviewed hrsa officials knowledgeable about adaps and interviewed officials from 13 states , which we chose based on their geographic location , size , and number of hiv / aids cases , about their adaps . in addition , we interviewed officials from the henry j. kaiser family foundation , nastad , and other organizations knowledgeable about adaps . for part b base grantees this resulted in ineligibility to receive grant year 2009 part b supplemental grants . for part b adap grantees , an unobligated balance of greater than 2 percent does not result in ineligibility for adap supplemental grants . officials from six health departments indicated that they either currently use or plan to use careware . the other eleven said they will use or plan to use a customized or vendor - distributed client - level information data system . officials from 8 of the 17 departments stated that they had a system to collect client - level data before hrsa's requirement to implement such a system . officials from 10 of the 17 health departments we interviewed had concerns or challenges with implementing a client - level data collection and reporting system and reporting client - level data to hrsa . for example , officials from three health departments stated they were concerned about how to train service providers and other partners to collect client - level data . an official from 1 of these 3 health departments mentioned that it had been a challenge for his state to train the 100 case managers in the state to report client - level data in a consistent manner . additionally , officials from three departments stated that they were concerned with potential breaches in the confidentiality of client information when data are entered into the rsr system .