gsa provided no comments . va's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of veterans affairs , and the administrator of the general services administration . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or shear@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the cost guide can be used to assess cost - estimating procedures to determine whether they meet the four characteristics — comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible — for being reliable . table 1 presents our assessment of va's overall cost - estimating process against the four characteristics and related best practices . in addition to the contact named above , heather macleod , assistant director ; jennifer echard ; elke kolodinski ; james leonard ; josh ormond ; sarah sheehan ; delwen jones ; and crystal wesco made key contributions to this report . ( see figure 2. ) because va's cost - estimating procedures do not fully incorporate relevant best practices for developing comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible estimates , the cost estimates it produces may be unreliable . appendix i summarizes our detailed assessment of va's procedures . our conclusion that va's cost - estimating process partially met the characteristics for producing reliable cost estimates is based on the following observations from our analysis of va documentation and interviews with va officials: comprehensive: va's cost - estimating process fully met the comprehensive characteristic because the procedures incorporate the elements of the two associated best practice steps . the procedures include the best practice step of developing an estimating plan . for example , va's procedures outline the timeline for developing , submitting , and reviewing the estimate , as well as who has responsibility for the various aspects of estimate development . va's procedures also include the best practice step of determining the estimating structure . for example , the estimate's inputs are clearly defined , and va provides detailed guidance to staff on the steps required to estimate those inputs . well - documented: va's cost - estimating process substantially met the well - documented characteristic because the procedures incorporate a large number of related best practice steps . although va's procedures fully include tasks related to the underlying best practice steps of defining the estimate's purpose , defining the program's characteristics , documenting the estimate , and presenting the estimate for approval , the procedures substantially met the tasks related to obtaining the data and identifying ground rules and assumptions . for example , the need to fill previously identified gaps in service to veterans defines the purpose of an estimate .