these documents were available on dea's website . in 2011 , dea released guidance for distributors containing suggested questions a distributor should ask customers prior to shipping controlled substances ( referred to as the know your customer guidance ) . additionally , dea offered a registration validation tool on its website so that registrants , such as distributors and pharmacies , could determine if a pharmacy or practitioner had a valid , current dea registration . however , our survey results suggested that many registrants were not using these resources that could help them better understand and meet their csa roles and responsibilities because they were unfamiliar with them . for example , of particular concern were the estimated 53 percent of individual pharmacies that were not aware of either dea's pharmacist's manual or the registration validation tool , and the 70 percent of practitioners that were not aware of dea's practitioner's manual , and were therefore not using these resources . the lack of awareness among registrants of dea resources and conferences suggested that dea may not have an adequate means of communicating with its registrant populations . further , with so many registrants unaware of dea's conferences and resources , we reported that dea lacked assurance that registrants had sufficient information to understand and meet their csa responsibilities . therefore , we recommended that dea identify and implement means of cost - effective , regular communication with distributor , pharmacy , and practitioner registrants , such as through listservs or web - based training . dea agreed that communication from dea to the registrant population was necessary and vital . as of april 2016 , dea reported that it had taken steps towards addressing this recommendation . in particular , dea reported that it was in the process of developing web - based training modules for all of its registrant population , and was considering the best way to implement a listserv to disseminate information to its various registrant types . we plan to continue to monitor the agency's efforts in this area , and this recommendation remains open . the department of health and human services agreed with the two recommendations we made to fda . in april 2016 , dea provided information about ongoing efforts to educate distributors about their roles and responsibilities for monitoring and reporting suspicious orders , such as their distributors' conferences , and noted that it plans to host yearly training for distributors . practitioners: practitioners are responsible for the proper prescribing and dispensing of controlled substances for legitimate medical uses . a prescription for a controlled substance must be issued for a legitimate medical purpose by an individual practitioner acting in the usual course of that person's professional practice . it is important for registrants to adhere to their responsibilities under the csa because they play a critical role in the prescription drug supply chain , which is the means through which prescription drugs are ultimately delivered to patients with legitimate medical needs . although prescription drugs are intended for legitimate medical uses , as shown in figure 1 , the prescription drug supply chain may present opportunities for the drugs to be abused and diverted .