the lcs is being developed to address these missions . the lcs design concept consists of two distinct parts , the ship itself and the mission package it carries and deploys . for lcs , the ship is referred to as the “seaframe” and consists of the hull , command and control systems , launch and recovery systems , and certain core systems like the radar and gun . a core crew will be responsible for the seaframe's basic functions . operating with these systems alone offers some capability to perform general or inherent missions , such as support of special operations forces or maritime intercept operations . we therefore do not discuss these at length . the navy and lockheed martin signed a contract for detailed design and construction of the first flight 0 ship in december 2004 , and the ship builder is expected to deliver the ship to the navy in fiscal year 2007 . the navy will then begin testing and experimenting with the ship , using the first mission package — mine warfare . in addition to limiting the operational capability of the flight 0 ships , technology maturity and availability issues could limit the time available for the navy to adequately experiment with operation of the seaframe and mission packages and gather valuable lessons for incorporation into flight 1 ships . flight 1 and future follow - on designs will be the basis for the lcs class of ships , which the navy currently estimates could number between 50 and 60 . under the current acquisition strategy , detailed design and construction of the first flight 1 ship will begin about 12 months after delivery of the first flight 0 ship . the last two flight 0 ships will not be available before detailed design and construction of flight 1 begins . the second flight 0 ship and the first mission packages for antisubmarine and surface warfare will be delivered just as detailed design and construction of flight 1 is set to begin . delivery of the first mission packages in spiral bravo will be aligned with delivery of the first flight 1 ship . recognizing that it lacks a number of key warfighting capabilities to operate in the littorals , the navy began to develop the concept of lcs as a potential weapon system before it had completed formal requirements . normally , a major acquisition program should include an examination of basic requirements and an analysis of potential solutions before a new system is decided upon . the navy eventually conducted a requirements development process and analyzed a number of alternative solutions to a new ship but concluded that the lcs remained the best option . however , the navy's analysis of one area of littoral operations — the surface threats facing u.s. forces in littoral waters — did not include consideration of the potential impact of all threats the lcs is likely to face . the navy has known about the capability gaps in the littorals for some time , particularly threats from mines and submarines in shallow waters . as we previously reported , the navy has acknowledged that it lacks a number of key warfighting capabilities it needs for operations in the littoral environs .