( recommendation 1 ) . established the space development agency . in march 2019 , dod established the space development agency to unify and integrate efforts across dod to define , develop , and field innovative satellite solutions , including communications . the space development agency is focused on a low - earth - orbit constellation to provide communications and other satellite - based operational support for dod , which could also provide information for selecting a post - wgs architecture . as of this time , dod has not determined how this new organization will mesh with the air force space and missile systems center that acquires satellite systems ; the defense advanced research projects agency , which creates breakthrough technologies and capabilities ; and similar organizations within the department . we found the wideband aoa to be a comprehensive assessment . the office of the secretary for defense for acquisition and sustainment completed the wideband aoa in june 2018 to support decision making for future wideband architectures . several subsystems comprise a satcom architecture and can include the number , type , orbital location , and capacity of satellites and associated ground or user segments . wgs constellation satellites will begin reaching their end of life in the early 2030s , which means dod will need to begin launching replacement system satellites in the late 2020s . dod satellite systems take , on average , over 7 years to develop and launch the first satellite of a purpose - built system . given these time frames , the wideband aoa study team focused on possible alternatives dod could begin developing as early as 2019 . in october 2016 , the office of the secretary of defense - cost assessment and program evaluation developed the wideband communications services analysis of alternatives study plan . this study plan provided the schedule and tasks to be conducted for the wideband aoa . these tasks included identifying study questions to be addressed and listing measures of performance and effectiveness . as set forth in its study plan , the wideband aoa study team obtained military input from across dod and information from commercial satcom vendors to inform its alternatives . aoa working groups were one of several mechanisms dod used to obtain stakeholder input . each of these frequency bands has advantages and disadvantages for various applications . satellite transponders operating at the lower c - band frequencies are less susceptible to degradation from rain than other bands . in the united states , the x - band is specifically designated for use by the u.s. government and the north atlantic treaty organization . the ku - band operates at higher frequencies and can communicate with smaller antennas and offer more flexibility . the still - higher - frequency ka - band satellites can transmit more data than c , x , and ku - band satellites , but their signals are more susceptible to degradation from water vapor and rain than satellites in lower frequency bands . commercial satellite communication providers have historically operated primarily in the ku - band but are now expanding services in the ka - band to offer higher data rates .