elizabeth a . field , ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , gao staff who made key contributions to this report include marc schwartz , assistant director ; pedro almoguera , john bumgarner , william cordrey ( retired ) , tim dinapoli , jennifer echard , christopher gezon , mae jones , jason lee , ned malone , tara porter , oliver richard , mike shaughnessy , susan tindall , nate tranquilli , john van schaik , and mary weiland . this can be during peak or non - peak season . accountability refers to the government's ability to affix responsibility to the contractor and their supplier network for performance . responsibility encompasses the authority of the government and how each government stakeholder will be held responsible for accomplishing their assigned tasks . planned contract performance indicators and metrics are intended to assess contractor performance , but they may also provide information that transcom could use to more broadly assess the extent to which dp3 is meeting its overarching program goals . however , transcom has not clearly articulated which of the performance metrics it has established under the global household goods contract align with which program goals . for example , one performance indicator for the global household goods contract is for contractor delivery of household goods to be on - time at least 95 percent of the time . while it appears that this performance indicator could relate to the quality and capacity goals , transcom has not established linkage between this performance indicator and either of these goals . determining how it will assess improved capacity is particularly important . when we spoke with them about the move to the global household goods contract , some military service officials , representatives of the moving and storage industry , and members of transcom's personal property relocation advisory panel told us that they doubt whether the global household goods contract will , indeed , improve capacity . moreover , none of the existing performance indicators appear to relate to transcom's responsibility goal . it is not surprising that the global household goods contract does not include performance indicators on how government stakeholders are to be held responsible for various program activities , because indicators under the contract are intended to evaluate contractor performance . however , we would expect to see performance metrics outside of the contract to measure government stakeholders' performance . when we spoke with transcom officials about the gaps we identified in their performance assessment approach , they agreed that clarifying the linkage between performance metrics and the overarching program goals and ensuring there are performance metrics for assessing each of the goals would improve the command's ability to assess overall program performance . while the performance indicators and metrics related to the various contracts , including the global household goods contract , are intended to assess contractor performance , they could also provide information that transcom could use to more broadly assess the extent to which dp3 is meeting its overarching program goals . dod instruction 4500.57 , transportation and traffic management , calls for transcom , in coordination with dod components , to conduct annual program reviews to ensure the overall effectiveness of the dp3 .