a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plaintext into ciphertext using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . a public key infrastructure ( pki ) is a system of hardware , software , and policies that uses cryptographic techniques to generate and manage electronic certificates , which links an individual or entity to a given public key . these certificates are then used to verify digital signatures ( providing authentication and data integrity ) and facilitate data encryption ( providing confidentiality ) . a properly designed and implemented pki can also be used to ensure that a given digital signature is still properly linked to the individual or entity associated with it ( providing nonrepudiation ) . commonly available commercial web browsers ( such as microsoft's internet explorer and america online's netscape communicator ) make use of the technical features of pki to provide security for web - enabled transactions . they invoke a standardized information exchange protocol known as secure sockets layer , which uses pki - like features to provide authentication between a user application , such as a web browser , and a server . the national security agency also recommends disabling protocols that do not encrypt information , such as user id and password combinations , transmitted across the network . sec did not always ensure that sensitive data was protected by encryption . for example , it did not adequately validate electronic certificates for certain connections , thereby diminishing their effectiveness . sec also did not enable secure sockets layer communications between certain client computers and a key financial application's database servers . in addition , users authenticating to a key enterprise database application sent unencrypted passwords across the network , thereby increasing the likelihood that the passwords would be compromised . as a result , an attacker could view unencrypted data , such as passwords , and use them to gain unauthorized access to sec network resources and view or modify messages transmitted across the network . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail of needed information in the desired formats and locations in order to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor users' activities . the way in which organizations configure system or security software determines the nature and extent of information that the audit trails can provide . sec policy requires the enforcement of auditing and accountability by configuring information systems to produce , store , and retain audit records of system , application , network , and user activity . sec also requires that audit records contain sufficient information to establish what events occurred , when the events occurred , the source of the events , and the event's outcomes . in addition , sec policy states that conducting a baseline assessment of the network is part of the detection and analysis phase of its incident response process .