( see fig . 1 for a diagram of the network of entities in the distribution of and payment for pharmaceuticals. ) at least 22 psaos , which varied in the number and location of pharmacies to which they provided services , were in operation in 2011 or 2012 . in total , depending on different data sources , these 22 psaos represented or provided other services to between 20,275 and 28,343 pharmacies in 2011 or 2012 . ( see table 1. ) the number of pharmacies contracted with each psao across these sources ranged from 24 to 5,000 pharmacies ; however , according to ncpdp data most contracted with fewer than 1,000 pharmacies . the largest 5 psaos combined contracted with more than half of all pharmacies that were represented by a psao in 2011 or 2012 . because pharmacies may change their psao , the number of pharmacies contracting with each psao fluctuates as for example , according to one psaos enroll and disenroll pharmacies.psao , member pharmacies will change psaos whenever they think that another psao can negotiate better contract terms with third - party payers or their pbms . some psaos contracted primarily with pharmacies located in a particular region . these psaos generally represented fewer pharmacies than psaos representing pharmacies across the united states . for example , the northeast pharmacy service corporation represented 250 independent pharmacies while the rxselect pharmacy network represented from 451 to 569 independent pharmacies . according to ncpdp data , psaos provide services primarily to independent pharmacies . of the 21,511 pharmacies associated with psaos in the 2011 ncpdp database , 18,103 were identified as independent pharmacies . these independent pharmacies represent nearly 75 percent of the total number of independent pharmacies in the 2011 ncpdp database . this is close to an estimate reported by ncpa and the hhs oig , both of which conducted surveys in which approximately 80 percent of responding independent pharmacies were represented by psaos . in addition to independent pharmacies , some psaos also contracted with small chains and franchise pharmacy members.small chain pharmacies ranging in size from 25 to 150 pharmacies under for example , managed care connection provides services to common ownership , and the medicine shoppe only offers its psao services to its franchise pharmacies . psaos provide a broad range of services to independent pharmacies including negotiating contractual agreements and providing communication and help - desk services . these and other services are intended to achieve administrative efficiencies for both independent pharmacies and third - party payers or their pbms . most psaos charge a monthly fee for a bundled set of services and separate fees for additional services . while psaos provide a broad range of services to independent pharmacies and vary in how they offer these services , we found that psaos consistently offer contract negotiation , communication , and help - desk services . several entities , including industry experts , trade associations , and psaos we spoke with , referred to one or all of these services as a psao's “key service ( s ) ” — meaning that a psao can be distinguished from other entities in the pharmaceutical industry by its provision of these services .