incentives . blm , boem and bsee have the authority to pay incentives in the form of recruitment , relocation , and retention awards of up to 25 percent of basic pay , in most circumstances , and for as long as the use of these incentives is justified , in accordance with opm guidance , such as in the event an employee is likely to leave federal service . however , we found that the bureaus' use of these incentives has been limited . for example , during fiscal years 2010 through 2012 , the three bureaus hired 66 petroleum engineers but awarded just four recruitment incentives , five relocation incentives , and four retention incentives . blm awarded two of the four retention incentives in 2012 to help retain petroleum engineers in its north dakota field office . opm data showed that , in 2011 , interior paid about one - third less in incentive awards than it did in 2010 . blm officials cited various factors that contributed to the limited use of incentives , such as limited funds available for incentives . a blm official also told us that there was confusion about an opm and office of management and budget ( omb ) requirement to limit incentive awards to 2010 levels and that some field office managers were uncertain about the extent to which office managers were allowed to use incentive awards . without clear guidance outlining when these incentives should be used , and a means to measure their effectiveness , we concluded that interior will not be able to determine whether it has fully used its authority to offer incentives to hire and retain key oil and gas oversight staff . hiring times . as part of the next phase of this effort , interior asked its bureaus to develop detailed workforce plans using a standardized model based on best practices used at interior . both planning efforts are ongoing , however , so it is too early to assess the effect on interior's hiring and retention challenges for key oil and gas positions at this time . blm , boem , and bsee are developing or implementing workforce plans as well . as we reported in july 2012 , boem and bsee did not have strategic workforce plans , and we recommended that the bureaus develop plans to address their hiring and retention challenges.workforce plan , and boem officials told us that they expect to complete one in 2014 . blm issued a workforce planning strategy in march 2012 that outlined strategic objectives to address some of its key human capital challenges ; however , this strategy does not include implementation ; address challenges with the hiring process ; or outline mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , or improve the hiring process ; so it is too soon to tell whether blm's planning strategy will help the bureau address its human capital challenges . moreover , we found that the bureaus' efforts do not appear to have been conducted as part of an overarching workforce plan , or in a coordinated and consistent manner , therefore the bureaus do not have a basis to assess the success of these efforts or determine whether and how these efforts should be adjusted over time .