but , it is not impossible . there are some risks that mbn has not identified or addressed . for example , pricewaterhousecoopers , mbn's external auditor , noted that mbn has not adequately addressed its risks related to information security . doing so would reduce the risk of security incidents and unauthorized system activity , according to the auditor . pricewaterhousecoopers also found that mbn's lack of a business continuity plan or an adequate disaster recovery plan could result in slower recovery in the case of such an event , as well as significant loss of revenue , inability to meet customer needs and third party obligations , and potential noncompliance with legal requirements . the internal audit function planned by mbn may at some point take on the function of assessing risk , but this body is not yet operational . mbn has provided some training on internal controls but has not yet developed a regular structured training program for its staff of about 240 , as recommended by the grant thornton llp review and by gao leading practices . mbn's cfo and controller attended a seminar on grants management in october 2004 and subsequently shared the information with the 16 in - house financial staff . mbn also provided internal control compliance training to its managers in december 2004 , and the organization regularly provides training to staff at its business manager meetings . the organization also has not developed an internal control plan . furthermore , mbn has not established a comprehensive process to analyze risks the organization faces from internal and external sources . finally , mbn has provided some training on internal control but has not yet developed a regular structured training program for its staff . the grant thornton review recommended that mbn establish an internal control board of key managers and officers to determine the internal control risks facing mbn , work towards decreasing these risks , and oversee mbn's efforts to employ strong controls . moreover , according to gao guidance , organizations should have an audit committee or senior management council – similar to an internal control board – that reviews the internal audit work and coordinates closely with external auditors . according to the mbn president , mbn is establishing an internal control board consisting of three members , including , as recommended , the mbn president , general counsel , and cfo . however , the board has not yet formally met to establish protocols and outline responsibilities . in addition , according to mbn's general counsel , mbn has not appointed a member from the bbg , as was recommended , to serve on the board . mbn's executive committee , which examines issues affecting mbn and reports back to the bbg , has provided some support on management and administrative issues , such as approving the construction and expansion of mbn's new facility and providing guidance on hiring high - level staff . however , the committee has not fulfilled the role of an internal control board as previously described . instead , mbn's cfo has largely taken on the sole responsibility of establishing and overseeing mbn's controls , reviewing audits , and coordinating with external auditors .