taxes . washington , d.c. different requirements and costs on auto manufacturers . one approach would introduce an “upstream” cap on fossil fuels in which all producers and importers of oil , coal , and other fossil fuels would be required to hold allowances based on the carbon content of their fuel . dot officials , including the senior associate administrator for vehicle safety , stated that , while we recommended that as part of any reform to the cafe program , nhtsa should consider indexing cafe penalties to keep pace with inflation , nhtsa has the ability to increase current civil penalties from $5.50 to $10.00 for every 0.1 mpg a manufacturers' fleet falls short of cafe standards . however , nhtsa officials believe that since the manufacturers that generally pay these penalties are those that produce luxury or specialty , high - performance vehicles whose sales they believe are dependent on performance , doubling the penalties will likely not induce these companies to produce more fuel - efficient vehicles . without more definitive research , we continue to recommend that nhtsa consider studying the impact of systematically increasing civil penalties if it revises the cafe program to determine how the penalties can best influence the intended outcomes of the cafe program . officials from epa , including the office of air and radiation and office of policy , economics , and innovation acknowledged our comprehensive discussion of the cafe program as well as the issue of climate change . however , epa officials requested we include more discussion of disagreements over the safety impacts and other potential trade - offs involved in raising cafe standards . in response , we added material on the lack of consensus on the safety issue . also , our matter for consideration to congress to provide nhtsa the authority to modify the program as the industry and technology changes , if implemented , would provide nhtsa an opportunity to adjust the program to enhance safety if conditions warrant . epa agreed with our recommendations and suggested we include a recommendation that nhtsa work with epa and doe to establish a valuation for reducing carbon dioxide emissions in its computer model that estimates the costs and benefits of increasing cafe standards . while we did not include such a recommendation , we added information on this possibility in this report . doe officials , in a letter from the assistant secretary of the office of policy and international affairs , expressed four general concerns with our draft report . ( see app . iii ) . first , doe's letter states that we do not provide sufficient analysis to support the report's assertion that reforming cafe standards alone is not sufficient to realize reductions in oil consumption . however , our report says that an increase in cafe standards would likely make an important contribution to reducing oil consumption .