prepare buildings for decontamination . conduct and support decontamination operations , including fumigation with chlorine dioxide gas . decontaminate interior surfaces of buildings , other structures , cars , and other vessels . provide for collection , containment , and transportation and disposal of contaminated materials from the site operations . provide support to epa sampling teams and other federal responders , including response technicians , to assist with decontamination activities . oversee preparation , handling , placement , and collection of spore strips used during fumigation with chlorine dioxide gas and ethylene oxide gas . provide the on - scene coordinator and incident commander fumigation design procedures , including details on fumigant delivery ; concentration ; operating conditions , such as temperature and humidity ; fumigant containment and recovery ; and monitoring of parameters . provide detailed design for delivery of fumigant , equipment requirements and specifications , flow schematics , and detailed schedules and operating procedures to use during fumigation . provide a chlorine dioxide specialist to assist epa in overseeing the fumigation setup . provide technical support to the on - scene coordinator in developing chronology of events at the site , including researching various files , documents , and logbooks in order to develop a comprehensive report . monitor and assist with the oversight of the chlorine dioxide fumigation process . assist with health and safety matters at the site , conduct sampling , assist and oversee off - gassing , inventory , and return items being treated . support the on - scene coordinator in conducting presentations and briefings related to post - treatment and design of chlorine dioxide use in the heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning system . these costs are discussed in the next section . because of the magnitude and urgency of the health threat and the high priority placed on reopening the congressional buildings as soon as possible to mitigate disruptions to the functioning of the federal government , the capitol hill anthrax cleanup conducted by epa and other federal agencies was accomplished fairly quickly , with the majority of contaminated buildings opened for business in about 3 months . without the emphasis on reopening the buildings , for example , the cleanup site likely would not have been operated around the clock , 24 / 7 , for months . in contrast , testing and decontamination of some buildings at other sites have taken much longer . for example , fumigation of the brentwood postal facility was completed in march 2003 , and this facility had not reopened as of may 2003 . in addition , a news media building in boca raton , florida , where the first letter containing anthrax was received in september 2001 , remained closed as of may 2003 . almost all of the cleanup expenses – 81 percent — paid to epa's 27 contractors and 3 government agencies were incurred under competitively awarded contracts .