gao - 10-622t . washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2010 . within defense , u.s . gao - 10-433r . washington , d.c.: april 7 , 2010 . defense provided written comments to clarify facts in the report which are reprinted in their entirety in appendix v. defense , homeland security , justice , state , transportation , and treasury provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . in written comments , defense stated that the department does not agree that using percent of seized suspected pirates who were delivered for prosecution is an appropriate measure of program success . defense also commented that the metric does not take into account that it is up to individual countries within the coalition to determine the validity of evidence and decide whether to prosecute . we did not state that the percent of suspects delivered for prosecution was an appropriate measure of program success . in the draft report , we stated that the action plan establishes objectives related to repressing piracy and reducing incidents of piracy , but does not define measures of effectiveness that can be used to evaluate progress toward reaching those objectives . in the absence of defined measures of effectiveness , we made qualitative assessments of u.s. government progress in implementing the action plan tasks by reviewing program documents , analyzing data , and interviewing agency officials . we determined that the u.s. government had made some progress on the action plan task to seize and destroy pirate vessels and related equipment and deliver captured suspected pirates for prosecution . in response to defense's comments , we have modified the report to explicitly recommend that the nsc identify measures of effectiveness to use in evaluating u.s. counterpiracy efforts . we also revised the summary text contained in figure 5 for this line of action to better incorporate some of the prosecution challenges discussed in appendix ii and more fully address the rationale for our assessment . defense also provided comments to better depict the contributions of the naval criminal investigative service to counterpiracy operations which we incorporated throughout the report . and finally , defense stated that u.s. special operations command does not conduct counterpiracy operations and stated in its technical comments that it is a force provider to other combatant commands who are responsible for conducting counterpiracy operations . as a result , we modified the draft to eliminate reference to the u.s. special operations command as incurring costs for counterpiracy operations . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 7 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the special assistant to the president for national security affairs ; the attorney general ; the secretaries of defense , homeland security , state , transportation , and the treasury ; and interested congressional committees . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .