( see app . i for a comparison of the wia performance measures with those proposed for vets and es. ) ui wage records cover about 94 percent of wage and salary workers , but certain employment categories are not covered , such as self - employed persons , most independent contractors , military personnel , federal government workers , railroad employees , some part - time employees of nonprofit institutions , and employees of religious orders . therefore , the ui system will not be able to track and count veterans who get these types of jobs . this is an issue for wia as well , and states are beginning to assess the extent to which this issue will affect their ability to accurately determine the outcome of wia - funded programs . there are other issues not related to the use of ui wage records that vets should consider as it finalizes its performance - reporting requirements . vets' proposed performance system does not standardize how states report veterans or nonveterans who use self - service activities , making it difficult to reliably assess nationwide performance . in an environment in which self - service is becoming more common , we found that states vary in whether they register veteran job seekers who access self - service tools , such as internet - based job listings or resume writing software . for example , some states allow job seekers greater access to job listings without requiring that they register , while others have more restrictions on who can access job lists . table 3 shows how such differences can affect entered - employment rates . in this example , 100 veterans enter the employment service for assistance . in both cases , 40 veterans ultimately get jobs after receiving identical services . in one case , the placement rate is 40 percent and in the other , 50 percent — a 10 percentage point difference . this difference results from counting all job seekers in one case and only those requiring staff assistance in the other . as a result of the different ways states currently count veterans and report outcomes , the entered - employment rate measure is not consistently calculated across states , and nationwide comparisons are misleading . vets' proposed performance system does not standardize how long a veteran or nonveteran remains registered after seeking services for performance - reporting purposes . we found that states differ in how long they keep veterans registered . this difference affects the calculation of the entered - employment rate ( i.e. , the number of veterans that get jobs ) , making performance comparisons across states less reliable . the roles of the dvops and lvers have been separately defined in two statutes . lvers were first authorized under the original gi bill ( the servicemen's readjustment act of 1944 ) and dvop specialists were authorized by the veterans' rehabilitation and education amendments of 1980 . a key responsibility of a dvop is to develop job and job training opportunities for veterans through contacts with employers , especially small - and medium - size private sector employers .