tracking of rme . vamcs must enter information on all rme that is classified as nonexpendable equipment by va's office of acquisition , logistics , and construction into the automated engineering management system / medical equipment reporting system ( aems / mers ) . va policies include requirements designed to help ensure that vamcs reprocess rme correctly , in order to help ensure that rme is safe for use when providing care to veterans . va's reprocessing policies include two key types of requirements: training requirements . to ensure that rme is reprocessed in accordance with manufacturers' guidelines , va requires that each vamc develop device - specific training for reprocessing rme . to develop this training , va requires vamcs to create device - specific standard operating procedures ( sop ) , which provide step - by - step instructions for reprocessing . va also requires vamcs to assess staff annually on their competence to reprocess rme in accordance with these sops . operational requirements . to ensure that reprocessing activities are performed safely and that rme is reprocessed correctly , va policies establish operational requirements for vamcs , which include that vamc staff must monitor sterilizers to ensure that they are functioning properly , use personal protective equipment when performing reprocessing activities , and segregate dirty and clean rme . we found that both the tracking and reprocessing requirements we reviewed are inadequate to help ensure the safety of veterans who receive care at vamcs . these inadequacies create potential risks to the safety of veterans who receive care at vamcs . however , we did not identify any inadequacies in the purchasing requirements we selected for review that may create potential risks to veterans' safety . va does not require vamcs to enter information about certain expendable medical supplies and rme into their inventory management systems , and therefore , vamc inventories have incomplete information on these items . specifically , vamcs are not required to enter into gip information on expendable medical supplies purchased on a nonrecurring basis . furthermore , vamcs are not required to enter into aems / mers information on rme that va's office of acquisition , logistics , and construction does not classify as nonexpendable equipment . rme that is not classified as nonexpendable equipment includes certain surgical and dental instruments . ( see fig . officials at one vamc we visited told us that they did not develop all of the required reprocessing training for critical rme — such as surgical instruments — because they did not understand that they were required to do so . officials at another vamc we visited also told us that they had begun to develop device - specific training for reprocessing non - critical rme , such as wheelchairs , even though they had not yet fully completed device - specific training for more critical rme . because these two vamcs had not developed the appropriate device - specific training for reprocessing critical and semi - critical rme , staff at these vamcs may not have been reprocessing all rme properly , which potentially put the safety of veterans receiving care at these facilities at risk . conflicting guidance on the development of rme reprocessing training .