our position remains unchanged . the details in the body of our report demonstrate lack of adequate progress . most important , 5 years after the passage of dcia , fsa had not yet established an adequate framework or systems capacity to effectively carry out its responsibilities for collecting large sums of delinquent debt . as agreed with your office , unless you announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and to the ranking minority member of your subcommittee . we will also provide copies to the secretary of agriculture , the inspector general of the department of agriculture , the administrator of the farm service agency , and the secretary of the treasury . we will then make copies available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or kenneth r. rupar , assistant director , at ( 214 ) 777-5714 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . we first identified the four states ( texas , california , louisiana , and oklahoma ) with the highest dollar amounts of debt excluded from top . from the four states , we drew a multistage cluster sample of 15 field offices ( population 123 ) using probability proportionate to size , a sampling method in which larger clusters ( in this case , offices ) have a higher probability of being selected than smaller clusters . our debt population consisted of all fsa debt more than 180 days delinquent that had been excluded from referral to treasury as of september 30 , 2000 . we reviewed all excluded debt ( 263 ) at the 15 sample offices . table 2 identifies the four states selected , the number of offices selected in each state , the number of excluded debts at the selected offices in each state , and the number of errors found at the selected offices in each state . based on our review , we estimate that 48.5 percent ± 15.7 percent of the population were inappropriately excluded from treasury referral . when projecting these errors to the population of 1,187 , we are 95 percent confident that the errors in the population are from 389 to 761 debts . table 3 shows the two - stage probability proportionate to size cluster sample results . other key contributors to this report were arthur w. brouk , sharon o. byrd , richard t. cambosos , michael d. chambless , michael s. laforge , and gladys e. toro . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions .