see appendix i . this analysis of benefit outcomes for army reserve and active duty disability cases could not account for the influence that preexisting conditions and years of service can have on disability decisions . these factors are key in determining whether an injured or ill service member qualify for disability benefits . because we could not test the effect of these factors empirically , we cannot rule out the possibility that one or the other may account for the differences we found . while , according to the army's own statistics , the peb process can take longer for reservists than active duty soldiers , we found the army data used to calculate processing times not of sufficient quality to warrant its use in our analysis . specifically , the dates in army's electronic database often did not correspond with the dates recorded in paper files . see appendix i . nonetheless , the statistics the army provided indicate that disability cases reviewed between fiscal years 2001 and 2005 took consistently longer than those of active duty soldiers . over half ( 54 percent ) of reserve soldiers took longer than 90 days while over one - third ( 35 percent ) of active duty soldiers exceed this threshold . see appendix ii for more detail . there are several possible explanations for the differences in processing times between reservists and active duty members , according to the army . for example , the army officials reported that mebs often must request medical records from private medical practitioners for reservists' cases , which can involve considerable delays . in addition , the personnel documents for reservists are stored in facilities around the u.s. , and therefore they may take longer to obtain than records for centrally located active duty soldiers . due to the lack of data on these issues as well as the problems we encountered with the data provided by the army we were not able to measure the differences or empirically test possible explanations for differences the army reported in the timeliness of disability case processing for army reservists and active duty soldiers . the military disability system's outcomes can greatly impact the future of service members , including reservists , injured in service to their country . given the significance of these decisions as well as the latitude that services have to implement the system , it is important that dod exercise proper oversight to make sure the system meets the needs of service members today and in the future . however , dod is not adequately monitoring the outcomes for active duty and reservist cases in the disability evaluation system . dod and the services do not have complete and reliable data for all aspects of the disability system . further , neither dod nor the services are systematically evaluating consistency and timeliness of decision making in the system . military officials recognize that in many cases , service members' cases are not determined within timeliness goals and have suggested that the goals may not be appropriate in many cases . in addition , it may take longer for reservist cases to go through the system .