as appropriate . mortality review committees discuss the area nurses' reviews and determine if a death should be referred to the state - level mortality review committee . investigative agents can specifically refer a case to the state - level interdisciplinary committee for discussion . review committee documents and maintains its findings and recommendations on a standard form . committee documents its mortality review process . review committee documents its meetings , including the agenda and recommendations . recommendations from the mortality review process are documented in the incident tracking system . aggregated on the basis of the following factors: cause of death , age , location of death , gender , program service type , the individual's level of functioning , and service delivery provider ( s ) . aggregated on the basis of the following factors: cause of death , age , location of death , gender , and program service type . aggregated on the basis of the following factors: cause of death , age , and service delivery provider . aggregated on the basis of the following factors: cause of death , age , location of death , gender , program service type , level of functioning , and county . developmental disabilities agency assesses trends over time in the leading causes of death among individuals with developmental disabilities . developmental disabilities agency assesses trends over time and analyzes aggregated mortality data . developmental disabilities agency and the mortality review committee review aggregated data and assess trends over time in the leading causes of death among individuals with developmental disabilities . developmental disabilities agency and mortality review committee assess trends over time in the leading causes of death for individuals with developmental disabilities . each county has a designated quality assurance person ( s ) responsible for identifying and discussing critical incident trends ( including deaths ) with other county - or state - level quality assurance professionals . membership includes directors of health and clinical services , quality assurance , and investigations for the developmental disabilities agency ; the state medical examiner ; a physician ; a supervising nurse consultant from the department of public health ; two individuals appointed by the protection and advocacy agency ; and a director of nursing from the developmental disabilities agency . membership includes the following professionals from the developmental disabilities agency: physicians , nurses , quality assurance officials , and legal staff . membership also includes representatives from the public health department and investigative unit , pharmacists , and members of the office of protection and advocacy and the stakeholder group disabled persons protection commission . includes a psychiatrist , forensic pathologist , registered nurse , pharmacist , internist , and a quality assurance official from the state developmental disabilities agency . membership includes physicians ; professionals with expertise in the field of developmental disabilities ; state protection and advocacy agency and other advocacy organization representatives ; and state agency officials from the critical incident management , quality assurance , and licensure divisions . state - level interdisciplinary independent mortality review committee in 2002 specifically to review deaths of individuals with developmental disabilities . state - level interdisciplinary mortality review committee in 1999 specifically to review deaths of individuals with developmental disabilities .