( see fig . corrosion was found to be so extensive on some of the trucks that the repair costs were greater than 65 percent of the average cost of a new vehicle . cost impacts appear to be even greater on army helicopters , as evidenced by a 1998 analysis estimating costs of about $4 billion to repair damage attributed to corrosion . corrosion is also a formidable cost driver to the navy . as an illustration , the navy's pacific and atlantic fleets estimate that about 25 percent of their total combined annual maintenance budget is directed to the prevention and correction of corrosion . ( 2 ) to what extent do dod and the military services have an effective approach to prevent and mitigate corrosion ? to respond to these questions , we reviewed numerous studies and discussed military corrosion impact issues with experts in and outside dod . to examine dod and the military services' approach to corrosion prevention and mitigation , we visited field installations and developed several case studies on specific corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts that are summarized in appendix ii and referred to throughout the report . more detailed information about our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . corrosion affects all military assets , including approximately 350,000 ground and tactical vehicles , 15,000 aircraft and helicopters , 1,000 strategic missiles , and 300 ships . maintenance activities — including corrosion control — involve nearly 700,000 military ( active and reserve ) and dod civilian personnel , as well as several thousand commercial firms worldwide . hundreds of thousands of additional mission support assets and thousands of facilities are also affected . corrosion is defined as the unintended destruction or deterioration of a material due to interaction with the environment . it includes such varied forms as rusting ; pitting ; galvanic reaction ; calcium or other mineral build up ; degradation due to ultraviolet light exposure ; and mold , mildew , or other organic decay . it can be either readily visible or microscopic . factors influencing the development and rate of corrosion include the type and design of the material , the presence of electrolytes ( water , minerals , and salts ) , the availability of oxygen , the ambient temperature , and the amount of exposure to the environment . the rate of corrosion increases exponentially when the ambient humidity is over 50 percent . corrosion can also occur in the absence of water , but only at high temperatures , such as in gas turbine engines . the effects of corrosion on dod equipment and infrastructure have become more prominent as the acquisition of new equipment has slowed and more reliance is placed on the service of aging equipment and infrastructure . the aging of military systems poses a unique challenge for maintenance and corrosion control for all services . a number of dod and commercial studies have identified and evaluated technologies and techniques for corrosion prevention and control . the studies indicate that although effective corrosion prevention and control methods and technologies are well known and have been recommended for years , they have not been implemented effectively .