international . international activities are primarily focused on areas outside the united states and are intended to reduce illegal drug availability in the united states or abroad . activities may include source - country programs designed to help international partners manage the consequences of drug production , trafficking , and consumption in their own societies , including programs to train and equip security forces ; efforts to raise awareness of science - based practices and programs to prevent , treat , and provide recovery from substance abuse ; and support for economic development programs to help reduce the production or trafficking of illicit drugs . these efforts may also include assessment and monitoring of international drug production programs and policies ; coordination and promotion of compliance with international treaties , including those directed at the eradication of illegal drugs and the production and transportation of illegal drugs ; involvement of other nations in international law enforcement programs and policies to reduce the supply of drugs ; and all other overseas drug law enforcement efforts to disrupt the flow of illicit drugs into the united states . investigations . investigations activities are designed to develop a prosecutable case against individuals and organizations responsible for the production and distribution of illegal drugs , including identifying seize them ; identifying the leaders of illegal drug and other criminal profits and assets from drug‐related criminal enterprises in order to organizations ; gathering information about drug‐related criminal activity ; ensuring that legitimate controlled substances are handled , manufactured , and distributed in accordance with federal laws and regulations ; and all other drug law investigative efforts to identify , disrupt , and dismantle drug smuggling in the united states . we requested and obtained data on spending for counternarcotics activities from these eight agencies and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , which ocdetf reimburses for international counternarcotics investigations . we also reviewed each agency's annual accounting for its counternarcotics budget . in addition , we interviewed agency officials to understand their counternarcotics budgets as they are reported in the annual ondcp budget and performance summary reports and to determine the extent to which the agencies could identify the funding they had obligated for counternarcotics activities in the western hemisphere . our methodology for identifying counternarcotics spending varied by agency , since some of the agencies — dod , ice , inl , and usaid — track such spending by region , while other agencies — the coast guard , cbp , ocdetf , and dea — do not . security . security is a precondition for the successful expansion of social services and developmental assistance . security must be maintained to allow the expansion of legal economic activities and the delivery of civilian services , including justice , education , and health , to a population unaccustomed to a significant government presence . flexibility . programs must adapt to changing circumstances , including adjusting programs that are not working as expected and adding new initiatives , if necessary . long - term approach . major counternarcotics programs designed to address complex and long - standing challenges require a multiyear investment in terms of financial resources and political commitment . ondcp has also promoted best practices through other efforts .