, division offices ) and headquarters reviews . the department of defense also provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the director of civil works of the u.s. army corps of engineers , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . many waterways need regular maintenance dredging because of ongoing accumulation of sediment . since the late 1970s , the corps has carried out most of its dredging under contract with private companies . specifically , in 1978 , legislation directed the corps to contract with industry to conduct dredging — as industry demonstrated that it could perform the work at reasonable prices and in a timely manner — and to maintain a minimum fleet of federal vessels to diminish risks to navigation by performing urgent or emergency work , among other things . according to corps reports , overall expenditures on dredging - related activities over the last 10 years have increased , though the total amount of material dredged has decreased . specifically , for fiscal year 2004 , the corps reported spending about $903 million on dredging - related activities , removing about 275 million cubic yards of material . by fiscal year 2013 , the corps reported spending about $1 billion for the removal of about 197 million cubic yards of material . these contract records included maintenance dredging ( about 99 percent ) and maintenance and construction work combined ( about 1 percent ) . according to the data , 1,405 of these maintenance contracts were completed during fiscal years 2004 through 2013 , with an average of approximately 140 contracts completed annually . specifically , we interviewed officials from the corps headquarters navigation data center who oversee the dredging database , and we interviewed officials from the 12 selected corps district offices about their offices processes for entering and updating data for their respective maintenance dredging contracts . we concluded that the data were not sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting information on total costs and quantities of maintenance dredging contracts . we also explored using other data to determine corps maintenance dredging contract costs , but we were unable to use other data sources because complete information for all contracts were not available from these sources . specifically , we sought information from the federal procurement data system - next generation , the corps of engineers financial management system , and the corps resident management system ( a system to manage construction contracts ) . with regard to the federal procurement data system - next generation , we obtained data on corps contracts from fiscal years 2004 through 2013 that were coded as “dredging” and attempted to separate out maintenance - related dredging contracts .