postal service . as it typically does for undeliverable mail , irs employed a locater service to attempt to find the taxpayer's new address by using other kinds of information , such as addresses associated with any credit cards . when the locator service found a new address , irs resent correspondence to the affected taxpayer . irs provided several means for taxpayers selected for any of the three tests to contact the agency for assistance . irs did not make changes to the letters and forms for the income misreporting test because they were the same ones used under the general aur program . improvements to key database based on examiner suggestions . examiners in kansas city , the site responsible for the qualifying child and filing status cases , suggested about 30 updates or other improvements to the eicpc system that they said would either reduce errors in the database , help irs better manage the cases and workload , or improve subsequent data analyses . for example , examiners noted they were lacking computer fields to record certain information such as the taxpayer's telephone number , whether the case was worked by the taxpayer advocate's office , or if an amended return had been received . as a result , examiners suggested ways to capture these data , which have been incorporated into the eicpc . irs is continuing to update and make improvements to the eicpc . use of automated telephone voice response expanded . for the fiscal year 2004 qualifying child and filing status tests , irs did not use automated responses to answer routine telephone calls and did not have a mechanism in place to obtain taxpayers' views about telephone services provided . both options were available for the income misreporting test and are available for users of irs's other toll - free telephone numbers . officials recognized that commonly asked questions , such as “where do i mail the required documentation ? ” or “who can sign an affidavit ? ” could be answered via automated responses , and plan to provide this option for the fiscal year 2005 tests , leaving only the more difficult questions to be answered by an examiner . irs also decided to implement a random feedback survey of taxpayers on the quality of service they received for the qualifying child and filing status tests when they called the toll - free number . the survey is a modified version of the one that irs uses for its regular toll - free telephone operations . changes made to the qualifying child test encourage early certification and simulate implementation across the country . there are two major changes to the qualifying child test for 2005: ( 1 ) taxpayers will be encouraged to certify in advance of filing their return that their child met the eitc residency requirement ; and ( 2 ) a portion of the taxpayers will be drawn from a single community — hartford , connecticut , while the rest will be drawn randomly from across the nation . irs officials contend that an early certification could help reduce delays in releasing eitc refunds because examiners would be able to validate cases before the start of the tax filing season when workloads reach their peak .