major commands . therefore , in order to include software sustainment costs for all shipboard systems in the vamosc system , navy officials must manually collect these cost data . this official explained that since the navy collects these costs manually , officials focus their efforts on the most expensive and most populous shipboard systems . according to the official , they intend to address the navy vamosc system's incomplete software sustainment data issue by expanding their manual data collection efforts to include additional navy systems . according to dod policy , cape's executive oversight responsibilities include annually reviewing the services' vamosc systems to address data accessibility , completeness , timeliness , accuracy , and compliance with cape guidance . cape formed a vamosc task force in partnership with the service cost - analysis agencies and the product support division in the office of the assistant secretary of defense for sustainment . the task force is aware of gaps in the military departments' reporting of software sustainment costs within their vamosc systems , particularly within the army and the navy , and it has included data completeness in the scope of its efforts . however , closing data gaps is not one of the specific purposes of the task force ; these purposes include ( 1 ) discussing integration of operating and support cost collection across the department and ( 2 ) clearly defining the technical differences across the military services' vamosc systems . the task force is concerned with multiple cost - reporting issues . we recognize that the task force can enable dod to improve the completeness of its software sustainment cost reporting . further , systematic and institutionalized cost data collection by each military department is important to support credible cost estimates of current and future programs . however , without cape taking steps to prioritize obtaining complete information on operating and support costs for software sustainment , it cannot provide reliable life - cycle cost estimates to dod acquisition or maintenance officials — or congress — to assist with current and future years funding decisions . dod continuously makes decisions about securing data rights , both early and throughout the life - cycle of a weapon system ( see sidebar ) . dod may obtain data rights , including access to technical data and computer software related to weapon systems , for a variety of reasons . for example , as we have previously reported , data rights may be obtained to help control costs and maintain flexibility in future acquisition and sustainment of systems and subsystems , including maintenance and upgrade of weapon system software . dod officials we spoke with emphasized that there is no one - size - fits - all approach . further , obtaining data rights for software sustainment constitutes only one of many competing priorities that must be considered along with cost , schedule , and performance in the acquisition of weapon systems . technical data or computer software , to be delivered under a contract . dod officials told us that this was due to cost and proprietary reasons — that is , the contractor retains ownership of the intellectual property , such as the source code .