this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for information about this statement , please contact mccoy williams , director , financial management and assurance , at ( 202 ) 512-6906 , or alana stanfield , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-3197 . you may also reach them by e - mail at williamsm1@gao.gov or stanfielda@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include lisa crye and jeff isaacs . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . an area of particular concern within usda continues to be the forest service . i will now elaborate on usda's progress in correcting these problems and what challenges still remain . moreover , usda had not utilized administrative wage garnishment to collect delinquent nontax debts . usda has taken actions over the last several years to improve its financial management and to address the weaknesses identified by its oig and us . usda officials made a commitment in december 2001 to substantially improve the department's implementation of dcia by december 2002 . in november 2002 , we testified that usda had made progress in addressing previously identified problems . for example , rhs began referring all reported eligible debt to treasury . further , fsa had developed an action plan to improve its process and controls for identifying and referring eligible debts to treasury . for example , in fiscal year 2000 , food and nutrition service was , for the first time , able to estimate its gross accounts receivable and related estimate of uncollectible amounts resulting from over - issued benefits in its food stamp program . further , for the first time since credit reform reporting requirements were implemented in 1994 , usda's lending agencies were able to estimate and reestimate loan subsidy costs for the department's net credit program receivables , which totaled about $74 billion as of september 30 , 2001 . because of usda's achievement in this area , along with that of other key lending agencies , this item was no longer a factor contributing to our disclaimer of opinion on the financial statements of the u.s. government . the oig also noted that usda made significant progress during fiscal year 2002 in reconciling its fund balance accounts with treasury's accounts , thus enabling the oig to validate this line item on usda's fiscal year 2002 financial statements . however , the oig continued to report this area as a material internal control weakness in fiscal year 2002 due to continuing deficiencies in usda's reconciliation processes . for example , rhs still had to complete regulations to refer losses related to its guaranteed single family housing loans to treasury and an automated process for such referrals , and fsa needed to complete actions needed to ensure that all of its eligible debt is promptly referred to treasury .