stigma . some working families may be especially sensitive to the stigma associated with some social safety net programs , because their earnings did not make them as self - sufficient as they hoped . to avoid this stigma , according to several officials we interviewed , eligible working families may choose not to participate in a program if their income is sufficient for them to survive without assistance . for example , a 2007 study of 115 eitc recipients in the boston area found that respondents who had received tanf benefits desired to leave the program as soon as possible . in contrast , according to a caseworker in san francisco , while unemployed families face the same stigma , they cannot afford to refuse any benefits for which they qualify . ( 2 ) to what extent are families with a low - wage worker in poverty ? and ( 3 ) to what extent do families with a low - wage worker participate in selected social safety net programs and what factors affect their participation ? to answer these questions , we analyzed data from 1995 through 2016 included in the current population survey ( cps ) — a national survey designed and administered jointly by census and the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) that serves as a key source of official government statistics on employment and unemployment in the united states . after discussions with census and bls officials , we selected the cps and a supplemental cps survey — the annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) — as the data sources best suited to answer our research questions because together they included hourly wage data , large sample sizes , data over time , and data on eligibility for and participation in social safety net programs . we selected these years to provide a historical view of the workforce at certain points in time extending across 2 decades . we assessed the reliability of the cps and asec data by reviewing data documentation and interviewing officials at bls and census who use and maintain the dataset . we determined that the data from these sources were reliable for the purposes of our report . we defined a “low wage” worker to be an individual who earned $16 per hour or less , measured in constant 2016 dollars . we divided low - wage workers into three mutually exclusive categories , based on their estimated hourly wages: federal minimum wage or below ; above federal minimum wage to $12.00 ; and $12.01 to $16.00 . for the purposes of our analysis , we defined a “worker” as a wage or salary earner ages 25 to 64 in the civilian labor force with positive weekly earnings . for the first objective , we used cps and asec data to describe selected characteristics of low - wage workers , including the industries in which they worked , their occupations , the number of jobs that they held , and the number of hours that they worked . to determine if the characteristics of low - wage workers changed over time , we examined these variables using every fifth year of data from 1995 to 2015 ( i.e.