iii ) . some federal agencies are involved in new demonstration projects that plan to address coordination across systems at the state and local level . for example , an official from hhs stated that the agency has coordinated with education and labor to develop grants under the new projects of national significance partnerships in employment systems change . this initiative will provide resources for state agencies and service providers to collaborate with other services systems to develop statewide model demonstration projects that expand competitive employment for youth with developmental disabilities . in another example , officials at all four agencies said they have been involved in early discussions regarding implementation of the new promoting readiness of minors in supplemental security income ( promise ) initiative , which will fund pilot projects in states to promote positive changes in the outcomes of youth ssi recipients and their families . education officials said they are in the process of holding meetings to gather input on potential projects from federal partners and stakeholders , including state agency officials , service providers , researchers , policy experts , and families . as part of the initiative , education and ssa officials said they will work collaboratively to identify legislative barriers to competitive employment and ways to improve coordination at the state level . in addition to collaborative efforts across agencies , education officials said that six grants focusing on transition and funded by their rehabilitation services administration are in their fifth and final year of operation . according to education officials , these grants demonstrate the use of promising practices of collaborative transition planning and service delivery to improve the postsecondary education and employment outcomes of youth with disabilities . despite these efforts , federal agency officials identified several barriers that limit their ability to coordinate . we have reported that federal agencies face a range of coordination barriers , one of which stems from goals that are not mutually reinforcing or are potentially conflicting , making it difficult to reach a consensus on strategies and priorities . found interagency coordination is enhanced by having a clear and compelling rationale for staff to work across agency lines and articulate the common federal outcomes they are seeking . indeed , officials identified a lack of compatible outcome goals for transitioning students with disabilities as one of the key barriers that hinder their coordination efforts . mutually reinforcing goals or strategies are designed to help align agency activities , core processes , and resources to achieve common outcomes . countered by requirements for students to prove that their disabilities limit their ability to work in order to receive ssi benefits . similarly , officials told us that , in early interagency discussions regarding the promise initiative , special education officials focused on students' access to postsecondary education , while vr and ssa officials were more concerned about students' earnings . officials from all four agencies said that aligning outcome goals for transition - age students with disabilities would enhance interagency coordination and help agencies approach transition in a more integrated way .