gao - 01-244 . washington , d.c.: january 2001 . contractor personnel did not report the discrepancies . according to most contractor personnel , this situation occurred primarily because the shipping activity did not notify them of impending shipments , thus they did not expect the shipment and could not monitor its status . others indicated that they simply never report any discrepancies . contractor personnel reported the discrepancies , but they did not route the discrepancy reports to the appropriate shipping activity personnel who could investigate and resolve the discrepancies . although we found that contractor personnel did not properly route shipping discrepancies to the appropriate shipping activity , they were under the impression that they had . contractor personnel reported the discrepancies , but did not follow up when no response was received from the shipping activity . they did not follow up because they planned to reorder the material that they had not received . contractor personnel reported the discrepancies , but when they later determined that the materials had been received , they did not cancel the discrepancy reports . this failure to comply with air force procedures undermines the air force's ability to determine the cause of discrepancies , effect corrective action , and prevent recurrence . this situation can also result in loss of control over material , lost recovery rights , and material remaining in a questionable status for long periods of time . to ensure proper reporting and accounting of material receipts , dod policy requires that inventory control points follow up with the contractor within 45 days from the date of shipment if they have not been notified that a shipment has arrived . the rationale behind this requirement is that until receipt is confirmed , the exact status of the shipment is uncertain and therefore vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse . at present , air force procedures do not ensure adequate follow - up on unconfirmed receipts . according to air force officials , inventory control points send electronic inquiries to contractors to follow up on all shipments . however , the air force has not yet established a system by which ( 1 ) the inventory control points can reconcile material shipped to contractors with material received by contractors to determine unconfirmed receipts and ( 2 ) contractors can respond to the follow - up inquiries to confirm receipts or discrepancies . consequently , inventory control points assume that all material shipped to contractors is received by them , and they close the record on the shipments without contractor confirmation of material receipt . the inventory control point does not become aware that material has not been received unless the contractor inquires about the shipment . the result is a situation in which unconfirmed receipts are officially considered delivered , an assumption that , in turn , places this material at risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and theft . the following example illustrates how the lack of adequate follow - up on unconfirmed receipts places this material at risk .