liquidity . liquidity represents the ability to fund assets and meet obligations as they become due , and liquidity risk is the risk of not being able to obtain funds at a reasonable price within a reasonable time period to meet obligations as they become due . we use two different variables to measure liquidity . the first variable is liquid assets as a percentage of volatile liabilities . this variable is similar in spirit to the liquidity coverage ratio introduced by the basel committee on banking supervision and measures a bank holding company's capacity to meet its liquidity needs under a significantly severe liquidity stress scenario . order no . 12,866 , 58 fed . reg . for significant rules , the order further requires agencies to prepare a detailed regulatory ( or economic ) analysis of both the benefits and costs . more recently , e.o . 13,563 supplemented e.o . 12,866 , in part by incorporating its principles , structures , and definitions . exec . order no . 13,563 , 76 fed . reg . 12,866 contains 12 principles of regulation that direct agencies to perform specific analyses to identify the problem to be addressed , assess its significance , assess both the benefits and costs of the intended regulation , design the regulation in the most cost - effective manner to achieve the regulatory objective , and base decisions on the best reasonably obtained information available . regulatory actions should be measured and reported . of the federal agencies included in our review , only fsoc and treasury are subject to e.o . as independent regulatory agencies , the federal financial regulators — cfpb , cftc , fdic , the federal reserve , occ , ncua , and sec — are not subject to e.o . 12,866 and omb's circular a - 4 . although not subject to e.o . 12,866 and omb circular a - 4 , most of the federal financial regulators told us that they try to follow circular a - 4 in spirit . in our 2011 report , we found that the policies and procedures of these regulators did not fully reflect omb guidance and recommended that they incorporate the guidance more fully in their rulemaking guidance . since then , fdic , occ , and sec revised their guidance as we recommended , but the other agencies have not . in the federal register releases of the 59 dodd - frank rules that we identified and reviewed , the issuing federal agencies stated that they conducted the regulatory analyses required by various federal statutes.as independent regulatory agencies , the federal financial regulators — cfpb , cftc , fdic , the federal reserve , occ , ncua , and sec — are not subject to executive orders that require comprehensive benefit - cost analysis in accordance with guidance issued by omb . under cra , omb is responsible for determining which rules are major but relies on agency analyses to help make the determination . however , our analysis showed that omb and the agencies may not have applied the cra criteria consistently in determining which rules are major rules .