the project is in a key location . virtually all barge traffic moving between the ohio river and its tributaries and the mississippi river system must pass through this stretch of river . according to corps documents , more tonnage passes through olmsted annually than any other place in the nation's inland navigation system . the water resources development act ( wrda ) of 1988 authorized the olmsted project at a cost of $775 million ( in october 1987 price levels ) , with the costs of construction shared equally between funds appropriated to the corps and from the inland waterways trust fund . at the time , the corps estimated construction would take 7 years . the study estimated that continuing to use in - the - wet construction would cost more , but would allow the project to be completed sooner . the total cost of benefits foregone from project delays that have occurred at olmsted is uncertain , primarily because the estimates that the corps developed for the project are no longer relevant or are of limited use for estimating the benefits that might have been generated had the project become operational as planned in 2006 . the extent to which the project incurs another type of benefit foregone — the additional interest during construction incurred because of the longer construction period — depends on economic factors , such as the project discount rate . also in 2012 , the corps used the pacr analysis to examine the benefits and costs associated with changing the construction method for the dam from the in - the - wet method to the more traditional in - the - dry method . reports by the corps and others identified the in - the - wet construction method , the contract type , and other factors as primary contributors to cost increases and schedule delays in the olmsted project , most of which were associated with constructing the dam . the pacr and the 2012 consultant report identified the selection of the in - the - wet method to construct the dam as contributing to cost increases and schedule days . in addition , the corps' decision to use a cost - reimbursement contract contributed to increased management costs , according to the pacr and the 2008 consultant report . the reports by the corps and others also identified other key factors that contributed to cost increases and schedule delays , including limited funding , changes in market conditions , and design changes . the corps' 1997 decision to construct the olmsted dam using the in - the - wet method was based on projections that this method would cost less and would allow the project to be completed more rapidly than the traditional in - the - dry method . the corps had originally planned to construct the olmsted project using an in - the - dry method using four cofferdams . however , the olmsted project was the subject of many studies and reviews seeking to improve on the authorized plan by incorporating innovative design and construction methods , according to the pacr .