( see fig . according to fda officials , the pediatric studies requested under bpca would generally also fulfill the prea requirement ; however , even if the sponsor does not complete the studies outlined in the bpca written request , it is still required to complete any studies required under prea . fda officials said that pediatric studies conducted under bpca are generally more extensive than those required under prea . for example , the written request could include studies for indications in addition to those described by the sponsor in its application , such as those that are relevant to children . under bpca , sponsors receive pediatric exclusivity as an incentive to conduct studies of drug and biological products for use in children . the bpca process formally begins when fda determines that information related to the use of the product in a pediatric population may produce health benefits and issues a written request for pediatric studies to the sponsor of a product . written requests may be issued for new , not previously marketed , drug or biological products or to products that are already on the market but still on - patent . fda may issue a written request on its own initiative or after it has received and agreed to a ppsr from a sponsor to conduct a study under bpca . the perc reviews all written requests and provides recommendations prior to their issuance to sponsors . according to fda officials , in the written request , fda may ask for more than one study of a single drug or biological product , such as studies for multiple indications or separate studies for different age groups , such as infants , children , and adolescents . bpca requires that fda take into account adequate representation of children of ethnic and racial minorities when developing written requests . ( see app . ii for information on fda's efforts to ensure the inclusion of racial and ethnic minorities in pediatric studies. ) the sponsor must respond to fda within 180 days of receiving the written request indicating whether the sponsor agrees to the request and , if so , when the pediatric study will be initiated . if the sponsor does not agree to the request , the sponsor must state the reasons for declining the request . when the pediatric studies are complete , the sponsor submits the results to fda in an application , which must include any suggested labeling changes resulting from the studies' findings . fda recommends that the application be submitted 15 months prior to the end of the sponsor's market exclusivity for the product in order to be considered for pediatric exclusivity . once the sponsor submits its application , fda is to review the sponsor's application in order to ( 1 ) determine whether or not to approve the application , ( 2 ) negotiate and reach an agreement with the sponsor on pediatric labeling changes , and ( 3 ) grant or deny pediatric exclusivity . fda is to grant pediatric exclusivity if the study meets the conditions outlined in the written request , regardless of the study's findings .