the nie , the terrorist threat to the u.s . most of the population depends on subsistence agriculture . the fata's per capita income is $250 per year , which is half of the national per capita income ; about 60 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line . per capita public development expenditure is reportedly one - third of the national average . social development indicators are also poor . the overall literacy rate is 17 percent , compared with 56 percent nationally , with male literacy at 29 percent and female literacy at 3 percent . the fata has just 41 hospitals for its population of 3.1 million , and a doctor to population ratio of 1 to 6,762 . the fata is governed by an administrative system and a judicial system different from the rest of pakistan — the frontier crimes regulations ( fcr ) of 1901 , codified under british rule . because pakistan retained the colonial administrative and legal structures of the british , as codified in the fcr , the fata populations are legally separate from and unequal to other pakistani citizens . examples of these differences under the fcr follow: fata residents do not have access to national political parties , and political parties are forbidden from extending their activities into the agencies of fata . the fata is under the direct executive authority of the president of pakistan . laws framed by the national assembly of pakistan do not apply in the fata unless so ordered by the president , who is empowered to issue regulations for the tribal areas . fata residents do not have the right to legal representation , to present material evidence , or to cross - examine witnesses in pakistan's judicial system . those convicted are denied the right of appeal in pakistan's courts . the president's representatives to the fata , who are called political agents , can punish an entire tribe for crimes committed on the tribe's territory by issuing fines , making arrests , implementing property seizures , and establishing blockades . in response to the draft , defense noted that the fcr is a culturally acceptable recognition of the tribal structure of the fata , where the population is ethnically different from the majority of pakistan's citizens , and precludes forced assimilation . further , defense noted that removing the fcr without a replacement mechanism that is accepted by the indigenous population has the potential to create a vacuum that could result in negative consequences . a recent announcement by pakistani prime minister yousaf raza gillani regarding the repeal of the fcr drew mixed reactions from tribesmen and political leaders , some of whom called for amendments to the fcr , rather than its repeal . the united states has not met its national security goals to destroy the terrorist threat and close the safe haven in the fata , despite more than $10.5 billion in u.s. support to pakistan since 2002 .