wah . mich. vt. mont . minn. ore. wi . n.y. mass . wyo . ■ r.i. penn . hofferth , sandra , and nancy collins . “child care and employment turnover.” population research and policy review , vol . kimmel , jean . “child care costs as a barrier to employment for single and married mothers.” the review of economics and statistics , vol . kimmel , jean , and lisa m. powell . “nonstandard work and child care choices of married mothers.” eastern economic journal , vol . lemke , robert j. , robert witt , and ann dryden witte . “the transition from welfare to work.” eastern economic journal , vol . meyers , marcia k. , theresa heintze , and douglas a. wolf . “child care subsidies and the employment of welfare recipients.” demography , vol . michalopoulos , charles , and philip k. robins . “employment and child - care choices of single - parent families in canada and the united states.” journal of population economics , vol . press , julie e. , jay fagan , and lynda laughlin . “taking pressure off families: child - care subsidies lessen mothers' work - hour problems.” journal of marriage and family , vol . queralt , magaly , ann dryden witte , and harriet griesinger . “changing policies , changing impacts: employment and earnings of child - care subsidy recipients in the era of welfare reform.” the social service review , vol . ribar , david c. “a structural model of child care and the labor supply of married women.” journal of labor economics , vol . robins , philip k. “welfare reform and child care: evidence from 10 experimental welfare - to - work programs.” evaluation review , vol . tekin , erdal . “child care subsidy receipt , employment , and child care choices of single mothers.” economics letters , vol . “single mothers working at night: standard work and child care subsidies.” economic inquiry , vol . “childcare subsidies , wages , and employment of single mothers.” the journal of human resources , vol . betty ward - zukerman , assistant director , and julianne hartman cutts , analyst - in - charge , managed this assignment . heddi nieuwsma and meghan squires made significant contributions to all aspects of this report . kate van gelder and james bennett provided writing and graphics assistance . in addition , harold j. brumm , jr. made key contributions ; and walter k. vance , jeff m. tessin , and monique b. williams provided design and methodological assistance . ashley l. mccall assisted with our literature search , and james rebbe provided legal assistance . temporary assistance for needy families: implications of changes in participation rates . gao - 10-495t . washington , d.c.: march 11 , 2010 . temporary assistance for needy families: fewer eligible families have received cash assistance since the 1990s , and the recession's impact on caseloads varies by state . gao - 10-164 . washington , d.c.: february 23 , 2010 . poverty in america: consequences for individuals and the economy . gao - 07-343t . washington , d.c.: january 24 , 2007 . welfare reform: better information needed to understand trends in states' uses of the tanf block grant .