according to cfpb staff , this information should not have been in that file . supervision of nondepository covered persons . section 1024 provides cfpb with the authority to supervise entities ( other than depository institutions or insured credit unions ) that provide certain consumer financial products or services . this authority also extends to service providers.these entities comply with federal consumer financial laws and obtaining information about their activities and compliance systems or procedures , this section charges cfpb with requiring reports and conducting examinations of the nondepository persons the section covers for purposes of detecting and assessing associated risks to consumers and markets for consumer financial products and in addition to assessing the extent to which services.cfpb's ability to collect personally identifiable financial information . section 1024 does not contain any explicit restrictions on supervision of large institutions and affiliates . section 1025 of the dodd - frank act provides cfpb with supervisory authority over insured depository institutions and credit unions with assets of more than $10 billion and their affiliates , including the authority to collect information from them for purposes of detecting and assessing associated risks to consumers and to markets for consumer financial products and services . cfpb also has some supervisory authority under section 1025 over service providers of insured depository institutions and credit unions with over $10 billion in assets , as well as service providers to a substantial number of insured depository institutions or credit unions with $10 billion or less in assets . section 1025 does not contain any explicit restrictions on cfpb's ability to collect personally identifiable financial information . the dodd - frank act also contains additional restrictions on cfpb's ability to collect consumer financial data and includes requirements on how such data must be protected once they are collected . the act requires cfpb to take steps to ensure that certain information , including personal information , is not disclosed to the public when such information is protected by law . in addition , cfpb must not obtain personally identifiable financial information about consumers from the financial records of covered persons or service providers , unless consumers provide written permission , or other legal provisions specifically permit or require such collections . cfpb interacts with other financial regulators that also collect consumer financial data and have responsibility for overseeing federal consumer financial laws .