portfolio review . agencies are to annually review their it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness , and identify potential waste and duplication . federal data center consolidation initiative . agencies are required to provide omb with a data center inventory , a strategy for consolidating and optimizing the data centers ( to include planned cost savings ) , and quarterly updates on progress made . expansion of training and use of it acquisition cadres . agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to address supporting the timely and effective acquisition of it . in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres . maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative . omb is to issue regulations requiring that federal agencies compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative . government - wide software purchasing program . the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software . most of these fitara sections relate to our high - risk topic on the government - wide management of it acquisitions and operations . with regard to this topic , for example , we focus on the need for cio authority enhancements , portfolio reviews , and federal data center consolidation . in june 2015 , omb released guidance that describes how agencies are to implement fitara . among other things , this guidance outlined topic areas related to agency cios' roles and responsibilities — referred to as omb's common baseline sections . enhanced transparency and improved risk management . two of the selected components — u.s . the guidance also directed the agencies to develop action plans describing the changes they needed to make in order to conform to the baseline sections . the guidance further directed agencies to conduct an annual review and to update the self - assessment , with the first update to be completed by the end of april 2016 . in response to the guidance , in november 2015 , dhs submitted to omb a self - assessment of its conformance with the common baseline . as a result of the assessment , dhs identified 130 action plans that it intended to implement to ensure that the department would meet all baseline responsibilities . according to the assessment , the department originally planned to implement all of the action plans by the end of may 2016 . however , the department updated its assessment in april 2016 and revised the number of action plans to 131 . it also deferred the implementation of certain action plans and revised the final time frame by which it expected to implement all of the plans to the second quarter of fiscal year 2018 . as of april 2016 , the department reported to omb that it had fully implemented 109 of its 131 action plans . appendix i lists the department's 131 action plans and the respective omb common baseline sections with which they are associated .