( see app . ii for more detail on the studies undertaken by the fbi and gsa. ) these activities are consistent with applicable gao leading practices in capital decision making . consistent with our first two leading practices in capital decision making — to conduct a comprehensive assessment of needs to meet an agency's mission goals and objectives and to identify the current capabilities and condition of existing assets ( i.e. , facilities ) to meet those needs — the fbi and gsa conducted facility condition and security assessments of the hoover building in 2001 and 2002 and identified recommendations in both areas . for example , the poor condition of the hoover building was identified as a gap in the fbi's need for a functional headquarters . in addition , as noted , the fbi's 2005 asset management plan identified the need for a new headquarters facility to safeguard personnel and information within efficient and cost - effective workspace , and the fbi has worked with gsa to identify its strategic facility and space requirements . also in 2005 , the fbi director and a deputy fbi director — with input from assistant directors — decided which fbi programs should be colocated in a headquarters facility to meet the agency's strategic and mission requirements . according to their analysis , the fbi director ; the national security branch , including its counterterrorism and intelligence divisions ; the criminal , cyber , response , and services branch ; and other fbi headquarters functions , such as the information technologies branch , would need to be colocated . throughout the decision - making process , fbi senior officials have consulted with senior gsa regional and national officials to discuss the fbi's requirements and the range of alternatives to meet the fbi's needs . in 2007 , gsa and the fbi found that the need to colocate certain fbi programs — to better enable collaboration and facilitate information sharing — could not be met in the hoover building and the annexes and that the fbi's operations in the hoover building and 21 of its annexes in the national capital region should be consolidated . this decision to consolidate is also consistent with a 2010 presidential memorandum directing federal agencies to eliminate lease arrangements that are not cost - effective , pursue consolidation opportunities , and identify reductions when new space is acquired , as the fbi pointed out in its 2010 consolidation report . in the studies they conducted from 2005 through 2009 , the fbi and gsa identified security requirements for a consolidated fbi headquarters facility . our previously issued law enforcement sensitive report describes these security requirements . the 2005 through 2009 planning studies also identified space requirements for an fbi headquarters facility . for example , a formal space programming study performed by the fbi's architectural consultant established space requirements for approximately 11,600 personnel and for support headquarters spaces , such as conference rooms and scif space . this personnel figure was based on current staffing levels for the functions that the fbi had determined should be colocated in a headquarters facility , adjusted to allow for limited future growth .