telematics . telematics combines telecommunications and information processing to send , receive , and store information related to specific items such as automobiles or water heaters . telematics often uses sensors to relay information such as global positioning system location , speed , and water levels . for example , sensors in an automobile can provide data on a driver's behavior ( such as speed , hard braking , and turning radius ) . the insurer may use that information to determine the driver's risk profile and help determine the premium rate for that driver . these technologies can be used together . for example , a telematics device can be used to provide data to a mobile app , which can then send the information to an ai algorithm to determine whether a claim should be paid . see figure 1 for examples of the types of technologies that insurers may use to automate the claims process . on receipt of the photographs , insurers can use ai algorithms to verify the damage shown — decisions that historically required human intelligence to perform — and automatically start the claims process for the consumer . fraud . insurers are able to detect fraud , or decide which claims need to be investigated further by employees , with information verified using big data , the internet of things , and telematics . for instance , an insurer may verify information provided in a claim against information obtained from a smart device to determine if the information provided by the policyholder was accurate . an insurer also might identify a false burglary claim by verifying whether an alarm was set during the time frame identified in the claim and reviewing video from home security cameras . connecting to legacy computer systems . some industry stakeholders and association representatives we interviewed stated that established insurers face significant challenges using new technologies because they first have to replace legacy computer systems or customize their systems to interface with new technologies properly . according to industry stakeholders , legacy computer systems were , in some ways , built around satisfying regulatory requirements rather than enhancing the consumer experience or providing more desirable products . they noted it can be costly and difficult to replace such systems or to modify them to interface with more consumer - centered systems , such as those being developed by insurtech companies . changing roles for insurers and agents . according to some insurance industry stakeholders , emerging uses of key technologies and innovative business models could lead to changes in insurers' roles and products . for example , with the advent of self - driving vehicles , the liability for accidents could shift from the driver to the vehicle maker or the company that produced the self - driving system . in such cases , they said insurance coverage primarily would be sold to those entities rather than the consumer , and the demand for and amount of consumer automobile coverage sold could decrease substantially . this could cause a shift in demand for products from consumers to commercial lines , resulting in the potential loss of business for some agents and insurers .