we also interviewed va officials . va did not initially comment on the recommendations in our 2009 report , but said it would provide an action plan . even if only a portion of va health care funding is to be provided in advance appropriations , congress will need to determine what that share should be and how it should be allocated across va's medical accounts . while providing funds for 2 years in a single appropriations act provides certainty about some funds , the longer projection period increases the uncertainty of the data and projections used . under the current annual appropriations cycle , agencies begin budget formulation at least 18 months before the relevant fiscal year begins . if va is expected to submit its budget proposal for health care for both years at once , the lead time for the second year would be 30 months . this additional lead time increases the uncertainty of the estimates and could worsen the challenges va faces when formulating its health care budget . given the challenges va faces in formulating its health care budget and the changing nature of health care , proposals to change the availability of the appropriations it receives deserve careful scrutiny . providing advance appropriations will not mitigate or solve the problems noted above regarding data , calculations , or assumptions in developing va's health care budget . nor will it address any link between cost growth and program design . congressional oversight will continue to be critical . no one would suggest that the current budget and appropriations process is perfect . however , it is important to recognize that no process will make the difficult choices and tradeoffs congress faces easy . if va is to receive advance appropriations for health care , the amount of discretionary spending available for congress to allocate to other federal activities in that year will be reduced . in addition , providing advance appropriations for va health care will not resolve the problems we have identified in va's budget formulation . mr. chairman , this concludes our prepared remarks . we would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for more information regarding this testimony , please contact randall b.williamson at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov or susan j. irving at ( 202 ) 512-8288 or irvings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . in addition to the contributors named above , carol henn and james c. musselwhite , assistant directors ; katherine l. amoroso , helen desaulniers , felicia m. lopez , julie matta , lisa motley , sheila rajabiun , steve robblee , and timothy walker made key contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . these questions become critical if congress decides to provide all or most of va health care's funding in advance .