gao - 09-955 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2009 . department of state: additional steps needed to address continuing staffing and experience gaps at hardship posts . gao - 09-874 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2009 . see our reports for a complete scope and methodology . in brief , mr. chairman , we found that , despite a number of steps taken over a number of years , the state department continues to face persistent staffing and experience gaps at hardship posts , as well as notable shortfalls in foreign language capabilities . a common element of these problems has been a longstanding staffing and experience deficit , which has both contributed to the gaps at hardship posts and fueled the language shortfall by limiting the number of staff available for language training . state has undertaken several initiatives to address these shortages , including multiple staffing increases intended to fill the gaps . however , the department has not undertaken these initiatives in a comprehensive and strategic manner . as a result , it is unclear when the staffing and skill gaps that put diplomatic readiness at risk will close . despite some progress in addressing staffing shortfalls since 2006 , state's diplomatic readiness remains at risk for two reasons: persistent staffing vacancies and experience gaps at key hardship posts that are often on the forefront of u.s. policy interests . first , as of september 2008 , state had a 17 percent average vacancy rate at the posts of greatest hardship ( which are posts where staff receive the highest possible hardship pay ) . posts in this category include such places as peshawar , pakistan , and shenyang , china . this 17 percent vacancy rate was nearly double the average vacancy rate of 9 percent at posts with no hardship differentials . second , many key hardship posts face experience gaps due to a higher rate of staff filling positions above their own grades ( see table 1 ) . as of september 2008 , about 34 percent of mid - level generalist positions at posts of greatest hardship were filled by officers in such above - grade assignments — 15 percentage points higher than the rate for comparable positions at posts with no or low differentials . at posts we visited during our review , we observed numerous officers working in positions above their rank . for example , in abuja , nigeria , more than 4 in every 10 positions were staffed by officers in assignments above grade , including several employees working in positions two grades above their own . further , to fill positions in iraq and afghanistan , state has frequently assigned officers to positions above their grade . as of september 2008 , over 40 percent of officers in iraq and afghanistan were serving in above - grade assignments . several factors contribute to gaps at hardship posts . first , state continues to have fewer officers than positions , a shortage compounded by the personnel demands of iraq and afghanistan , which have resulted in staff cutting their tours short to serve in these countries . as of april 2009 , state had about 1,650 vacant foreign service positions in total .