gao - 04-657 . washington , d.c.: june 1 , 2004 . veterans' employment and training service: flexibility and accountability needed to improve service to veterans . gao - 01-928 . washington , d.c.: september 12 , 2001 . vets has implemented employment measures for dvop and lver staff . however , vets estimated that it will be at least until 2007 before it has the trend data needed to establish the minimum standard that all states must meet for the rate at which veterans enter employment . using goals negotiated with the states in the interim , vets reported that dvop and lver programs , as a whole , met labor's goal of achieving a 58-percent employment rate for all veteran job seekers during program year 2003 , although the programs fell somewhat short in reaching a 60-percent employment goal for disabled veterans . however , assessing how well dvop and lver programs are serving veterans may continue to be difficult due to vets' ongoing concerns about the reliability of service - related data . vets has implemented changes to its system for monitoring state compliance with the dvop and lver programs , and work continues to determine how best to use the monitoring information to improve program performance . vets staff completed their first round of reviewing state plans and self - assessments of performance in program year 2004 . in addition , vets staff performed their first round of on - site reviews . nvti also conducts case management training aimed at dvop staff . at the end of its first training year in october 2004 following passage of jva , nvti reported training 282 dvops and estimated that an additional 144 would be trained each year in the future . similarly , nvti conducts employer outreach training focused on lvers . because this class is new , nvti estimates that it will train 264 lvers by october 2005 , and projects that an additional 240 lvers would be trained each year . one of the key changes in the new law gives states the flexibility to establish part - time dvop and lver positions , though this was already permitted to some extent for lvers . according to their fiscal year 2005 state plans , 23 states planned to use the new flexibility under jva to employ both full - and part - time dvops , while 34 states planned to use the long - standing authority to employ both full - and part - time lvers . as shown in table 1 , part - time dvop positions would comprise about 18 percent of the total dvop staff and about 44 percent of the total lver staff . some states plan to use part - time dvops and lvers extensively . for example , two states , maine and washington , planned to use part - time lvers exclusively . in addition , south dakota plans on having 87 percent of its dvops be part - time , and vermont plans to have 91 percent of lvers be part - time . by contrast , in new jersey , only 5 percent of dvops are to be part - time and , in indiana , 6 percent of lvers are to be part - time .