ii . according to ahrq officials , as of january 2018 results from these evaluations were not yet available . between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , ahrq obligated a total of $94 million for awards supporting training in the methods used to conduct cer . ahrq plans to obligate an additional $14 million for training on conducting cer by fiscal year 2020 . ahrq has funded eight categories of awards for individual researchers or research institutions . engagement awards fund projects to improve the methodology for carrying out research by involving patients , caregivers , clinicians , and other healthcare stakeholders into the research process . workforce training awards provide accredited continuing education opportunities , in coordination with the agency for healthcare research and quality , for researchers and clinicians . information about individual engagement awards and workforce awards can be found at: https: / / www.pcori.org / research - results ? f%5b0%5d=field_project_type%3a299#search - results and https: / / www.pcori.org / research - results / 2017 / k12-institutional - mentored - career - development - program . dissemination and implementation awards are intended to help researchers and other stakeholders to publicize findings , and support the utilization of findings for patients and providers . integrates pcor into clinical practice using various methods shown to improve the uptake of scientific evidence in clinical decision making . grantees were asked to consider both educational theory and the relevance of “new media” as they designed their programs . searches for emerging interventions , prioritizes those most likely to have a large impact in the near future , and disseminates the information to the public . according to ahrq , the horizon scanning system screened more than 22,000 potential intervention leads and tracked over 2,300 intervention topics . provides targeted audiences — such as providers and payers — with an accessible tool for obtaining objective , detailed information on evidence - based clinical practice guidelines to further their dissemination , implementation , and use . promotes collaboration , reduces redundancy , and improves transparency in patient registries . description created informational tools to support the dissemination and implementation of pcor findings , including best practices and new knowledge about the use of electronic health record data for research and quality improvement . promotes the timely incorporation of pcor findings into clinical practice — which encompasses a variety of tools to enhance clinical decision - making . collaborated with 176 national organizations to disseminate materials for the effective health care program . multi - media campaign to educate health care consumers about the value of reviewing medical evidence when weighing treatment options . educating the educators conducted and disseminated research to develop a process for shared decision making that includes exploring and comparing the benefits , harms , and risks of each option through meaningful dialogue about what matters most to the patient . collects patient - generated health data , integrates patient - generated health data with pcor evidence , and disseminates pcor findings using mobile health technology . identifies ways to reduce health care differences across diverse populations with a particular focus on minority populations in under - resourced healthcare settings . established five regional offices , responsible for developing and cultivating dissemination partnerships within each region .