cayfin can and does make requests to fincen as well . fincen and cayfin routinely share suspicious activity information . in fiscal year 2007 cayfin made 25 suspicious activity information requests to fincen to follow up on potential new as well as existing cayman islands - generated suspicious activity reports ( sars ) , while fincen made 6 requests to cayfin . according to cayfin , financial institutions primarily filed suspicious activity reports on u.s. persons for suspicion of fraud related offenses . other offenses leading to the filing of suspicious activity reports included drug trafficking , money laundering , and securities fraud , which mostly consisted of insider trading . in addition to the formal information sharing codified into law between the u.s. government and cayman islands government and financial institutions represented by tiea and mlat requests and sars , cayman islands officials reported sharing with and receiving information from federal agencies , state regulators , and financial institutions . to address the challenges posed by offshore illegal activity , irs has targeted abusive transactions in areas related to transfer pricing , hedge funds , offshore credit cards , and promoters of offshore shelters . the report we are issuing today focuses on these activities . the objectives of our report were to determine ( 1 ) the nature and extent of u.s. persons' involvement with ugland house registered entities , and what business , if any , these entities carry on in ugland house and in the cayman islands ; ( 2 ) what reasons attract u.s. persons to conduct business in the cayman islands ; ( 3 ) what information is available to the u.s. government regarding u.s. persons' cayman islands activities , including which are associated with u.s. taxpayers ; and ( 4 ) for tax noncompliance and other related illegal activities , describe the u.s. government's compliance and enforcement efforts , and any related activity on the part of the cayman islands government . structured - finance entities are not typically carried on a company's balance sheet , and ownership can be through a party other than the person directing the establishment of the entity , such as a charitable trust , or spread across many noteholders or investors , such as in deals involving securitization . the entities created by maples and calder that are directly owned or controlled include corporate subsidiaries , such as those used by multinational corporations to conduct international business . u.s. persons who conduct financial activity in the cayman islands commonly do so to gain business advantages , including tax advantages under u.s. law . although such activity is typically legal , some persons have engaged in activity in the cayman islands , like other jurisdictions , in an attempt to avoid detection and prosecution of illegal activity by u.s. authorities . the cayman islands may attract u.s - related financial activity because of characteristics including its reputation for stability and compliance with international standards , its business - friendly regulatory environment , and its prominence as an international financial center . irs and department of justice ( doj ) officials stated that particular aspects of offshore activity present challenges related to oversight and enforcement .