we agree . our observation is not intended to suggest that hamp adopt the flexibility of proprietary modifications . we are simply describing what is known about proprietary modifications . moreover , the report notes that the long - term sustainability of both types of modifications is unclear , particularly for proprietary modifications because these modifications may not reduce the monthly payments of borrowers as much as hamp modifications have . the pages referenced in this comment are now pages 41 to 45 . treasury stated that it believed that the overall conclusion reached in the draft report that the gaps in data limit treasury's ability to identify program gaps is inaccurate and misleading . treasury noted that some of the examples of missing or inaccurate data are outliers . it also noted that the data on permanent modifications is robust and that data provided by servicers has improved significantly over the past 6 months . we have added text in the report to acknowledge that treasury's data , particularly on the race and ethnicity of borrowers , has improved over time , and that the reporting in the most recent public file represents an improvement over the data we received as of september 30 , 2010 . we also note that treasury has worked with fannie mae to make improvements to the data . while we acknowledge that progress has been made in the quality and accuracy of the data reported by servicers , we believe that it is critical that treasury continue to work toward improving the data so that it and policymakers can understand the characteristics of both borrowers who have been helped by hamp as well as those who could not be helped by hamp . this information will be essential to identifying what additional steps or adjustments could be made to existing tarp - funded programs or other government programs to prevent avoidable foreclosures to better achieve the goals of preserving homeownership and protecting property values . the pages referenced in this comment are now pages 25 to 40 . treasury stated that it instructed servicers to report borrowers in a single disposition path to avoid double counting of borrowers and , thereby , provide a clear view of the current path the population is following through the progression of potential loss mitigation outcomes . however , the current method of data collection can distort the current disposition status of borrowers because borrowers are often “dual - tracked” ( eg , being evaluated for a proprietary modification while also starting the foreclosure process ) . reflecting the full range of possible outcomes these borrowers face would improve treasury's understanding of the extent to which borrowers are helped by other programs and assist any evaluation of the need for further action to assist this group of homeowners . treasury stated that it disagreed with the draft report's conclusion that its programs had not been fully implemented . we revised the language in the report to more clearly state that the implementation of treasury's mha programs had gotten off to a slow start and reiterated that actions needed to be taken by treasury to better ensure the success of its programs . the page referenced in this comment is now page 47 .