( see fig . aircraft certification's approximately 950 engineers and inspectors in 42 field offices issue approvals to the designers and manufacturers of aircraft and aircraft engines , propellers , parts , and equipment . since 2005 , aircraft certification has used project sequencing to prioritize certification submissions on the basis of available resources . projects are evaluated against several criteria , including safety attributes and their impact on the air transportation system . as a result , faa now has the capability to track how long certification submissions are wait - listed and reallocate resources , if appropriate , to better meet demand . in april 2012 , as required by section 312 of the act , faa established the aircraft certification process review and reform aviation rulemaking committee ( certification process committee ) . its role is to make recommendations to the director of faa's aircraft certification service to streamline and reengineer the certification process . the committee considered guidance and current certification issues — including methods for enhancing the use of delegation and the training of faa staff in safety management systems — and assessed the certification process . it developed six recommendations , which called for faa to develop comprehensive implementation plans for certification process improvement initiatives , including measuring the effectiveness of the implementation and benefits of improvements as well as developing a means to track and monitor initiatives and programs ; continue to improve the effectiveness of delegation programs ; develop an integrated , overarching vision of the future state for certification procedures ; update part 21 certification procedures to reflect a systems approach develop and implement a comprehensive change management plan to prepare the workforce for its new responsibilities in a systems safety approach to certification and oversight ; and review continued operational safety and rulemaking processes and implement reforms to improve efficiency . we found these recommendations to be relevant , clear , and actionable . in response to the committee's recommendations , faa developed a plan that includes 14 initiatives to implement the committee's recommendations and publicly reported the plan in july 2013 . we believe that the committee took a reasonable approach in assessing faa's aircraft certification process and developing recommendations by assessing the status of previous recommendations from 19 reports related to the certification process , reviewing certification guidance and processes as well as major initiatives , and reviewing other areas that it believed required consideration when making recommendations for improving efficiencies in the certification process . faa has many initiatives and programs underway that it believes will respond to the committee's recommendations to improve efficiency and reduce costs related to certifications . for example , faa and two industry groups had already developed an oda action plan to address the effectiveness of the oda process . we found these initiatives were generally relevant to the recommendations and clear and measurable . however , faa's initiatives and programs to implement the recommendations do not contain some of the elements essential to a performance measurement process . for example , the certification process committee recommended that faa develop an integrated roadmap and vision for certification process reforms , including an integrated overarching vision of the future state for certification procedures .