v ) . in addition , ars officials emphasized that the majority of research performed at ars related to improving agricultural practices can result in reduced antibiotic needs by producers . officials from both nifa and ars said that they had not assessed the extent to which the research conducted helped achieve the action item in the 2001 interagency plan . indeed , conducting such an assessment would be difficult without a complete list of relevant research activities . nifa officials told us that additional funding and resources would be needed to conduct such an assessment , but they did not provide more specific details on how many additional resources would be needed to do so . although an assessment of research activities on alternatives has not been conducted , ars officials nevertheless said the agency plans to conduct more research on alternatives to antibiotics in the next 5 years . similar to usda agencies , hhs agencies have conducted some research on alternatives . specifically , from 2001 through 2005 , cdc and fda sponsored at least five research grants that included funding to research alternatives and reduce resistant bacteria in food animals ( see app . vi ) . nih has conducted research related to antibiotic resistance that may have applications in both humans and in animals , but agency officials told us that nih considers human health issues its research priority . like usda agencies , hhs agencies did not report any research activities under the action item related to antibiotic alternatives to the interagency task force . no hhs agency has sponsored any such research activities since 2005 . hhs officials told us this is because usda may be the most appropriate lead agency for undertaking alternatives research related to food animals . usda officials acknowledged that they have a role in researching alternatives to antibiotics , although they said that it is also important for hhs to be involved since fda would likely be the regulatory agency to approve any products resulting from such research . cdc and fda officials told us that their agencies have not performed any assessments to determine whether their research activities have helped the agency to fulfill this action item in the 2001 interagency plan . representatives of the national veterinary , producer , public health , and animal pharmaceutical organizations that we spoke with told us that greater federal efforts are needed to research alternatives to current antibiotic use in animals . in addition , representatives from most of the veterinary and several public health organizations we spoke with said that the federal government should make greater efforts to coordinate with the food animal industry about researching alternatives to current antibiotic use . specifically , most representatives from the producer and veterinary organizations emphasized a need for the federal government to provide funding and other resources to the food animal industry for research projects looking at alternatives . for example , representatives from one veterinary organization told us that several national producer and veterinary organizations have goals of utilizing prevention as an alternative to antibiotic use and said that the federal government could help by conducting research on preventive measures such as vaccine development .