vi ) . ii. ) fhwa implemented a balanced approach to managing its senior executive performance in response to its 1999 employee satisfaction survey . where appropriate , we have made changes to this report that reflect these technical comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of the interior , transportation , the treasury , and veterans affairs ; the commissioner of internal revenue ; and the director of opm . specifically , the majority of employees that responded indicated that they did not understand their workgroup's role in implementing fhwa's corporate management strategies that were based on the malcolm baldridge national quality award and the presidential quality award criteria — leadership , strategic planning , customer and partner focus , information and analysis , human resource development and management , process management , and business results . beginning in fiscal year 2000 , fhwa appraised senior executives on these corporate management strategies . ( for more information on fhwa's senior executive performance plans , see app . iii. ) in response to the internal revenue service restructuring and reform act of 1998 , irs initiated a method of measuring performance designed to foster quality service , promote compliance with the tax laws , and consider the impact on employees . in fiscal year 2000 , irs implemented a senior executive performance management system that aligned the executives' performance expectations with a set of balanced expectations consisting of employee satisfaction , customer satisfaction , and business results , and with two additional areas of responsibility — leadership and equal employment opportunity . ( for more information on irs's senior executive performance plans , see app . iv. ) vba adopted a balanced scorecard approach in fiscal year 1999 as a strategic management tool to drive organizational change , provide feedback to employees on measures they can influence , link performance appraisal and reward systems to performance measures , and provide incentives to managers to work as teams in meeting performance measures . its scorecard included measures for accuracy , speed and timeliness , unit cost , customer satisfaction , and employee development and satisfaction . vba incorporated these measures in the performance appraisals for senior executives in its regional offices where the majority of senior executives are located . ( for more information on vba's senior executive performance plans , see app . at blm , fhwa , and vba , we randomly selected 10 career senior executives to interview at each agency , including 5 executives randomly drawn from central headquarters and 5 executives randomly drawn from the field offices . effective performance management systems translate organizational priorities and goals into direct and specific commitments that senior executives will be expected to achieve during the year . to this end , blm , fhwa , irs , and vba developed a set of expectations for senior executive performance that were intended to balance organizational results , customer satisfaction , and employee perspectives and offered a menu of expectations for senior executives to incorporate into their individual performance plans . they appraised senior executives' contributions to organizational results by the core competencies and supporting behaviors senior executives followed or the targets they met .