leading practice . to ensure the effective management of software licenses , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture take the following six actions: develop an agency - wide comprehensive policy for the management of software licenses that addresses the weaknesses we identified . employ a centralized software license management approach that is coordinated and integrated with key personnel for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . establish a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . regularly track and maintain a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools and metrics . analyze agency - wide software license data , such as costs , benefits , usage , and trending data , to identify opportunities to reduce costs and better inform investment decision making . provide software license management training to appropriate agency personnel addressing contract terms and conditions , negotiations , laws and regulations , acquisition , security planning , and configuration management . to ensure the effective management of software licenses , we recommend that the secretary of commerce take the following six actions: develop an agency - wide comprehensive policy for the management of software licenses that addresses the weaknesses we identified . employ a centralized software license management approach that is coordinated and integrated with key personnel for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . establish a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . regularly track and maintain a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools and metrics . analyze agency - wide software license data , such as costs , benefits , usage , and trending data , to identify opportunities to reduce costs and better inform investment decision making . provide software license management training to appropriate agency personnel addressing contract terms and conditions , negotiations , laws and regulations , acquisition , security planning , and configuration management . to ensure the effective management of software licenses , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following six actions: develop an agency - wide comprehensive policy for the management of software licenses that addresses the weaknesses we identified . employ a centralized software license management approach that is coordinated and integrated with key personnel for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . establish a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools for the majority of agency software license spending and / or enterprise - wide licenses . regularly track and maintain a comprehensive inventory of software licenses using automated tools and metrics . analyze agency - wide software license data , such as costs , benefits , usage , and trending data , to identify opportunities to reduce costs and better inform investment decision making . provide software license management training to appropriate agency personnel addressing contract terms and conditions , negotiations , laws and regulations , acquisition , security planning , and configuration management .