see figure 1 . as outlined in figure 1 , the internet can facilitate legal purchases either through ffls or through nonlicensed private sellers . for purchases through an ffl , an individual orders a firearm online , and generally completes the transaction process in person . the ffl submits the required paperwork to atf . a background check is processed directly by nics or through a state government that checks nics . unless denied by the background check , the transaction is completed . if the individual is purchasing the firearm from an ffl in another state , the original ffl will transfer the firearm to an ffl in the state the buyer resides in to complete the transaction . if both the buyer and seller are residents of the same state , transfers between private nonlicensed parties facilitated by the internet without the involvement of an ffl may be lawful . the firearm may be transferred in person between the buyer and the seller , or , if the firearm is a shotgun or rifle , it may be mailed intrastate between the individuals . the seller has no record - keeping obligations , and no nics background check is performed on the buyer . however , a nonlicensed individual is usually prohibited from directly transferring a firearm to a person who the transferor knows or had reasonable cause to believe is residing in another state . in addition , it is usually illegal for any nonlicensed individual to transport into or receive in the state where he resides any firearm purchased or otherwise obtained outside that state . therefore , interstate transactions between two nonlicensed individuals are likely to be illegal unless an ffl becomes a party to the transaction . for a legal transaction between residents of different states , the seller must send the firearm to an ffl in the buyer's state . the ffl submits the paperwork , a background check is processed , and , unless denied by the background check , the ffl transfers the firearm to the buyer . potential gun buyers can view firearm advertisements and make purchases from the following categories of websites: major retailers , online retailers , online auctions and marketplaces , online classified listings , online forums and social media networks , and dark web websites . according to atf reports , major retailers and online retailers meet the definition of firearm dealers and therefore must be ffls in order to operate . to see how purchases may be facilitated by various internet marketplaces , see figure 2 . gao , doj , and the congressional research service ( crs ) , as well as a gun - control advocacy group , have reported on the issue of internet firearm sales since the early 2000s . in 2001 we reported the results of our undercover inquiries to private individuals who advertised firearms online . we attempted to purchase firearms from two of these individuals . both individuals were willing to complete the transactions in person , though we did not complete the sales . also in 2001 , as part of a larger report on reducing gun violence , doj identified issues related to firearms sales facilitated by the internet .