tasc . dhs initiative to consolidate financial , acquisition , and asset management systems , establish a single line of accounting , and standardize business processes . dhs headquarters consolidation . the collocation of the department by combining existing department and component leases and building out st. elizabeths campus in washington , d.c. human resources information technology . initiative to consolidate , replace , and modernize existing departmental and component payroll and personnel systems . data center migration . initiative to move dhs component agencies' data systems from the agencies' multiple existing data centers to two dhs consolidated centers . homeland security presidential directive 12 personal identification verification cards deployment . provision of cards to dhs employees and contractors for use to access secure facilities , communications , and data . this initial management integration plan contained individual action plans for each of the seven initiatives . in march 2010 , we met with dhs officials and provided oral and written feedback on the initial plan . we noted that , for example: the action plans lacked details on how the seven initiatives contribute to departmentwide management integration and links to the department's overall strategy for transformation ; the performance measures contained in the plans did not identify units of measure , baseline measurements , or target metrics that would be used to measure progress ; the impediments and barriers described in the plans did not align with identified risks and the strategies for addressing these impediments and barriers ; and the plans did not identify planned resources for carrying out these initiatives . dhs officials told us the department is working to enhance its initial management integration plan to include a framework for strengthening the department's acquisition management . we plan to review the changes dhs is making to the initial management integration plan as part of our work for the 2011 high - risk update . based on our work and recommendations on management integration , we have identified specific actions and outcomes for dhs that we believe will help the department address those management integration challenges that contributed to our designation of dhs implementation and transformation as high risk . specifically , we believe that addressing these actions and outcomes within the individual management functional areas of acquisition , information technology , financial , and human capital management would help dhs to integrate those functions . for example , to successfully implement the tasc program , the chief financial officer would need to work with the chief procurement officer to establish effective mechanisms for overseeing the contractor selected to implement the tasc program ; the chief information officer to ensure that data conversions and system interfaces occur when required ; and the chief human capital officer to ensure that relevant personnel at the department and component levels are trained on use of the tasc program once the system is implemented . in addition , dhs should revise its strategy for management integration to address the characteristics for such a strategy that we recommended in 2005 . performance measurement . dhs has not yet fully developed performance measures or put into place structures and processes to help ensure that the agency is managing for results .