refunds . as a result of the errors described above , some claimed refunds on line 73a on our 19 returns were either substantially higher or lower than they should have been . figure 3 shows the deviation from the correct refund amount under our two scenarios . the pairs of bars shown in the figure indicate returns prepared by employees affiliated with the same chain . as shown in the figure , refunds reported for the plumber were incorrect in all 9 cases — sometimes by only small amounts , but at other times by substantial sums . refunds reported for the sales worker were correct in 2 cases and overstated in the other 8 cases . deductions . only 2 of 9 of the plumber's returns reported the correct amount of itemized deductions ( line 40 ) . returns done by 2 preparers claimed the standard deduction , even though it was about $4,000 less than the total amount of itemized deductions we included in the scenario . five other preparers itemized deductions for the plumber , but made other mistakes . these errors changed the amount of the plumber's refund , although sometimes by fairly small amounts . one preparer , however , missed deductions for property taxes worth about $4,000 , meaning that the claimed refund was hundreds of dollars lower than it should have been . on the other hand , all 10 of the sales worker returns claimed the standard deduction , which was to the taxpayer's advantage in these cases because she had very few deductions to itemize . in 2002 , we reported that as many as 2 million taxpayers failed to minimize their taxes by failing to itemize their deductions and that about half of these taxpayers had returns prepared by another person . foreign tax credit . the plumber's form 1099 from his mutual fund showed a small amount of foreign taxes paid , but only 1 of the 9 preparers we visited claimed the foreign tax credit ( line 47 ) for which the taxpayer was eligible . child - care expenses . the sales worker had child - care expenses , but none of the 10 preparers we visited included the credit for child - and dependent - care expenses ( line 48 ) for which she was eligible . some preparers told her that she could not claim the credit because she did not have the social security number of her child - care provider . this information was incorrect . the instructions for form 2441 state that a taxpayer who attempts to collect the social security number of his or her child - care provider but is unsuccessful can report that fact on form 2441 and still claim the credit . education credits . in the plumber scenario , one of the taxpayer's children was a college student in the second year of postsecondary education , but 6 of 9 paid preparers made some sort of error in determining the line 50 education credit — either improperly including items in expenses , not claiming the credit most advantageous to the taxpayer , or both .