gao - 04-924 . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2004 . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2003 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to help other countries combat nuclear smuggling need strengthened coordination and planning . gao - 02-426 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2002 . nsc officials did not respond to our requests to meet . however , we discussed the role of the nsc staff and the extent of its participation in coordinating programs with dod , doe , and state officials . we also relied on related prior gao reports . we performed our review in washington , d.c. , from february 2004 to november 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the national security council ; and the secretaries of defense , energy , and state . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have questions regarding this report , please contact mr. christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 or christoffj@gao.gov or mr. aloise at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov . gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix vi . dod and doe assess the performance of their threat reduction and nonproliferation programs . they establish goals and assess progress toward meeting these goals using performance metrics . table 5 lists these dod and doe goals and metrics . dod and doe and state have projects in three areas that address similar missions in the fsu . these areas are the employment of former biological weapons scientists to prevent the proliferation of their expertise , improvement of security at sites where russian nuclear warheads are stored , and the enhancement of countries' ability to secure their borders against the smuggling of wmd materials . tables 6 , 7 , and 8 show the different projects , funding and countries served for all three agencies and areas . in addition , hynek kalkus , wyatt r. hundrup , nanette j. ryen , william lanouette , dorian l. herring , stacy edwards , lynn cothern , etana finkler , judy pagano , and ernie jackson made significant contributions to this report . russian nuclear submarines: u.s . participation in the arctic military environmental cooperation program needs better justification . nuclear nonproliferation: doe needs to take action to further reduce the use of weapons - usable uranium in civilian research reactors . gao - 04-807 . washington , d.c.: july 30 , 2004 . nuclear nonproliferation: doe's effort to close russia's plutonium production reactors faces challenges , and final shutdown is uncertain . gao - 04-662 . washington d.c.: june 4 , 2004 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. and international assistance efforts to control sealed radioactive sources need strengthening . gao - 03-638 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2003 . weapons of mass destruction: additional russian cooperation needed to facilitate u.s. efforts to improve security at russian sites . gao - 03-482 . washington , d.c.: march 24 , 2003 . weapons of mass destruction: observations on u.s . threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia . gao - 03-526t .