this is consistent with our own analysis . specifically , for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 we compared the actual price dla paid for fuel with the actual price of other fuel products — including wti crude oil , brent crude oil , and commercial jet fuel — to determine the relationship among these prices . based on our analysis of data from the energy information administration , we found that in each year the prices dla paid for fuel had a closer relationship with commercial jet fuel prices than with either wti or brent crude oil prices . to compensate for the limitations in its crude oil baseline , dod has adjusted other components of its standard price . for example , as discussed earlier in this report , beginning in fiscal year 2013 , dod increased the refinement markup component of the standard price from 30 percent to 50 percent to account for the divergence between wti and other crude oil pricing benchmarks . dod has continued to use the 50 percent refinement markup in setting its standard price for fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . this practice means that dod is using the markup not only to account for refinement costs , but to cover the price spread between wti and other crude oil pricing benchmarks . by using the increased refinement markup to compensate for the price spread , dod is not addressing the underlying limitations with its crude oil baseline . rather , dod is adding further risk and uncertainty concerning its estimate , because the estimate must now account for additional price variables . even though in recent years its methodology has been producing estimates that differ significantly from actual costs , dod has not reevaluated its approach or documented the rationale behind the assumptions it uses for setting the standard price . dod's 2007 study found that its forecasting methodology produced results as good as or better than the forecasting models the study compared it with . however , that study focused exclusively on the crude oil component of the standard price . it did not evaluate the accuracy of the standard price methodology as a whole against other potential approaches . moreover , since that time , dod has not reevaluated whether using wti as its baseline assumption — with the corresponding refinement markup — is still appropriate given recent market changes . further , dod has not considered whether a crude oil baseline is still reasonable at all . officials from the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) told us that they have held internal discussions regarding changing the crude oil pricing baseline used in the standard price , but no final decision has been made . furthermore , dod has not fully documented its rationale and assumptions for establishing each component of the standard price . gao's cost estimating and assessment guide states that a cost estimate should be supported by detailed documentation that describes how it was derived . according to the guide , the documentation should include , among other things , the estimating methodology used to derive the costs for each element of the cost estimate , and it should also discuss any limitations of the data or assumptions .