as a result , we have removed that matter from the report . to identify what factors hinder the collection of air tour fees , and to provide information on the possible expansion of air tour fees to additional park units , we considered the results of our january 2006 report , particularly the sections on the lack of data on air tour activity over park units and the park service's not funding its share of the cost of developing air tour management plans . we assessed budget data describing the park service's requests for annual appropriations and faa's funding dedicated to developing air tour management plans . this budget information covered fiscal years 2001 through 2006 and were obtained from budget appropriation reports , the agencies' budget requests , and budget summaries provided by faa and a contractor . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed park service , interior , and faa officials and reviewed faa's january 2001 draft report to congress on the likely effects that air tour fees will have on air tour operators . in addition , we reviewed park service data on the park units that charge admission fees . we also assessed data reflecting the number of annual air tours authorized by faa for operators over various national park units under the air tour management act and the national parks overflights act of 1987 . we interviewed agency officials regarding a series of data reliability questions addressing areas such as data entry , data access , quality control procedures , and data accuracy and completeness . we asked follow - up questions whenever necessary . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we performed our work from january 2005 through april 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . the park service is responsible for conserving the scenery , the natural and historic objects , and the plants and wildlife in national park units , and for providing for the enjoyment of national park units in ways that leave them unimpaired for future generations . to accomplish its mission , the park service has a budget of about $1.7 billion for fiscal year 2006 . the park service also has authority to collect and retain recreation fees from visitors , including entrance fees , amenity fees , and special permit fees , to be used primarily at the site where the fee was collected . in fiscal year 2005 , the park service collected $146.8 million in visitor use fees . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( the fees legislation ) directed the park service to establish air tour fees by october 1 , 1993 . in the house budget committee's report accompanying the fees legislation , the committee stated that tour operators generate their revenues by selling national park units as a destination and , therefore , a modest fee is a reasonable and justifiable means of addressing impacts they have on park unit resources and personnel .