health . arkansas estimated costs for health services to compact migrants by compiling costs for the population identified as of pacific islander ethnicity ; as a result , arkansas's estimates may overstate compact migrant health costs by including services to pacific islanders who are not compact migrants . however , the estimates do not include costs for the arkansas women , infants and children program and were not complete for all years for tuberculosis and sexually transmitted disease treatment , potentially leading to an underestimate of total costs . social services . arkansas does not track the use of some state - funded services by ethnicity and therefore could not estimate the costs of providing these services to compact migrants . however , officials stated that compact migrants are eligible for programs such as the state's division of developmental disabilities services ; division of youth services ; and arkids first , which provides health insurance to low - income u.s. - citizen children of compact migrants . unlike affected jurisdictions , arkansas does not provide medicaid equivalent services to noncitizen compact migrants . as in affected jurisdictions , arkansas compact migrants contribute to the local economy through payment of taxes and participation in the labor market . taxes . marshallese are subject to federal , state , and local taxes ; however arkansas does not disaggregate the tax revenue by ethnic categories or citizenship and there are no data on consumption and remittances . labor market . marshallese fill a significant niche in the local poultry industry . according to employers in northwest arkansas , marshallese represent between 14 and 37.9 percent of the total workforce at some plants of major poultry producers , such as tyson , cargill , and george's . tyson officials in springdale stated that they have begun referring some marshallese job applicants to plants elsewhere in arkansas and in oklahoma . in addition , tyson may begin recruiting workers in the marshall islands . according to marshall islands officials , tyson representatives have visited the marshall islands . table 5 shows the estimated population of the compact migrants from each fas in the u.s. states based on tabulations of census' 2005-2009 acs . taking into account sampling uncertainty , the table shows the lower - bound and upper - bound population interval that corresponds to a 90 percent confidence interval . estimates of compact migrants from each fas in guam and the cnmi , using data from census's 2008 survey of compact migrants , are shown for comparison . the 2010 decennial census identified 22,434 native hawaiian or pacific islanders — alone or in combination with another race — who identified themselves specifically as marshallese residing in the 50 u.s. states in 2010 . the largest marshallese populations were in hawaii , arkansas , and washington , which together accounted for 62 percent of the total reported marshallese residing in the 50 states . see table 6 . as of september 2011 , census has not released a separate count of u.s. residents who identified themselves as one of the fsm ethnicities or palauan , but plans to do so between december 2011 and april 2012 . as of november 2011 , census race data for guam and the cnmi had yet to be released .