mms has agreed to do so . geothermal energy is literally the heat of the earth . this heat is abnormally high where hot and molten rocks exist at shallow depths below the earth's surface . water , brines , and steam circulating within these hot rocks are collectively referred to as geothermal resources . geothermal resources often rise naturally to the surface along fractures to form hot springs , geysers , and fumaroles . for centuries , people have used naturally occurring hot springs as places to bathe , swim , and relax . more recently , some individuals have constructed buildings over these springs , transforming them into elaborate spas and resorts , thereby establishing the first direct use of geothermal resources for business purposes . businesses have also established other direct uses of geothermal resources by drilling wells into the earth to tap the hot water for heating buildings , drying food , raising fish , and growing plants . where the earth's temperature is not high enough to supply businesses with geothermal resources for direct use , people have made use of the ground's heat by installing geothermal heat pumps . geothermal heat pumps consist of a heat exchanger and a loop of pipe extending into the ground to draw on the relatively constant temperature there for heat in the winter and air conditioning in the summer . geothermal resources can also generate electricity , and this is their most economically valuable use today . only the highest temperature geothermal resources , generally above 200 degrees fahrenheit , are suitable for electricity generation . when companies are satisfied that sufficient quantities of geothermal resources are present below the surface at a specific location , they will drill wells to bring the geothermal fluids and steam to the surface . upon reaching the surface , steam separates from the fluids as their pressure drops , and the steam is used to spin the blades of a turbine that generates electricity . because geothermal heat pumps are effective where ground temperatures are between 40 and 70 degrees f , they can be installed in almost any location in the united states and , therefore , constitute the most widespread geothermal application and represent the greatest potential for future development . the development of geothermal resources for electricity production faces major challenges , including high risk and financial uncertainty , insufficient transmission capacity , and inadequate technology . geothermal groups reported that most attempts to develop geothermal resources for electricity generation are unsuccessful , that costs to develop geothermal power plants can surpass $100 million , and that it can take 3 to 5 years for plants to first produce and sell electricity . although some geothermal resources are easy to find because they produce tell - tale signs such as hot springs , most resources are buried deep within the earth — at depths sometimes exceeding 10,000 feet — and finding them often requires an in - depth knowledge of the area's geology , geophysical surveys , remote sensing techniques , and at least one test well . the risks and high initial costs associated with exploring for and developing geothermal resources limit financing .