streamline processes . twenty - three of the 64 stakeholders suggesting a change suggested that faa needs to streamline some of its processes . stakeholder suggestions included streamlining the development and implementation of flight navigation procedures , the certification of new aircraft equipment , and the acquisition of new technology . for example , to streamline its process for certifying new technology , one stakeholder said that faa should use an approach that recognizes that once a type of equipment , such as an antenna , is found to be safe , every piece of that equipment produced does not have to be personally inspected by faa . faa officials said that they are making progress streamlining both the certification of new technology and development of new procedures ; however , faa must ensure that new procedures and technology are evaluated for potential safety and environmental concerns and that community outreach occurs . in april 2013 , we found that faa's processes and requirements , while keeping the u.s. airspace safe , are also complex and lengthy . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to september 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . stakeholder airlines for america ( a4a ) cargo airline association ( caa ) national air carrier association ( naca ) regional airline association ( raa ) regional air cargo carriers association ( racca ) united parcel service ( ups ) houston airport system ( george bush intercontinental airport , william p. hobby airport , and ellington airport ) los angeles world airports ( los angeles international airport , la / ontario international airport , and van nuys airport ) metropolitan airports commission ( minneapolis - st. paul international airport ) port authority of new york and new jersey ( john f. kennedy international airport , newark liberty international airport , laguardia airport , stewart international airport , and teterboro airport ) airports council international — north america ( aci - na ) american association of airport executives ( aaae ) bill ayer , chair of the nextgen advisory committee ( nac ) air traffic control association ( atca ) michael baiada , president and chief executive officer , ath group gary church , president , aviation management associates dr. george donohue , systems engineering and operations research , george mason university michael dyment , managing partner , nexa capital partners , llc amr elsawy , president and chief executive officer , noblis inc .