resolution . the system will accommodate existing treatment streams and new treatment streams . returns will be routed systemically to the best treatment stream , opened into the treatment stream's inventory and , if applicable , the system will send an initial contact letter to the taxpayer . prevention . in addition to the contact name above , individuals making contributions to this report included sabine paul ( assistant director ) , mary evans , rebecca eyler , paul middleton , and bradley roach . the system will automatically integrate the results of each return's resolution into the detection models . the results can be used to help target education and outreach efforts to taxpayers and preparers on how to avoid unintentional noncompliance . the system will also allow analysis and identification of fraud and noncompliance not identified by the predictive detection models . there are a number of approaches that can be utilized by an investment . irs's enterprise lifecycle methodology includes the following approaches: waterfall , planned maintenance , iterative , and managed services . waterfall is a sequential development of a solution with planned reviews and formal approvals required before continuation of work . the planned maintenance approach manages change in an organized manner , minimizes the disruption caused by frequent system changes , and increases the efficiency and effectiveness of the system change process . additionally , the iterative approach is an adaptive development approach in which projects start with a conceptual vision of the solution and end with deployment , with repeated cycles of requirement discovery , development , and testing in between . finally , the managed services approach is designed to capitalize on the benefits of managed services provided by either an outside service , internal business processes , and / or existing infrastructure service provider . this provides useful information on the requirements of how a project is to progress through the life cycle . contract type: for purposes of this report , this can be broken down into two categories . the first is firm , fixed price contracts in which the price is not subject to any adjustments . the second is cost reimbursement contracts which provide for the payment of allowable incurred costs , to the extent prescribed in the contract . types of cost reimbursement contracts include , but are not limited to ( 1 ) cost plus fixed fee in which actual costs and a fixed fee can be charged ; however , costs are not allowed to exceed the agreed upon estimate without approval ; and ( 2 ) cost plus incentive fee that provides for an initially negotiated fee to be adjusted later by a formula based on the relationship of total allowable costs to total target costs . number of rebaselines: rebaselines are changes to projects' cost , schedule , and performance goals ( i.e. , baselines ) . according to officials , scope changes must go through a baseline change request process and be approved by treasury and omb . current life - cycle phase: mixed ( development / operations and maintenance ) .