all commercial airports are eligible to apply to the spp . to apply , an airport operator must complete the spp application and submit it to the spp program management office ( pmo ) , as well as to the fsd for its airport , by mail , fax , or e - mail . figure 1 illustrates the spp application process . although tsa provides all airports with the opportunity to apply for participation in the spp , authority to approve or deny the application resides in the discretion of the tsa administrator . according to tsa officials , in addition to the cost - efficiency and effectiveness considerations mandated by faa modernization act , there are many other factors that are weighed in considering an airport's application for spp participation . for example , the potential impacts of any upcoming projects at the airport are considered . once an airport is approved for spp participation and a private screening contractor has been selected by tsa , the contract screening workforce assumes responsibility for screening passengers and their property and is required to adhere to the same security regulations , standard operating procedures , and other tsa security requirements followed by federal screeners at non - spp airports . since our december 2012 report , tsa has developed guidance to assist airport operators in completing their spp applications , as we recommended . in december 2012 , we reported that tsa had developed some resources to assist spp applicants , but it had not provided guidance on its application and approval process to assist airports . as the application process was originally implemented in 2004 , the spp application process required only that an interested airport operator submit an application stating its intention to opt out of federal screening as well as its reasons for wanting to do so . in 2011 , tsa revised its spp application to reflect the “clear and substantial advantage” standard announced by the administrator in january 2011 . more detailed information on the scope and methodology appears in our december 2012 report . to update our work , we obtained related documentation , such as the spp annual report issued in january 2013 , and interviewed agency officials in january 2014 on progress made to implement the recommendations from our december 2012 report related to application guidance and monitoring of private versus federal screener performance . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for example , passenger wait time data could not be used because we found that tsa's policy for collecting wait times changed during the time period of our analyses and that these data were not collected in a consistent manner across all airports . we also considered reviewing human capital measures such as attrition , absenteeism , and injury rates , but did not analyze these data because tsa's office of human capital does not collect these data for spp airports .