requirements definition . this contract , which was awarded in october 2005 using fiscal year 2006 funds , covers gathering and documenting non - uscis stakeholder digitization and document management requirements , including the meta - data requirements for indexing the scanned documents . as of december 2005 , the first draft of requirements had been reviewed by uscis and some of the external stakeholders , including ice , cbp , and the department of state . the contractor's next steps are to refine the requirements and develop , among other things , the plans of action and a concept of operations for the digitization and document management processes . the value of this contract is about $451,000 . it is not yet possible to determine the effectiveness of uscis's management of its long - term a - files automation effort because this effort is not yet under way . however , uscis currently has a near - term a - files automation effort under way ( iddmp ) that it is not effectively managing . specifically , uscis has not developed a program management plan to guide program execution and provide the basis for reliable cost and schedule estimates , and it does not have a plan for evaluating its iddmp concept of operations pilot test of a document scanning capability . according to uscis officials , these plans do not exist because the program is just getting started . nevertheless , five contracts have either been awarded or are to be awarded under this program , a pilot test is under way , and significant program costs are anticipated . without effective planning , iddmp is at risk of falling short of expectations and its funding requests cannot be justified . as we have previously reported , technology alone cannot be relied on to solve long - standing and fundamental business problems , such as uscis's dependence on paper - laden a - files . instead , our work has shown that such organizational and business transformation requires a number of key , interdependent elements working collectively to effect meaningful and long - lasting institutional change and mission improvement . these elements begin with strong , sustained executive leadership to direct and oversee organizational reforms . other elements include a comprehensive and integrated business transformation plan , strategic management of human capital , effective processes and related tools ( such as an enterprise architecture to provide a business and technology blueprint and associated road map ) , and results - oriented performance measures that link institutional , unit , and individual personnel goals , measures , and expectations . until recently , uscis had high - level , technology - focused plans for modernizing its information systems environment , including plans for automating its a - files . these plans were part of the ocio's it transformation program , which included four components: ( 1 ) establishing and evolving a mature cio organization ; ( 2 ) improving the it infrastructure ; ( 3 ) implementing an information - based architecture to facilitate information standardization , security , and sharing ; and ( 4 ) providing new business capabilities .