we support these actions . however , two key actions to improving screeners' performance are still not complete . these actions are the deployment of threat image projection systems — which place images of dangerous objects on the monitors of x - ray machines to keep screeners alert and monitor their performance — and a certification program to make screening companies accountable for the training and performance of the screeners they employ . threat image projection systems are expected to keep screeners alert by periodically imposing the image of a dangerous object on the x - ray screen . they also are used to measure how well screeners perform in detecting these objects . yet , to further minimize the vulnerabilities in our aviation security system , more needs to be done . additional considerations for the immediate future could include prioritizing outstanding recommendations that address security , developing a strategic plan to address the recommendations , assigning specific executive responsibility for carrying out this plan , and identifying the sources and amounts of funding needed . in establishing priorities , a key action needed is to complete the promulgation of the screening company certification regulation , which also implements the requirements of the airport security improvement act of 2000 , enacted by the congress last november . the congress also needs to reconsider whether airlines should continue to bear primary responsibility for screening operations at the nation's airports . aviation security has truly become a national security issue , and responsibility for screening may no longer appropriately rest with air carriers . consideration of the role of air carriers in conducting passenger screening could be examined as part of the ongoing effort to identify and structure mechanisms to provide financial and other assistance to help the aviation industry emerge from the current crisis . it has been observed that previous tragedies have resulted in congressional hearings , studies , recommendations , and debates , but little long - term resolve to correct flaws in the system as the memory of the crisis recedes . the future of aviation security hinges in large part on overcoming this cycle of limited action that has too often characterized the response to aviation security concerns . some context for my remarks is appropriate . one such problems is faa's computer - based air traffic control system . the atc system is an enormous , complex collection of interrelated systems , including navigation , surveillance , weather , and automated information processing and display systems that link hundreds of atc facilities and provide information to air traffic controllers and pilots . failure to adequately protect these systems could increase the risk of regional or nationwide disruption of air traffic — or even collisions . in five reports issued from 1998 through 2000 , we pointed out numerous weaknesses in faa's computer security .