iv ) . we also received an e - mail response from fms . irs concurred with our recommendations . in response to our recommendation that irs conduct a study to determine whether medicaid payments can be incorporated in the continuous levy program , irs stated that both a subgroup of the federal contractors tax compliance ( fctc ) task force and irs general counsel have completed an independent study on whether the medicaid payments can be incorporated into the continuous levy program . both the fctc task force and irs general counsel concluded that medicaid disbursements do not qualify as federal payments and therefore cannot be incorporated in the continuous levy program . in response to a draft of our report , cms expressed concern about the tone and language we used to discuss our findings . specifically , cms interpreted our finding that over 30,000 medicaid providers had over $1 billion of unpaid federal taxes as implying that "there is some direct correlation between owing taxes and being a medicaid provider. our report clearly states that the vast majority of medicaid providers are paying their taxes . for the 5 percent of medicaid providers with tax debt , we simply reported on the facts of what we found , which do not require additional evaluation to satisfactorily address our objective . furthermore , regarding our third objective , cms interpreted our report as implying that there is an underlying connection between the activity ( preventing providers with tax problems from participating in the medicaid program ) and the authority and responsibility to perform such activity . again , it appears that cms misinterpreted our findings . we specifically stated that federal law does not prohibit providers with unpaid taxes from enrolling in and billing medicaid . although cms is not required to screen potential providers for tax debts , we are concerned that cms stated it would be inappropriate to prevent medical providers that owe federal taxes participating in the medicaid program — which would presumably include those egregious cases we identified in this report . we believe that any cms action to prevent medical providers who refuse to pay their taxes from participating in the medicaid program would help ensure the integrity of the medicaid program and does not necessarily conflict with cms's role in providing health care to low - income individuals . both cms and fms expressed concern with their agencies involvement in the continuous levy program . states may file claims for medical services and for administrative functions . our analysis found that over 30,000 medicaid providers at the selected states had over $1 billion in unpaid federal taxes as of september 30 , 2006 . however , we did report that irs had not determined whether medicaid payments are federal payments and recommended that irs conduct a study to determine whether medicaid payments can be incorporated in the continuous levy program . cms and fms also provided us technical corrections to the report which we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly release its contents earlier we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter .