we changed our report accordingly . va also suggested that our title was misleading because it stated that va continues to address problems in its collections operations rather than stating that va is building infrastructure to implement effective collections operations . we believe that our title is accurate because va continues to address problems that we and others have identified in va's collections operations . these charges were not specific to the care provided . va continues to implement the 2001 improvement plan that it developed to address these and other problems . va's new initiatives also address problems , such as gaps in automated capture of billing data , that have been previously identified . as arranged with your office , unless you release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of veterans affairs , interested congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . for example , the chief business officer was considering whether to centralize some processes at the network or national level and was developing the performance standards that would be required for holding network and facility directors accountable . moreover , according to the chief business officer , implementing pfss will require the office to resolve some issues , including making its existing systems provide sufficient data to support the new financial system . as va faces increased demand for medical care , third - party collections for nonservice - connected conditions remain an important source of alternative revenue to supplement va's resources . our work and va's continuing initiatives to improve collections suggest that va could collect additional supplemental revenues because it has not collected all third - party payments that it could in fiscal year 2002 . however , va does not have an estimate of the amount of uncollected dollars , which it needs to assess the effectiveness of its current processes . va has been improving its billing and collecting under the new fee schedule established in 1999 , but va has not completed its efforts to address problems in collections operations . in this regard , fully implementing va's 2001 improvement plan could help va maximize future collections by addressing problems such as missed billing opportunities . however , the plan's reliance on directives , in some cases , to achieve increased collections is not enough to ensure full implementation and optimal performance . the chief business office's new approach could also enhance collections . va's new chief business office's challenge is to ensure such performance by identifying root causes of problems in collections operations , providing a focused approach to addressing the root causes , establishing performance measures , and holding responsible parties accountable for achieving the performance standards . however , it is too early to evaluate the extent to which va will be able to address operational problems and further increase collections by fully implementing its 2001 plan and new approach .