hunt . this appendix provides our analysis of the logistics transformation plans and other implementation plans prepared by the military services , the defense logistics agency , and the u.s. transportation command as they relate to the department of defense's logistics fiscal year 2000 strategic plan . the overall objective of the department - wide plan was to focus the collective attention and resources necessary for achieving the key objectives required to improve the department's logistics support to the warfighter . the logistics strategic plan includes the following six basic objectives: ( 1 ) optimize support to the warfighter , ( 2 ) improve strategic mobility to meet warfighter requirements , ( 3 ) implement customer wait time as the department - wide logistics metric , ( 4 ) fully implement total asset visibility across the department of defense , ( 5 ) reengineer and modernize applicable logistics processes and systems , and ( 6 ) minimize logistics costs while meeting warfighter requirements . to support the implementation of the department's logistics strategic plan , the department of defense reform initiative 54 , dated march 23 , 2000 , requires the military services , the defense logistics agency , and the u.s. transportation command to develop logistics transformation plans to relate the 400 different service - sponsored logistics reengineering initiatives to the department - wide logistics strategic plan . these plans serve as the primary vehicles for aligning the military component initiatives , obtaining resources , and documenting the approach for achieving the logistics strategic plan goals and objectives . with the exception of the u.s. transportation command , each component prepared a transformation plan based on high - level guidance provided by the department to address the six strategic objectives . the u.s. transportation command's plan primarily focused on objective 2 – improve strategic mobility to meet warfighter requirements – and , to a lesser extent , objective 4 – fully implement joint total asset visibility . the defense logistics agency submitted an annotated agency performance contract that specifically addressed its implementation plan for the department's six objectives . the following is both a brief overview of the logistics reengineering initiatives that each of the military services , the u.s. transportation command , and the defense logistics agency are individually pursuing and our analyses of how these initiatives related to the office of the secretary of defense's fiscal year 2000 logistics strategic plan . the components' implementation plans are embodied in their transformation plans and other related documents . the navy's focus on high yield logistics began several years ago and includes 46 ongoing initiatives in its logistics transformation plan . according to navy officials , the navy's vision of logistics transformation is captured in its high yield logistics strategy . however , the navy is using its logistics transformation plan as the tool to meet the challenge and address all aspects of logistics transformation required under the department of defense's reform initiative #54 . these initiatives , however , do not directly link with the other components' initiatives . for example , the navy's four ongoing initiatives to support how it plans to implement customer wait time , objective three , do not relate to the other components' initiatives regarding customer wait time .