, einstein ) and cdm . we provided a draft of this report to omb and the 23 civilian cfo act agencies , including dhs , covered by our review . the results of these interviews are not generalizable to all federal agencies . to address the third objective , we summarized information from our semi - structured interviews about reported capabilities implemented at the 23 civilian cfo act agencies to detect and prevent intrusions . dhs is to make these capabilities available for use by any agency . in addition , the act requires dhs to improve intrusion detection and prevention capabilities , as appropriate , by regularly deploying new technologies and modifying existing technologies . the act also requires omb and dhs , in consultation with appropriate agencies , to review and update government - wide policies and programs to ensure appropriate prioritization and use of network security monitoring tools within agency networks , and to brief appropriate congressional committees . in may 2017 , the president signed executive order 13800 , which sets policy for managing cybersecurity risk as an executive branch enterprise . specifically , it outlines actions to enhance cybersecurity across federal agencies and critical infrastructure to improve the nation's cyber posture and capabilities against cybersecurity threats . to this end , the order states that the president will hold executive agency heads accountable for managing agency - wide cybersecurity risk and directs each executive agency to use the nist cybersecurity framework to manage those risks . determined that developing enhancements to current intrusion detection capabilities to facilitate the scanning of internet protocol version 6 ( ipv6 ) traffic would be feasible . according to dhs officials , the department has developed plans to fully support ipv6 for several of its ncps intrusion detection capabilities . further , the department has developed implementation schedules and begun roll - out of the enhancements . updated the tool it uses to manage and deploy intrusion detection signatures to include a mechanism to clearly link signatures to publicly available , open - source information . developed clearly defined requirements for detecting threats on agency internal networks and at cloud service providers to help better ensure effective support of information security activities . according to dhs officials , the department was also continuing pilot activities with cloud service providers to enhance protections of agency assets . the cybersecurity framework , which provides guidance for cybersecurity activities , is based on five core security functions: identify: develop an organizational understanding to manage cybersecurity risk to systems , people , assets , data , and capabilities . protect: develop and implement appropriate safeguards to ensure delivery of critical services . detect: develop and implement appropriate activities to identify the occurrence of a cybersecurity event . respond: develop and implement appropriate activities to take action regarding a detected cybersecurity incident . recover: develop and implement appropriate activities to maintain plans for resilience and to restore capabilities or services that were impaired due to a cybersecurity incident . according to nist , these five functions should be performed concurrently and continuously to address cybersecurity risk . interviewed knowledgeable omb officials and staff to obtain their views on the reported effectiveness of the federal government's approach and strategy to securing agency information systems .