the largest program , p.l . 480 title ii , is managed by usaid and represents approximately 74 percent of total in - kind food aid allocations over the past 4 years , mostly to fund emergency programs . the bill emerson humanitarian trust , a reserve of up to 4 million metric tons of grain , can be used to fulfill p.l . the united states has principally employed six programs to deliver food aid: public law ( p.l. ) 480 titles i , ii , and iii ; food for progress ; the mcgovern - dole food for education and child nutrition ; and section 416 ( b ) . table 1 provides a summary of these food aid programs . since u.s. food aid assists only about 11 percent of the estimated hungry population worldwide , it is critical that donors and implementers use it effectively by ensuring that it reaches the most vulnerable populations and does not cause negative market impact . however , challenging operating environments and resource constraints limit implementation efforts in terms of developing reliable estimates of food needs and responding to crises in a timely manner with sufficient food and complementary assistance . furthermore , some impediments to improving the nutritional quality of u.s. food aid , including lack of interagency coordination in updating food aid products and specifications , may prevent the most nutritious or appropriate food from reaching intended recipients . agency inspectors general have reported that monitoring has not been regular and systematic , that in some cases intended recipients have not received food aid , or that the number of recipients could not be verified . in may 2007 , these agencies established an interagency executive working group to identify ways to respond to several of our recommendations . dot stated that it strongly supported the transportation - related initiatives we recommended , noting that they offer the potential to help u.s. agencies achieve efficiencies and reduce ocean transportation costs while supporting the u.s. merchant fleet . usaid outlined actions it is considering , has initiated , or intends to take to address each of our nine recommendations . usda stated that in general it found our recommendations to be helpful and cited some of its ongoing efforts to improve its food aid programs . however , usda questioned some of our conclusions that it believed were the result of weaknesses in our methodology . for example , usda does not agree that the current practice of monetization as a means to generate cash for development projects is an inherently inefficient use of resources . we maintain that it is an inherently inefficient use of resources because it requires food to be procured , shipped , and eventually sold , and the revenues from monetization may not recover shipping , handling , and other costs . furthermore , u.s. agencies do not electronically collect data on monetization revenues , without which their ability to adequately monitor the degree to which revenues cover costs is impeded . we conducted the work for our report and this testimony between may 2006 and march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . countries provide food aid through either in - kind donations or cash donations .