( see fig . ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) if ‘other' to 3d: what sample size was used ? 3e: to the best of your knowledge , did the personnel drawing or analyzing samples follow a testing protocol that offers guidance on developing the sampling plan , drawing samples of water , or analyzing samples ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) no ( skip to 3f ) don't know ( skip to 3f ) if ‘yes' to 3e: a . to the best of your knowledge , were any of the following entities involved in developing the protocol ? ( check one per row. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) contractor / water testing company epa or another federal government agency a local government agency ( aside from your lea ) if ‘other' to 3eh: what other entities were involved in developing the protocol ? if tests were conducted in some schools in your lea in the past 12 months — but were not conducted in every school — how was it determined which schools would be tested ? ( check one per row. ) not applicable: tests were conducted in every school ( skip to 3g ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) if ‘other' to 3fe: in what other ways did your lea use to determine which schools would be tested ? how much do you estimate your lea has spent on testing for lead in school drinking water in the past 12 months ? ( please answer this question for lead testing only ; the survey asks about expenditures to address concerns identified through testing later . also , please include materials , labor , and any other expenditures related to lead testing in your estimate. ) estimated number ( median ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( number ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( number ) ( respondent reported number ) 3h . did your lea use any of the following sources of funding for the testing in the past 12 months ? ( check one per row ) . 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) if ‘other' to 3h: what other sources of funding did your lea use ? in the past 12 months , did your lea notify the following groups that it was planning to test for lead in school drinking water before conducting the tests ? ( check one per row ) .