gao - 06-544 . washington , d.c.: may 25 , 2006 . the latter is known as the process of reappointment . prior to working at va , physicians initiate the credentialing process for their initial appointment by completing va's application process , which includes entering into vetpro information used by va medical facility officials in the credentialing process . among the credentialing information that va requires physicians enter into vetpro , for their initial appointment , is information on all the medical licenses they have ever held and the states where they have obtained these licenses , including any licenses they have held that have expired . for their reappointments , physicians must update this credentialing information in vetpro . once physicians enter their credentialing information into vetpro , a facility's medical staff specialist — an employee who is responsible for obtaining and verifying the information used in the credentialing and privileging processes — performs a data check on the information to be sure that all required information has been entered . in general , the medical staff specialist at each va medical facility manages the accuracy of vetpro's credentialing data . the medical staff specialist verifies , with the original source of the information , the accuracy of the credentialing information entered by the physicians . this type of check is known as primary source verification . for example , the medical staff specialist contacts state licensing boards in order to verify that physicians' state medical licenses are valid and unrestricted . medical staff specialists are required , at initial appointment and at reappointment , to verify the status of the state medical licenses physicians disclose to va by listing them in vetpro . the medical staff specialists can obtain information on the status of physicians' state medical licenses by accessing the information on state licensing boards' web sites or by contacting the boards directly . we interviewed officials at this office to obtain information about va's process and requirements for determining if substandard care was delivered . at initial appointment only , va requires medical staff specialists to query fsmb , which contains information from state licensing boards . we identified the internal controls va has in place for its privileging process and used gao's standards for internal controls in the federal government to determine whether these controls were adequate . during our site visits , we determined if any of the seven medical facilities had internal controls in place to help ensure the accuracy of the information used to support the renewal of clinical privileges . we conducted our work from july 2005 to may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the contact named above marcia a. mann , assistant director ; kelly barar ; mary ann curran ; martha a. fisher ; and krister friday made key contributions to this report . the clinical service chief reviews this information along with the physician's privileging information . figure 1 illustrates va's credentialing process . at the same time physicians enter credentialing information into vetpro , they complete a written request for clinical privileges .