the 2002 by 7 percent . the number of patient care staff decreased less than 1 percent during the same time period . ( see table 8. ) in addition to tvhs staff , 125 other va staff worked at murfreesboro in fiscal year 2002 . these staff consisted of network 9 ( nashville ) staff , staff working at the consolidated mail outpatient pharmacy ( cmop ) , the office of resolution management , and the veterans benefits administration . table 9 shows the numbers and types of va staff other than those who work for tvhs who work at the murfreesboro location . the 95 network 9 ( nashville ) staff consisted of 8 office staff whose offices were located at murfreesboro and 87 staff of the mid south customer accounts center ( mcac ) , which is responsible for insurance billing and collections for the network . ( see fig . the $760 million allocated on the basis of fixed - capitation amounts for patient workload and case mix came primarily from the network . the network allocated $742 million to medical centers on this basis . va headquarters allocated the remainder of the resources based on fixed - capitation amounts for patient workload and case mix — $19 million — directly to medical centers in network 9 ( nashville ) . the portion of medical center resources based on fixed - capitation amounts for patient workload and case mix was similar in other years . for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2003 , we estimated that medical centers received about three - quarters of their resources based on fixed - capitation amounts for patient workload and case mix . the network allocated the largest portion of medical centers' resources — $742 million — based on fixed - capitation amounts for patient workload and case mix in fiscal year 2002 . to calculate its patient workload , the network , like vera , used two methods . the network calculated the number of patients who received a relatively limited amount of health care during a previous 3-year period , and calculated the number of patients who received relatively more care during a previous 5-year period . in its workload calculation for this 3-year period , the network's resource allocation methodology , like vera , excluded a group of veterans , known as priority 7 veterans , but included them in its 5-year workload calculation . the network made an exception in the way it calculated 3-year workload for a one - time $5 million allocation , its share of a supplemental appropriation va received in fiscal year 2002 . for this allocation the network included all priority 7 veterans in its workload calculation . to calculate case mix in fiscal year 2002 , the network classified patient workload into different categories , depending upon estimates of the patients' health care needs and associated costs for treating them . the network , like vera , used three case - mix categories: basic non - vested , basic vested , and complex . basic non - vested and basic - vested categories included patients who have relatively routine health care needs and are principally cared for in an outpatient setting .