this is incorrect . while the navy allowed us to observe the model , we did not independently check the accuracy of the calculations because navy officials stated that the cost model , which contains the cost calculations , could not be released . we informed the navy that this would affect parts of our assessment . after we provided a draft of the report , the navy provided a briefing summarizing the results of a program office cost checkpoint conducted in september 2018 . at the briefing , we received information on updates that the navy made to the program cost estimate . as a result , we updated our assessment to reflect that the navy substantially met the best practice to regularly update the cost estimate to reflect significant changes . however , the additional information provided by the navy did not change our assessment of the accuracy and , therefore , our overall assessment of the columbia cost estimate remains valid . in paragraph 1 , page 2 , the navy did not agree with our assessment of the credibility of the cost estimate and stated that the life cycle cost estimate includes analyses that address sensitivity , risks , and uncertainty within the estimate . as we point out in the report , the estimate is based , in part , on optimistic assumptions regarding the number of labor hours needed to construct columbia class submarines . the navy has made updates to the program cost estimate based on a 2018 checkpoint review and stated that the cost risk analysis has been updated and program costs are less than originally estimated . the navy provided us with a high - level brief of these updates . however , due to the timing of this report , we were not able to fully assess the update to the cost model . given the size and complexity of the columbia class program , we continue to believe that the program's cost estimate does not adequately account for program risks . in paragraph 3 , page 1 , dod stated that our findings were largely informed by an assessment conducted by the naval center for cost analysis ( ncca ) . however , our process for assessing program cost estimates is based on the extent to which the estimate met best practices outlined in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide . in conducting our assessment , we examined multiple sources of information , including the columbia class program life cycle cost estimate , ncca's independent cost assessment , dod's office for cost assessment and program evaluation's ( cape ) independent cost estimate , and the cost estimate conducted by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , to determine what methodologies and assumptions differed from the program cost estimate . we also relied on prior experience examining and reporting on the cost performance of navy shipbuilding programs , issuing 26 reports over the past 10 years . we found , for example , that the cost estimate is based on optimistic labor assumptions which , while in agreement with ncca's assessment and cbo's estimate , results from our independent assessment of the evidence we reviewed and on our prior work .