reservists sometimes do not do this . when deers is not properly updated , reservists or their dependents might be denied medical care , or be charged incorrectly for medical services . according to dod officials we interviewed , dependents of active - duty members also have problems with deers , but these problems are accentuated for dependents of reservists because their eligibility status can change more frequently . dod does not collect data on how many reservists and their dependents experience problems with the information entered into the deers system . ii. ) the ndaa for fiscal year 2004 included a temporary provision in which congress authorized members of the selected reserve and the individual ready reserve to enroll in tricare if the reservists were eligible for unemployment compensation or ineligible for health care coverage from their civilian employer . another temporary provision allowed reservists who had received their active - duty orders to use tricare for up to 90 days before their active - duty service began . a third temporary provision extended the length of time that service members could use tricare under the transitional assistance management program ( tamp ) to 180 days after they were released from active duty . the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 indefinitely extended the provisions that provided up to 90 days of tricare coverage to reservists prior to the beginning of active - duty service and 180 days after . it also authorized the program that dod has named tricare reserve select ( trs ) , which makes tricare coverage available for purchase by certain reservists after their tamp coverage ends . as originally authorized , trs provided the option of purchasing tricare coverage to members of the selected reserve who were mobilized since september 11 , 2001 , and who continuously served on active duty for 90 days or more in support of a contingency operation . to qualify for trs , reservists had to enter into an agreement with their respective reserve components to serve in the selected reserve for the number of years that they wished to participate in trs . they could receive 1 year of coverage for each 90-day period of this qualifying service . electing to enroll in this trs program was a one - time opportunity , and as originally authorized , the program required reservists to sign the new service agreement and register for trs before leaving active duty . figure 1 describes the various periods of tricare eligibility for mobilized reservists and their dependents . the ndaa for fiscal year 2006 further expanded the number of reservists and dependents eligible to participate in the trs program . under the expanded program , which became effective on october 1 , 2006 , almost all reservists and dependents — regardless of the reservist's prior active - duty service — have the option of purchasing tricare coverage . similar to the original trs program , members of the selected reserve and dependents choosing to enroll in the expanded trs program must pay a monthly premium to receive tricare coverage . the premium paid by reservists and their dependents for coverage varies based on certain qualifying conditions that must be met , such as whether the reservist has access to an employer - sponsored health plan .