dod concurred with our recommendation . in april 2019 , the most recent update dod provided on this recommendation , dod officials said they were planning to pilot a staffing tool to help the military services determine the number of family support providers needed at each installation ; the pilot is expected to last 2 years before it can be implemented across the military services . we reported in may 2018 that osn had several efforts underway to improve its oversight of the efmp . for example , to help provide a more consistent efmp screening process across the military services and improve the collection of comparable assignment coordination data , osn had planned for each military service to use standard screening forms for family members with special medical or educational needs prior to making new assignments . in january 2020 , dod told us that the forms were approved , but related guidance had not yet been developed for implementation across all of the military services . in addition , osn planned to centralize the management of efmp data across the military services . in april 2019 , dod reported that 82 percent of the efmp related data terms were collectable across the military services which can improve osn's monitoring and reporting capabilities of the efmp . despite osn's initial efforts , we found that dod lacked common performance measures for assignment coordination and family support , and therefore is unable to fully assess efmp performance across the military services . in our may 2018 report , we recommended that dod direct osn to develop common performance metrics for assignment coordination and family support , in accordance with leading practices for performance measurement . dod concurred with our recommendation . in april 2019 , the most recent update dod provided on this recommendation , dod officials told us that each military service submits data on assignment coordination and family support to the efmp data repository on a quarterly basis , and that osn was currently developing additional performance metrics for assignment coordination and family support . until these metrics are fully developed and implemented , dod will remain unable to fully assess the effectiveness of its efforts related to assignment coordination and family support at each of its installations . we also found in may 2018 that osn did not have a process to systematically evaluate the results of the military services' monitoring activities . instead , dod requires each military service to monitor its own assignment coordination and family support provided through the efmp and requires each military service to assess performance at least once every 4 years using standards developed by a national accrediting body . more detailed information about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i of the issued report . dod provided information in april 2019 and january 2020 regarding the status of each recommendation , which we have summarized as appropriate . we conducted the work on which this testimony is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .