complexities in the basements . the cmp office noted that work in the basements was more complex than expected due , in part , to limited documentation of the basement infrastructure and relocation of essential mechanical systems . for instance , the cmp office reported that un documentation did not account for the large quantity of existing telephone , electrical , and security cables in the ceilings of the basements . according to the cmp office , each of these cables had to be individually tested to ensure that the cmp office did not remove active infrastructure , which was a labor - intensive process . figure 3 shows examples of ceiling conditions in the basements before and after cmp renovations . to address cost overruns of the cmp , the cmp office recommended that the un general assembly endorse two financing proposals . specifically , the cmp office proposed utilizing the working capital reserve fund and the interest income on cmp funds . as of february 2012 , $45 million was available in the working capital reserve fund and the interest income amounted to $107.2 million . as of may 2012 , the un general assembly had not made a decision to approve the use of these funds , but the advisory committee on administrative and budgetary questions had reviewed and supported the proposals . if the un general assembly approves the utilization of the working capital reserve fund and the interest income , these funds will cover about a third of the projected cost overruns , but cost overruns in the amount of approximately $277.7 million will still not be addressed . the cmp office is also exploring options to further address estimated cost overruns by not fully renovating two buildings included in the original cmp renovation scope . with no solution to the security issues related to the library and south annex , cmp officials told us that they would propose limiting the scope of the renovations to these buildings . rather than renovating as originally planned , the renovations to the library and south annex would only include connecting them to new building systems , such as heating and air conditioning . based on the original cost estimate for these buildings , the cmp office estimates that not fully renovating the two buildings would eliminate $65 million in planned work , which could be applied to address projected cost overruns of the cmp . cmp officials also told us that they plan to explore additional opportunities to reduce work and achieve savings related to site landscaping and the general assembly building , but have not estimated the potential savings of these options . as shown in table 4 , combining the proposed financing options with reductions in the project's planned scope would still leave the project with a shortfall of $212.7 million . another potential financing option is an additional member assessment . in the resolution approving the cmp , the un general assembly decided that , in the event of cost escalations over the approved budget of $1.88 billion , member states would be subject to a further assessment to meet the revised requirements of the cmp .