corporations . corporations have a separate legal existence from their owners , meaning that the corporation rather than the owners is ordinarily responsible for farm business debts , and the corporation can be sued . as a result , some individuals may choose the corporate form of farm business organization to protect their personal assets in case of farm financial difficulties . limited liability companies . limited liability companies are a hybrid form of business entity because they have the limited liability feature of a corporation and the income tax treatment of a general partnership . their owners are called members . limited liability partnerships . limited liability partnerships , another hybrid organizational form , eliminate the liability of an individual partner for negligence , wrongful acts , and misconduct of other partners and partnership employees . each partner remains personally liable for his or her own conduct and for the conduct of those under his or her direct supervision . partners remain personally liable for partnership commercial obligations such as loans or taxes . limited partnerships . limited partners in a limited partnership are investors whose liability for partnership financial obligations is only as great as the amount of their investment . a limited partnership must have at least one general partner who manages the farm business and who is fully liable for partnership financial obligations to be considered eligible for farm program payments . other types of entities that may qualify as one member under current payment limitation rules include an irrevocable trust , a revocable trust combined with the grantor of the trust , an estate , or a charitable organization . fsa headquarters annually selects certain farming operations for compliance reviews to determine whether they carried out their operating plans as represented when fsa made its initial determination of whether farming operation members satisfied actively engaged in farming requirements . to select farming operations for compliance reviews , fsa uses various criteria , such as whether a farming operation underwent an organizational change in the past year . table 7 shows the number of farming operations by state that fsa headquarters selected for 2009 and 2010 compliance reviews . ( according to an fsa official , these are the most recent years for which state office compliance reviews had been completed and reported to fsa headquarters at the time of our review. ) the 2009 and 2010 assigned reviews were to be completed and reported by august 1 , 2011 , and december 1 , 2012 , respectively . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) fsa's compliance reviews of farming operation members' claims of significant active personal management and personal labor contributions to meet actively engaged in farming requirements ; ( 2 ) the extent to which fsa state offices complete and report compliance reviews within expected time frames , and the results of reported reviews of management and labor contributions ; and ( 3 ) the distribution and amount of payments to farming operations by type of entity and members' claims of active personal management or personal labor contributions . pt . 1400. most recent for which compliance reviews were to have been completed when we conducted our review .