we disagree . as discussed in our draft report , initially , the army could not support its reported costs for mobilized army reservists or explain the $2.1 billion difference that we noted between its payroll system and its reported cost for mobilized army reservists . during our audit , the army and the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) provided us with several possible , although sometimes inaccurate , explanations for the $2.1 billion difference . after several months , dod provided information showing that it could account for about $1.6 billion of the $2.1 billion difference . while making it clear that the information was received too late for us to assess its accuracy and completeness as part of our audit , we did include the information in our draft report . we stated that some of the explanations appeared valid , while others did not and , taken together , they failed to fully account for the difference . the fact that dod's comment letter reduces the $1.6 billion to $1.3 billion further confirms the concerns we have expressed throughout this report over the accuracy of dod's past reported costs . finally , we believe that dod's reference in its comment letter to the $2.1 billion difference as an anomaly is a mischaracterization - - particularly when viewed in the context of its explanation that “the department's use of estimates led to a difference.” as clearly stated in this report , we found that the reported cost data are not reliable , in part because of long - standing deficiencies in dod's financial and accounting systems , a lack of systematic processes to ensure that data are properly entered into those accounting systems , and the use of estimates rather than actual information . we understand that dod is planning corrective action to address issues related to cost reporting for military personnel supporting gwot operations . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; the secretaries of the military services ; and the director , office of management and budget . copies of this report will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions regarding this report , please contact sharon pickup at 202-512-9619 or by e - mail at pickups@gao.gov or greg kutz at 202-512-9095 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made major contributions to this report are included in appendix iv . to accomplish this review , we obtained and analyzed copies of all 12 months of the department of defense's ( dod ) fiscal year 2004 monthly consolidated dod terrorist response cost report from the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , which was renamed the supplemental and cost of war execution report in january 2005 , to identify reported obligations by operation and by appropriation account for the military services .