hhs did not provide comments . in written comments , education stated that it shares the view outlined in the report that improved federal coordination will better assist k - 12 schools in preparing for emergencies , and noted that other federal agencies , including especially fema , play a significant role in school emergency preparedness . additionally , education cited the importance of involving other relevant agencies in obtaining agreement on the assignment of roles and responsibilities , including selecting a lead agency charged with primary responsibility for coordinating federal emergency preparedness assistance to k - 12 schools . we found examples of this at the schools we visited . for example , officials from 7 of the 12 schools we visited said that they debrief after drills to determine what lessons could be learned . during our interviews with schools , we learned of such improvements . for example , officials at one school realized teachers could not lock their classroom doors without stepping into the hallway , potentially placing them in harm's way . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we expressed our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( eg , plus or minus 7 percentage points ) . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn . unless otherwise noted , all percentage estimates in this report have confidence intervals within plus or minus 7 percentage points . for other estimates , the confidence intervals are presented along with the estimates themselves . in the survey , we asked questions about the emergency operations plans of districts and their schools , such as about plan development and implementation , plan content , training and resources , and challenges to emergency management planning . the quality of both the state and district survey data can be affected by nonsampling error , which includes , for example , variations in how respondents interpret questions , respondents' willingness to offer accurate responses , nonresponse error ( failing to collect data on members of the sample or answers to individual questions from respondents ) , and data collection and processing errors . to minimize such error , we included the following steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data . we pre - tested draft versions of the instrument with state educational agency officials in four states , state administrative agency officials in two states , and officials in four districts to check the clarity of the questions and the flow and layout of the survey . on the basis of the pretests , we made revisions to all three surveys . further , using a web - based survey and allowing state and district officials to enter their responses into an electronic instrument created an automatic record for each state and district and eliminated the errors associated with a manual data entry process .