we interviewed va officials about communication procedures . we also interviewed representatives from two veterans' service organizations and four procurement technical assistance centers ( ptac ) — which provide verification counseling services to veterans — about va's verification process and communication efforts . we selected the veterans groups based on our prior work in the area and the ptacs based on recommendations from the defense logistics agency and the association for procurement technical assistance centers and to obtain geographic diversity . to assess the steps va has taken to identify and address verification program challenges and longer - term goals , we reviewed the office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) strategic plan for 2014 – 2018 and its operating plan for 2016 and compared them with useful practices and lessons learned on organizational transformations , as identified in previous gao work . we reviewed our prior work on the verification program and that of the va oig . additionally , cve will notify the sender if the agency has enough information to investigate the allegation and request additional information , if necessary . based on our review of the files for these 10 allegations , we found that cve had not always documented that a noncompliance allegation had been received or that it was conducting a review of the firm's eligibility based on the allegation . cve officials said they adopted a policy in july 2015 to upload all findings from investigations that result from noncompliance allegations to the case - management system so that cve staff and contractors working on a firm's verification have access to that information . va has taken steps to improve communication with veterans since our january 2013 report , in which we discussed concerns of some veterans' organizations about the verification program . according to va officials , and generally consistent with findings from our case file review , federal employees make the final determination for verification decisions . officials said that based on information obtained through the pilot , va has determined that it needs a total of 10 federal reviewers on the critical path team ; however , it still was determining its needs for contractor staff as of november 2015 . according to osdbu officials , va has contracts in place for the verification program staff through april 2016 and plans to start the process for securing new contracts in january 2016 . we reported in january 2013 that va moved from using a paper - based verification application to an electronic application when it implemented a new case - management system in 2011 , consistent with our prior recommendation . however , we identified significant shortcomings in va's data system , including that the system did not collect important data and had limited reporting and workflow management capabilities . we recommended that va integrate its efforts to modify or replace the program's data system with a broader strategic planning effort to ensure that the system addressed the program's short - and long - term needs . va concurred with the recommendation and included a strategic performance goal to improve information technology capabilities in its strategic plan , which was consistent with our recommendation .