gao - 09-703 . washington , d.c.: july 9 , 2009 . some of this inventory may no longer be needed . these data were the most recent available for our analysis . after assessing dla's data , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our analysis and findings , as discussed in appendix i in more detail . we determined the total number of items that had more than or less than enough inventory to satisfy requirements , as identified by dod , and for each of these items also determined the number and value of parts that were more than or less than what was needed to satisfy requirements . in presenting the value of inventory in this report , we converted then - year dollars to constant fiscal year 2008 dollars using dod operations and maintenance price deflators . it is important to note that our analysis reflects points in time over the 3-year period we reviewed and that requirements and inventory levels are constantly shifting . dod and dla officials noted that when military operations are ongoing , requirements from customers are particularly volatile and less defined . they further stated that effective , timely supply support to the warfighter is of paramount interest and that efforts to measure the cost - efficiency of dla's investment in inventory should take the current and recent wartime environment into consideration , as well as the agency's success at meeting customer demands . the scope of our review did not include an analysis of dla's effectiveness at meeting customer demands . in this report , we characterize inventory as beyond current requirements when existing inventory levels are greater than what dod calls its “requirements objective,” defined as follows: “for wholesale stock replenishment , the maximum authorized quantity of stock for an item . dodig found the buy - back program to be effective at reducing procurement quantities , and thereby minimized investment for some inventory . prior to the buy - back program , dla procured 100 percent of the special program requirements , according to dodig . despite the positive effects from the program noted in the dodig report , our current audit found that dla stopped updating its buy - back rates in 2006 , coinciding with the implementation of the enterprise business system . in may 2009 , dla began again to update buy - back rates . as a result , during this period when rates were not updated , dla may not have been optimizing investment in inventory purchased for special program requirements . dla inventory managers do not consistently have accurate , timely data needed to make informed purchase decisions , which may lead to the acquisition of parts that are not needed to meet requirements . although dla recognizes that sound supply chain management principles emphasize the need for effective communication within the agency and externally with all other stakeholders in the supply chain , we found that dla inventory managers have experienced gaps in effective communication and data exchange . our review of sampled items identified cases where inventory managers , as a result of these gaps , lacked accurate , timely data that could have influenced purchase decisions .