monitoring . monitoring can include , for a program like trs that serves the public , the analysis of consumer complaints . such complaints may indicate that deficiencies exist — deficiencies that could be investigated to determine any possible underlying causes . fcc aggregates the trs consumer complaints filed with fcc , state regulators , and providers , as well as aggregating complaints by service , complaint type , and the amount of time it takes to resolve them . how have the services and costs of the trs program changed since 2002 ? the types of trs complaints most frequently received included complaints about customer service , interoperability of a consumer's equipment with a service provider's network , and “slamming” and “porting.” subsequent to our request for any analyses fcc may have conducted on trs complaints , fcc began conducting an analysis in august 2014 on complaints received from july 1 , 2013 , through june 30 , 2014 . according to fcc , there had not been any analysis like this conducted before . as a result of not routinely analyzing consumer complaints about trs , fcc was missing an opportunity to monitor the trs program and to proactively identify recurring issues , trends , and potential risks to the program and determine if corrective actions were needed . we have previously examined and noted concerns with fcc's complaint process and recommended that fcc expand its outreach to consumers about this process and establish policies and procedures for monitoring and analyzing trends in consumer complaints , among other things . fcc agreed with our prior recommendation and , with regard to trs , officials told us that they plan to routinely analyze trs complaints going forward . in january 2015 , fcc launched a new online consumer help center , which , according to fcc , will make it easier for consumers to file complaints and help streamline fcc's process for synthesizing and analyzing trends in consumer complaints . such analyses could help provide fcc with useful trs data to help it make performance - based decisions and evaluate its efforts with regard to management of the trs program . consumer groups and trs providers identified , through interviews and a survey , the following challenges to trs service's quality: the lack of skill - based routing , interpreter accuracy , and decreasing trs reimbursement rates . some of the consumer groups told us that the lack of skill - based routing — which would allow users making a trs call to request a ca with a particular specialty , such as a medical or legal expertise — negatively affects trs service quality . for example , one consumer group representative told us that under the current program a trs user's assignment is based on interpreter availability . the expectation that interpreters will be the best fit for all calls is not reasonable and can lead to poor communication , especially during medical or legal calls . in addition , 7 of the 10 providers responding to our survey said that the lack of skill - based routing leads to lower quality service ( see app . ii for our survey results ) .