pub . 111-148 , ยง 2001 ( a ) ( 1 ) , 124 stat . for purposes of this report , references to ppaca include the amendments made by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 , pub . 111-152 , 124 stat . medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans . however , recent evidence suggests that the quality of medicaid encounter data may be improving and stronger requirements surrounding encounter data submissions suggest that such improvements could continue . analyses of beneficiaries' service utilization could enhance program knowledge and serve as a baseline for future analyses of trends in utilization over time and of the factors that may contribute to differences across states . you asked us to examine the level of services provided to beneficiaries in medicaid managed care . in this report , we describe what encounter data indicate about the service utilization of medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans . the max data files for each state contain information on medicaid eligibility , service utilization , and payment for each medicaid beneficiary during a given calendar year . these files are derived from each state's medicaid statistical information system ( msis ) data files and have been processed by cms's contractor into a research friendly format . we obtained max data from cms in november 2013. determined their data were unreliable or otherwise were not usable for our purposes . within the four broad categories of professional services , e / m services include preventive services , office and inpatient visits , consultations , and emergency room or critical care visits ; procedural services include allergy , cardiovascular , ophthalmology , surgery - administered drugs ( including chemotherapy ) , and immunizations / injections ; ancillary services include pathology and lab services , physical medicine , radiology , and anesthesia services ; and other professional services include oxygen therapy , hospital - mandated on - call service , and other services that are not otherwise classified in the categories above . we , in large part , utilized the health care cost institute's methodology for grouping professional services based on a range of hcpcs codes . these codes are used by providers to bill for professional services . factors was beyond the scope of this study . ( see appendix i for a detailed description of our methodology and study limitations. ) we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to may 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . managed care and fee - for - service ( ffs ) are two possible models that states use to deliver benefits under their medicaid programs . most states provide a combination of these two delivery models , which offer different financial incentives . nationally , more than half of medicaid beneficiaries are enrolled in a managed care plan .