this is not a comprehensive listing of ethics provisions . moreover , we have excluded differences in coverage which are exclusively applicable to sges serving on faca committees as these sges are outside the scope of this report . agencies in our review used a number of government - wide and agency - specific hiring authorities to on - board sges . the selected agencies frequently designated as sges individuals who had been appointed to serve as experts or consultants ( under 5 u.s.c . ยง 3109 , or a similar agency - specific authority ) . under the government - wide authority 5 u.s.c . ยง 3109 , agencies may appoint experts and consultants , as needed , for temporary or intermittent work when authorized by an appropriation or other statute . tables 2 and 3 show government - wide and agency - specific hiring authorities that our selected agencies reported using when hiring sges . yvonne d. jones , ( 202 ) 512-6806 or jonesy@gao.gov . in addition to the individual name above , signora j . may , assistant director ; anthony patterson , analyst - in - charge ; jessica lewis , sara daleski , karin fangman , amanda miller , susan sato , and robert gebhart made major contributions to this report . he declined because the application of the law would have exposed him to criminal liability . prior to the act , most of the existing laws originated in the 19th century , at a time when persons outside the government rarely served as consultants or advisers . therefore , the laws were aimed at the activities of regular full - time employees , rather than at a consultant or other temporary employee whose main work was performed outside the government . while congress had recognized the adverse impact these laws had on temporary employees and granted specific statutory exemptions from time to time , this approach created an inconsistent range of exemptions . to address this issue , congress created a uniform means of imposing special rules on all temporary employees expected to serve within specified time limits . in doing so , congress aimed to balance efforts to ensure integrity of government service with recruitment needs . a special government employee ( sge ) is an employee of the federal government and therefore generally subject to ethics rules applicable to employees . sges must be distinguished from individuals that work for the federal government as independent contractors ( rather than employees ) , who would not be covered by federal employee ethics rules . while some ethics rules apply differently to sges ( or in fewer instances , do not apply at all ) , most ethics provisions apply to sges . the following is an overview of selected government - wide ethics provisions for executive branch employees and how they apply to sges that are not serving on federal advisory committee act ( faca ) committees . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a sge is an employee expected to perform temporary duties for no more than 130 days during a 1-year period .