in addition 41 u.s.c . 423 ( c ) requires officials who participate personally and substantially in a procurement exceeding $100,000 to report promptly contacts by bidders or offerors regarding future employment . the official must either reject the possibility of employment or disqualify himself or herself from further participation in the procurement . dod's joint ethics regulation , administered by dod's general counsel , requires dod to provide training and counseling to educate employees regarding applicable ethics laws and regulations . to implement its ethics program , dod relies on local ethics counselors within dod's military services and agencies to train and counsel employees on conflict - of - interest and procurement integrity rules . we did not determine the effectiveness of post - government employment legal restrictions or the extent to which violations of these restrictions may be occurring . in assessing dod oversight of its programs , we used the standards for internal control in the federal government , internal control management and evaluation tool , office of management and budget circular a - 123 regarding management accountability and control , and the united states sentencing commission guidelines manual . we applied the management control framework to dod and dod component ethics programs . to assess dod's efforts to train and counsel its workforce to raise awareness and dod measures of the effectiveness of these efforts , we met with the designated agency ethics official , their designee or ethics counselors in the office of the secretary of defense , air force , army , navy , defense contract management agency . in addition to headquarters offices , we selected locations that according to the federal procurement database system and dod officials spent a large amount of money on acquisitions . specifically , we met with officials from: ( 1 ) standards of conduct office , general counsel , office of the secretary of defense ; ( 2 ) general counsel — ethics and personnel office , defense contract management agency ; ( 3 ) associate counsel — ethics and personnel , eastern region , defense contract management agency , ( 4 ) ethics office and associate general counsel ( fiscal & administrative law ) , air force ; ( 5 ) air force materiel command , wright patterson air force base , air force ; ( 6 ) electronic systems center , hanscom air force base , air force , ( 7 ) deputy general counsel ( ethics & fiscal ) and standards of conduct office , army ; ( 8 ) army materiel command , fort belvoir , army ; ( 9 ) communications - electronics command fort monmouth , army ; ( 10 ) office of general counsel , navy ; and ( 11 ) naval air systems command , patuxent river , navy , ( 12 ) naval air warfare center weapons division , china lake , navy . we met with five contracting / acquisition offices and nine investigative offices at these locations . to assess dod's knowledge of defense contractors' programs to promote ethical standards of conduct , we interviewed seven defense contractors about their ethics programs and hiring practices of former government employees .