small starts projects . small starts projects complete a similar but more streamlined process that requires project sponsors to complete only one phase — project development — to be eligible for a construction grant agreement . during this phase , the secretary must also determine that the project has been adopted as the locally preferred alternative and the project sponsor must complete the environmental review process . to complete project development , project sponsors must develop a firm and reliable cost , scope , and schedule for the project and obtain all non - capital investment grant program funding commitments , among other things . before fta can recommend a project to congress for funding , it is required by law to rate the project by using a number of criteria designed to provide important information about project merit . while new starts and small starts project justification criteria have changed over time , there are currently six criteria: mobility improvements , environmental benefits , cost - effectiveness , economic development , land use , and congestion relief . in contrast , the project justification criteria for core capacity improvement projects are: mobility improvements , environmental benefits , cost - effectiveness , economic development , congestion relief , and existing capacity needs of a corridor . fta is also required to evaluate and rate the local financial commitment to the project and the project sponsor's ability to operate the project and continue to operate the existing transit system . fta is also required to rate each individual criterion on a five point scale , from low , medium - low , medium , medium - high , and high . we focused our work on selected statutory requirements contained in map - 21 that were not significantly altered or repealed by the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ) . to address our objectives , we reviewed the relevant provisions of map - 21 , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) , and the fast act . we also reviewed fta's policy guidance ; other pertinent fta documents related to the program , such as fta's annual reports to congress ; and our body of work on fta's capital investment grant program . in addition , we interviewed fta officials , representatives of the american public transportation association , and selected project sponsors . specifically , we interviewed representatives from 13 project sponsors representing 17 of 52 projects participating in the program as of february 2015 and conducted a content analysis of the interviews with project sponsors to identify and summarize themes that emerged during our discussions . the information obtained from our interviews with project sponsors is not generalizable to all project sponsors but provides insight into project sponsors' views of the map - 21 changes thus far . we also visited new york city and dallas , texas , to tour the sites of two proposed core capacity improvement projects .