let . β ) ) β ) ) a carrier has to have two or more reported crashes in the past 30 months to receive an accident safety evaluation area value . a carrier has to have three or more roadside inspections to receive a driver or vehicle safety evaluation area value . a driver has to have had a compliance review in the past 18 months to receive a safety management safety evaluation area value . there are other ways a carrier can receive a value for one of these four safety evaluation areas , refer to the description of each one provided in the background . intercept for the indicator term ( the coefficient for the indicator function ) . we used a similar parameterization to formulate the poisson regression model . we estimated regression models using the same data fmcsa used in its application of the safestat model on june 25 , 2004 , with one exception for the accident safety evaluation area . for that area , we used our own match of crashes to carriers for december 26 , 2001 , through june 25 , 2004 . the mcmis data we received in june 2006 produced different totals in the match of crashes to carriers for about 10,700 carriers . mcmis data change over time because crash data are added , deleted , or changed as more information about these crashes is obtained . the discrepancies in matching arose even though we used the identical time interval and counted crashes only when the record indicated they had been reported to fmcsa before june 25 , 2004 . because of these discrepancies , it was necessary to calculate the accident safety evaluation area values using our match of crashes and then recalculate the safestat carrier scores for june 25 , 2004 , using our accident safety evaluation area values and the original driver , vehicle , and safety management safety evaluation area values . we used our accident safety evaluation area values and the original driver , vehicle , and safety management safety evaluation area values in the regression model analysis . using the revised accident safety evaluation area values and fmcsa's original driver , vehicle , and safety management safety evaluation area values , the safestat model identified 4,989 carriers that pose high crash risks . for each regression model , we input the safety evaluation area data for the carriers in our analysis data set and used the regression model to calculate the predicted mean number of crashes . we then sorted the predicted scores and selected the 4,989 carriers with the worst predicted values as the set of high - risk carriers identified by the regression model . next , we used mcmis to determine the crash history of these 4,989 carriers between june 26 , 2004 , and december 25 , 2005 , and compared the aggregate crash history with the aggregate crash history of the carriers identified by the safestat model during the same period of time . the regression models do not categorize carriers by letter ; the regression models produce a predicted crash risk for each carrier . the regression models make use of the safety evaluation area values , but they differ from the safestat model in this respect .