staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . to determine how the department of defense ( dod ) measures the extent of foreign involvement in software development in weapon systems and how risks associated with using foreign suppliers for software development are measured and mitigated , we reviewed relevant dod guidance , policies , regulations , and procedures . in addition , we spoke with dod officials from the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition technology & logistics ) , the national security agency , the defense information systems agency , the defense advanced research projects agency , the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( networks and information integration ) , the department of the army , the department of the air force , and the department of the navy . we met with software experts at the software engineering institute of carnegie mellon university to obtain information on software development practices and risk identification and mitigation techniques used by the software industry . additionally , we met with the association of old crows ( the electronic warfare and information operations association ) whose membership includes individuals and companies involved in the design and development of software used in dod weapon programs . to document and analyze how programs specifically measure and manage their use of foreign - developed software , we identified 16 dod weapon systems and solicited information from each program office and prime contractor . we selected these weapon systems based on recommendations from dod officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems . while our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all dod systems , the systems selected varied by product type , represented each of the military services , and represented a range of dod contractors . the systems reviewed were the abrams system enhancement package , ah - 64d apache , bradley upgrade , c - 130 avionics modernization program , c - 130 j hercules , c - 17 globe master , comanche reconnaissance attack helicopter ( rah - 66 ) , f / a - 18 super hornet , f / a - 22 raptor , future combat systems , global hawk unmanned aerial vehicle , joint helmet mounted cueing system , joint strike fighter , patriot missile system , tactical tomahawk missile , and wideband gapfiller satellites . using their respective command liaisons to initially contact each office , we distributed a structured set of questions to solicit information from software managers designated by individual program managers to respond to our inquiry . to further determine how programs manage and mitigate their use of foreign - developed software , we then tailored follow - up questions to solicit information and documentation in areas such as program risk identification and management practices , security policies and procedures , and software contracting management practices . to learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use of foreign - developed software , we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials . information requested from contractors included government guidance for software practices , company software development and security practices , software risk mitigation efforts , software testing procedures , and software sourcing decision processes .