established mentoring programs . for example , an official from another commercial bank told us that the company had a web - based program that allowed employees of all backgrounds to connect with one another and to find potential mentors . instituted diversity training programs . there were some variations across financial sectors by size . however , we note that sia's 2005 study of securities firms did find variation in diversity by firm size for a variety of positions within the securities sector . officials from financial services firms and industry trade associations we contacted stated that the rapid growth of minorities as a percentage of the overall u.s. population and increased global competition have convinced their organizations that workforce diversity is a critical business strategy . financial firm officials we spoke with said that their top leadership was committed to implementing a variety of workforce diversity programs to help enable their organizations to take advantage of the full range of available talent to fill critical positions and to maintain their firms' competitive position . however , officials from financial services firms and trade associations also described the challenges they faced in implementing these initiatives , such as ongoing difficulties in recruiting and retaining minority candidates and in gaining commitment from employees to support diversity initiatives , especially at the middle management level . over the past decade , the financial services firms we contacted have implemented a variety of initiatives to increase workforce diversity , including programs designed to recruit and retain minority and women candidates to fill key positions . some bank officials said that they had developed scholarship and internship programs to encourage minority high school and college students to consider careers in banking with the goal of increasing the diversity of future applicant pools . some firms have established formal relationships with colleges and masters of business administration ( mba ) programs to recruit minority students from these institutions . some firms and trade organizations have also developed partnerships with groups that represent minority professionals , such as the national black mba association and the national society of hispanic mbas , as well as with local communities to recruit candidates , using events such as conferences and career fairs . officials from other firms said that the goal of partnerships was to build long - term relationships with professional associations and communities and to increase the visibility of financial services firms among potential employees . officials from financial services firms also said that they had developed programs to foster the retention and professional growth of minority and women employees . specifically , these firms have encouraged the establishment of employee networks . for example , a commercial bank official told us that , since 2003 , the company had established 22 different employee networks that enabled employees from various backgrounds to meet each other , share ideas , and create informal mentoring opportunities . officials from financial services firms said that these training programs increase employees' sensitivity to and awareness of workforce diversity issues and helped staff deal effectively with colleagues from different backgrounds . one commercial bank we contacted requires its managers to take a 3- to 5-day training course on dealing with a diverse workforce .