security . while the agencies responsible for the data mining efforts we reviewed followed a number of key security procedures , none had fully implemented all the procedures we evaluated . although sba , fbi , and rma applied many of the key procedures required for the information systems used in their data mining efforts , their documentation did not include all the information called for in federal guidance . state supplies that information to citibank . state also supplies required account parameters — such as single transaction and monthly spending limits — and assigns a unique identifying number . other account information is assigned by citibank . transaction data . the amount and level of detail available in the transaction data varies depending on the technical capabilities of the vendor from whom products are purchased . for example , vendors with the most basic capabilities transfer standard commercial transaction data , including the total purchase amount , date of purchase , vendor's name and location , date the charge or credit was processed , and a reference number for each charge or credit . vendors with more advanced technology can provide additional information including , among other things , unit cost and quantity , vendor's category code , and sales tax amount . ccrs provides reports on purchase card transactions and account information , including a list of all purchase card accounts , a report on suspended or cancelled accounts , and reports summarizing expenditures by region or by vendor . many reports in the ccrs system are available in a summary form that does not contain personal identifiers and in a detailed form containing personal identifiers , including account number and name . according to state officials , ccrs reports are used within state's purchase card office to ensure adequacy and accuracy of compensating controls such as credit limits . reports are also used to track expenditures and are supplied to other state offices , such as state's inspector general , for use in analyzing purchases . the internal revenue service ( irs ) uses the reveal system to detect patterns of criminal activity , analyze intelligence , and detect terrorist activities . in addition to government data , rma uses other publicly available information on an as - needed basis . crop insurance information . insurance companies participating in the program provide crop insurance information to rma on program participants , including producers , insurance agents , and loss adjusters . the crop insurance data contains personal identifiers that can be linked to program participants , including names , addresses , phone numbers , and social security numbers . land survey data . the system uses digital maps from the public land survey system — regulated by the bureau of land management — that depict public survey information , such as township locations referred to in legal land descriptions . analysts use this information to determine whether there is a discrepancy between a producer's claim and land records . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix xii . to address our objectives , we used a case study methodology .