( see fig . 3 for an example of how covered entities work with contract pharmacies and tpas to dispense 340b drugs. ) they do not include a review of covered entities' processes to prevent duplicate discounts for drugs dispensed through medicaid managed care . the potential for duplicate discounts related to medicaid managed care has existed since 2010 when manufacturers were required to pay medicaid rebates under managed care , and currently , there are more medicaid enrollees , prescriptions , and spending for drugs under managed care than fee - for - service . hrsa officials told us that they do not assess the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care as part of their audits because they have yet to issue guidance as to how covered entities should prevent duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care . they agreed that the lack of medicaid managed care guidance for covered entities was problematic , and hrsa's december 2014 policy release stated , “hrsa recognizes the need to address covered entities' role in preventing duplicate discounts under medicaid managed care , and is working with the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) to develop policy in this regard.” according to hrsa , in the absence of formal guidance , covered entities should work with their states to develop strategies to prevent duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care . however , 8 of the 10 covered entities we spoke with described challenges working with their states and local medicaid managed care organizations to ensure that duplicate discounts were not occurring or expressed the need for more guidance from hrsa on how to comply with 340b requirements related to duplicate discount prevention . as a result of these challenges , some covered entities acknowledged that they did not have assurance that duplicate discounts were not occurring with their medicaid managed care claims , while other entities told us that they did not seek discounts for the drugs of managed care patients due to compliance challenges . federal internal control standards related to control activities and monitoring state that agencies should 1 ) implement control activities through policies , such as by determining the necessary policies based on the objectives and related risks for the operational process ; and 2 ) establish and operate monitoring activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate results , such as by establishing and operating monitoring activities that are built into each entity's operations , performed continually , and responsive to change . in addition , federal law directs the agency to develop detailed guidance describing methodologies and options for avoiding duplicate discounts . until hrsa develops guidance and includes an assessment of the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care as part of its audits , the agency does not have assurance that covered entities' efforts are effectively preventing noncompliance . as a result , manufacturers are at risk of being required to erroneously provide duplicate discounts for medicaid prescriptions . audit closure process does not ensure all identified issues of noncompliance are addressed .