( see table 5. ) the remaining $20.8 million , or 93 percent of the set - aside amount , was distributed in severe need grants . the total amount of severe need grant funds available in fiscal year 2004 to distribute among the eligible grantees was less than it would have been without the hold - harmless payments . however , in fiscal year 2004 not all 25 of the title ii grantees eligible for severe need grants made the match required to receive such grants . in future years , if all of the eligible title ii grantees make the match , and if there are also grantees that qualify to receive hold - harmless funds under this provision , grantees with severe need for adap funding would get less than the amounts they would otherwise receive . care act funding for title i , title ii , and adap base grants would have shifted among grantees if hiv case counts had been used with elcs , instead of elcs alone , to allocate fiscal year 2004 formula grants . case - reporting systems need several years to become fully operational . we found that those grantees that would receive increased funding from the use of hiv cases tend to be those with the oldest hiv case - reporting systems . those grantees with the oldest reporting systems include 11 southern and 8 midwestern states whose hiv - reporting systems were implemented prior to 1995 . a second provision included in 1996 protected the eligibility of emas . some individual grantees would have had changes that more than doubled their funding . grantees in the south and midwest would generally have received more funding if hiv cases were used in funding formulas along with elcs . however , there would have been grantees that would have received increased funding and grantees that would have received decreased funding in every region of the country . funding changes in our model would have been larger without the hold - harmless and minimum - grant provisions that we included . changes in care act funding levels for title i base grants , title ii base grants , and adap base grants caused by shifting to hiv cases and elcs would be larger — up to 24 percent — if the current hold - harmless or minimum - grant amounts were not in effect . one explanation for the changes in funding allocations when hiv cases and elcs are used instead of only elcs is the maturity of hiv case - reporting systems . funding changes can also be linked to whether a jurisdiction has a name - or code - based system . cdc will only accept name - based case counts as no code - based system had met its quality criteria as of january 2006 . cdc does not accept the code - based data principally because methods have not been developed to make certain that a code - reported hiv case is only being counted once across all reporting jurisdictions . as a result , if hiv case counts were used in funding formulas , hiv cases reported using codes rather than names would not be counted in distributing care act funds .