there is some overlap in the descriptions . for example , the mission - related telephone service for the call centers should fall under services purchased from private contractors rather than miscellaneous expenses . however , because frtib budget data aggregate these expenses with charges such as postage and other miscellaneous expenses , we were unable to isolate the specific portion related to telephone services . to judge whether the administrative expenses of frtib are the result of practices consistent with federal regulations , we identified the regulations that guide frtib's expenses for activities , such as acquisition , and reviewed the department of labor's audits of frtib . to analyze frtib's current benchmarking practices , we reviewed a benchmarking study cited by frtib , notes from board meetings , and our relevant related work . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. between october 2006 and may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i describes the scope and methodology of our work in greater detail . the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( fersa ) created the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) , a retirement savings plan similar to private - sector 401 ( k ) plans , as a key component of the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) for federal workers . membership is open to federal and postal employees , members of congress and their staff , members of the uniformed services , and members of the judicial branch . participants are eligible for deferred federal ( and in certain cases , state ) income taxes on employee contributions and earnings . for employees covered by fers , agencies make contributions to employees' tsp accounts . agencies automatically contribute 1 percent of an employee's salary during each pay period to the tsp . agency contributions for any employee who remains employed by the federal government until “vested” become part of that employee's retirement savings . some employees are vested after 2 years of service ; all other employees are vested at the end of 3 years of service . agencies also match fers employee contributions to the tsp up to a total of 5 percent of the employee's basic pay . as of november 2006 , frtib managed about $200 billion in assets for 3.5 million participants and beneficiaries . frtib — which administers the tsp — is an independent agency in the executive branch . as of the close of fiscal year 2006 , frtib employed about 65 people . some functions — such as enrollment and training of participants — are handled by other federal agencies rather than frtib . these other agencies' payroll and personnel offices act as the points of contact for tsp participants ; these offices may assist with enrollment and alteration of contribution percentages . additionally , the office of personnel management has established a training program for retirement counselors of federal agencies . frtib is overseen by five presidentially appointed board members and is charged with establishing policies for the investment and management of tsp funds and with creating administrative policies for the tsp . frtib's administrative expenses are funded by ( 1 ) forfeited agency contributions and ( 2 ) assessments against net earnings of the thrift savings fund .