thickness . weight and center of gravity are closely monitored in ship design due to the impact they can have on ship safety and performance . the navy has required service life allowances ( sla ) for weight and center of gravity for ships to allow for future changes to the ships , such as adding equipment and reasonable growth during the ship's service life — based on historical data — without unacceptable compromises to hull strength , reserve buoyancy , and stability ( eg , tolerance against capsizing ) . adding new systems or equipment may require mitigating action such as removing weight ( eg , equipment , combat systems ) from the ship to provide enough available weight allowance to add desired new systems or equipment . a reduced center of gravity may require mitigation such as adding additional weight in the bottom of the ship to act as ballast , though this could also reduce the available weight allowance . these changes all require redesign which can increase costs , and this design work and related costs can potentially recur over the life of the ship . the navy is considering a range of design options to deal with adding amdr and its supporting power and cooling equipment . none of the ddg 51 variants under consideration as part of an ongoing navy study meet navy sla requirements of 10 percent of weight and 1 foot of center of gravity for surface combatants . figure 9 shows that several variants provide less than half of the required amounts . the navy has determined that only by completely changing the material of the entire fore and aft deckhouses and the helicopter hangars to aluminum or composite as well as expanding the overall dimensions of the hull ( especially the width , or beam ) can the full sla be recovered for a flight iii with a 14-foot amdr . though a decision has not yet been made , at this time navy officials do not believe that a composite or aluminum deckhouse will be used . the navy also told us that removing combat capability from ddg 51 may be required in an effort to manage weight after adding amdr , effectively reducing the multimission functionality of the class . navy officials stated that sla has not always been required , and that this allowance is included in designs to eventually be consumed . they pointed to other classes of ships that were designed with less than the required sla margins and that have performed adequately . however , as shown in table 10 , our analysis of the data indicates that these ships have faced sla - related issues . according to navy data , delivery weight of ddg 51s has gotten considerably heavier over the course of building the class , with current 51s weighing approximately 700-900 long tons ( a measure of ship displacement ) more than the first ddg 51s . further , while the current ddg 51s all can accept both an increase in weight or rise in the center of gravity , the ships are already below the required center of gravity allowances , though navy officials told us that this could be corrected with ballasting if the navy opted to fund the change .