there was no consensus on this issue . many private - sector officials stated that the government did not have a direct recovery role , while others identified a variety of potential roles , including providing information on specific threats ; providing security and disaster relief support during a crisis ; funding backup communication infrastructures ; driving improved internet security through requirements for the government's own procurement ; serving as a focal point with state and local governments to establish standard credentials to allow internet and telecommunications companies access to areas that have been restricted or closed in a crisis ; providing logistical assistance , such as fuel , power , and security , to focusing on smaller - scale exercises targeted at specific internet disruption issues ; limiting the initial focus for internet recovery planning to key national security and emergency preparedness functions , such as public health and safety ; and establishing a system for prioritizing the recovery of internet service , similar to the existing telecommunications service priority program . a third challenge to planning for recovery is that there are key legal issues affecting dhs's ability to provide assistance to help restore internet service . as noted earlier , key legislation and regulations guiding critical infrastructure protection , disaster recovery , and the telecommunications infrastructure do not provide specific authorities for internet recovery . as a result , there is no clear legislative guidance on which organization would be responsible in the case of a major internet disruption . in addition , the stafford act , which authorizes the government to provide federal assistance to states , local governments , nonprofit entities , and individuals in the event of a major disaster or emergency , does not authorize assistance to for - profit corporations . several representatives of telecommunications companies reported that they had requested federal assistance from dhs during hurricane katrina . specifically , they requested food , water , and security for the teams they were sending in to restore the communications infrastructure and fuel to power their generators . dhs responded that it could not fulfill these requests , noting that the stafford act did not extend to for - profit companies . a fourth challenge is that a large percentage of the nation's critical infrastructure — including the internet — is owned and operated by the private sector , meaning that public / private partnerships are crucial for successful critical infrastructure protection . although certain policies direct dhs to work with the private sector to ensure infrastructure protection , dhs does not have the authority to direct internet owners and operators in their recovery efforts . instead , it must rely on the private sector to share information on incidents , disruptions , and recovery efforts . many private - sector representatives questioned the value of providing information to dhs regarding planning for and recovery from internet disruption . in addition , dhs has identified provisions of the federal advisory committee act as having a “chilling effect” on cooperation with the private sector . the uncertainties regarding the value and risks of cooperation with the government limit incentives for the private sector to cooperate in internet recovery - planning efforts .