paymes . we deed insance where roups of registranay ve ee involved in cheme to defraud fema . we found thecheme ecause the registran rovded the same ssn , lasname , crreddress , and / or daged ddress ther registrns . or mcro anaysis of oteiall frauleuse of ssn and other dining re onging , and we an to reort ddnal result re dte . for pu of this temony , we dot coct sufft work to roect the magnide of oteiall frauleanroer payme of ihp . www..gov / cg - bin / getrpt ? gao - 06-403t . to vew the fll prodct , nclng the cope nd methodology , clck on the lnk above . for more nformon , contct gregory ktz t ( 202 ) 512-7455 or ktzg@g.gov . we found tht fema o mde dupte ea payme to ab,000 of the rl 11,000 debit crd recipi — oce through the distribu of debit crd anagain by check or electronic fun transfer . we found tht whle debit crd were used redominantl to oainash , food , clothing , anernaecessi , ll nuer were used for lt etertainmet , baiervce and weapns purchase , whch do ot appr to tem or ervcethre essial to saisisaster relted essiaeeds . cairman and memer of the commttee: than for the opportuni to disussr onging forensiauand relted inveigans of assisance rovded to inua and householdrelted to hrran ktrina anria . the iua and householdprom ( ihp ) , ajor comt of the federl disaster respnse effortabished under the rert t. sfford disaster relef and emerassisance act ( sfford act ) , is designed to rovde finaniaassisance to inua and household who , as rect result of ajor disaster , hve ecessaxpns anerus eed tht cannot e met through other means . a of md - decemer 200 , the federl emer managemet a ( fema ) hd distributed rl $5.bill in ihp assisance o more thanll registrns . hrran ktrina anri detroed home and dispced inua cross the gulf coast regin . i the wke of thee massive nal disaster , fema fced the formable chllenge of roving t leasome iniiaassisance to over ll registranuicklth mini“red tape,” whle hing sufft cotrol in ce to rovde assuance thef were paid o to eligible inua and households . disaster relef covered by ihp inclde temor housing assisance , reanernaroert repaiand recemet , and other ecessaxpns relted to isaster . ihp assisance is erll delvered fter an inspectas ee cocted to ver the etet of loss and determine eligibiy . because of the tremedous devasaused byrran ktrina anri , fema ctted expedted assisance to rovde fast trck mo — in the form of $2,000 inxpedted assisance payme — to eligible disaster vct to helth mmediate , emer eed of food , helter , clothing , anernaecessis . this ft respnse wasin helpingct of hrran ktrina anria . fema speced tht expedted assisance payme were to rovded o to inua and household who , as result of hrran ktrina anri , were dispced from theredisaster residece anpub . l. 93-288 , 88 s. 143 ( 1974 ) ( meded 2000 ) . ted assisance rocess is ot specll authorzed in the sfford act .