education . as noted earlier , there is evidence that people in the united states with limited english proficiency are more likely to have low educational attainment . moreover , overall levels of education can affect financial literacy . for example , the jump$tart coalition survey found a correlation between test scores on the basics of financial literacy and the educational attainment of test takers and their parents . similarly , researchers with the board of governors of the federal reserve system who reviewed consumer survey data from the university of michigan found a statistically significant correlation between respondents' levels of formal education and their ability to correctly answer a series of true - false questions concerning savings , credit , and other general financial management matters . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( eg , plus or minus 4.5 percentage points ) . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples that could have been drawn . in this report , all public user microdata area level percentage estimates derived from the 2006-2008 american community survey have 95 percent confidence levels of plus or minus 4.5 percentage points or less , unless otherwise noted . we also conducted interviews at and gathered relevant studies and educational materials from federal agencies , organizations that provide financial literacy and education , and organizations that serve or advocate for populations with limited english proficiency . we interviewed staff at the department of the treasury's office of financial education , federal trade commission , internal revenue service , federal deposit insurance corporation , and the department of health and human services' office of refugee resettlement . we also interviewed representatives and gathered documentation from organizations that address financial literacy issues , including consumer action , consumer federation of america , and the jump$tart coalition for personal financial literacy ; organizations that represent the interests of populations that include individuals with limited english proficiency , including the asian american justice center , national coalition for asian pacific american community development , national council of la raza , and southeast asia resource action center ; and organizations that represent financial service providers , including the american bankers association , credit union national association , and national foundation for credit counseling . we also gathered information from three academic researchers who focus on issues related to financial literacy or limited english proficiency . in addition , we conducted a series of 10 focus groups to discuss the barriers that individuals with limited english proficiency may face in improving financial literacy and conducting their financial affairs . information we collected from our focus groups and from the organizations we contacted provided context on the issues discussed , but this information is not generalizable to the entire populations represented by the focus groups . further , our work may not have addressed all of the different perspectives of the many diverse cultures comprised by people with limited english proficiency in the united states .