screening . screening of cargo through the application of technical or other means that are intended to identify weapons or explosives . personnel security . processes to vet individuals with unescorted access to air cargo at any point in the air cargo supply chain . training . training of personnel who screen , handle screened cargo , or perform other duties related to air cargo screening , preparation , or storage . compliance and oversight activities . clearly established requirements that regulated entities must satisfy in order to participate in the security program , and routine audits of such entities for compliance by appropriate authorities . tsa first approved the ncsp recognition process for passenger aircraft operations in fiscal year 2011 and made subsequent changes to the process in fiscal year 2013 . according to tsa , the ncsp recognition program increases its visibility into recognized governments' air cargo security requirements and air cargo supply chains , facilitates the identification of air cargo industry vulnerabilities , and is a key component of tsa's efforts to achieve 100 percent screening of u.s. - bound air cargo and enhance global supply chain security . within global strategies , the mitigation plans and programs directorate is responsible for the ncsp recognition program . air cargo advance screening ( acas ) the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) initiated the acas pilot in december 2010 to more readily identify high risk cargo for additional screening prior to all - cargo and passenger aircraft departing from foreign airports to the united states . unlike tsa , which focuses on aviation security , to include the security of air cargo prior to loading on aircraft at last point of departure airports , cbp focuses on identifying persons and cargo that may violate u.s. law and are , therefore , prohibited from entry into the united states . the aim of the pilot was to determine whether it was feasible for air carriers to submit air cargo manifest data to cbp prior to departure from all foreign last point of departure airports . this would allow cbp to analyze , target , and , if needed , for dhs to issue instructions to air carriers to provide additional cargo information or take additional security measures before such cargo is loaded onto u.s. - bound aircraft . dhs determined that the pilot was successful . in 2012 , we reported on the actions tsa took to enhance the security of u.s. - bound air cargo after the october 2010 discovery of explosive devices in packages on all - cargo aircraft bound for the united states from yemen . we recommended , among other things , that dhs assess the costs and benefits of requiring all - cargo carriers to report u.s. - bound air cargo screening data . dhs agreed with our recommendation and tsa reported that , although all - cargo air carriers submit data to tsa as part of the air cargo advance screening ( acas ) pilot , the all - cargo air carriers do not need to report on the number of shipments screened for explosives .