pub . 111-296 , § 143 , 124 stat . 3183 , 3213. to adequate food for an active and healthy life . food insecurity , which most often takes the form of poor diet quality and food access , is higher than average in southern states — an area that is typically lower cost according to rpp and spm rankings and would likely be adjusted downward in terms of eligibility . what was done to reduce bias and improve accuracy in the estimates ? underlying data: are the underlying data complete , accurate , and reliable ? regional price parities ( rpp ) are a type of price index that allows price levels of multiple goods and services to be compared from place to place . rpps include prices from a wide range of consumer goods and services collected for use in the consumer price index and supplemented with housing data from the american community survey . rpps compare the price level of goods and services in one location to the average price level of goods and services in all locations . the united states national average is set at 100 , and different locations are above 100 if price levels are higher than average in that area and below 100 if price levels are lower than average in that area . we evaluated all of the potential cost - of - living measures against these key considerations . specifically , we eliminated from consideration data sources that ( 1 ) do not cover goods that make a significant contribution to overall costs of living , ( 2 ) do not cover all states , ( 3 ) are not updated regularly , and ( 4 ) do not include low - income individuals in the sampling framework . table 6 in appendix i summarizes our analysis . we reviewed documentation for each data source to determine whether it had methodological characteristics that would limit its use for the purpose of adjustments for school meal eligibility . we identified regional price parities ( rpp ) and the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) as the two data sources that could be used to adjust eligibility guidelines for school meals programs based on these considerations . our analysis is consistent with the findings of an expert panel cited in a report to congress recently released by hhs . as a tool to adjust school meal eligibility , rpps have strengths and limitations . rpps cover a comprehensive market basket of goods , are based on reliable federal data sources , and are estimated using methods that are transparent and well documented . another advantage of the rpps is that they are available for states , as well as metropolitan statistical areas ( msa ) , and non - metropolitan areas , which would allow for cost - of - living adjustments to be made at either the state or sub - state level . however , some estimates may be less accurate because the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) calculates rpps using a complex statistical aggregation procedure that uses some estimated ( i.e.