fda agrees . guidelines issued by the office of management and budget on the quality of information disseminated by federal agencies state that transparency is important in reviews of technical information and that these reviews should be conducted in an open and rigorous manner . yet critics have stated that fda's current memos to file do not adequately communicate the scientific rationale for the decisions . some consumer groups have pointed out the brevity of some of the memos and described them as “perfunctory” summaries of company data that provide little or no insight into fda's evaluation of the data . likewise , the council for agricultural and science technology , a group of universities and companies established to provide a more scientific basis for analyzing and prioritizing agricultural issues , stated that fda does not adequately clarify in its memos to file the basis for its decisions on gm food submissions . our review of memos to file for the 50 gm food products evaluated by fda as of april 2002 confirms that these memos do not clearly explain the scientific rationale for fda's decisions . in response to these concerns , fda officials note that the memos to file had originally been created for fda's internal use rather than as public documents . thus , they were not designed to provide detailed rationales of fda's decisions on gm food submissions . in addition , fda officials said that some memos are brief because they record decisions on gm foods that are very similar to previously evaluated gm foods . however , fda officials acknowledge that fda could do more to inform the public of the basis for their decisions . for example , fda could include comments in the memos to file that better reflected the context of the evaluation ( for instance , its similarity to previous evaluations ) , the adequacy of the tests performed by the company , and the level of evaluation provided by fda . for those memos to file on submissions for gm foods that are similar to gm foods previously evaluated , fda could make reference to earlier , similar submissions having a more detailed memo to file . scientists expect future gm foods to include modifications of plant composition that may enhance the nutritional value of these foods but may also increase the difficulty of assessing their safety . while current tests have been adequate for evaluating the small number of relatively simple compositional changes made so far , some scientists believe that new testing technologies under development may be needed to assess the safety of these more complex gm foods . scientists have diverging views on the potential role of these new technologies: some view them as a useful supplement to existing tests , while others view them as a new , more comprehensive way to assess the safety of all changes in gm foods . however , the lack of technical standards for these new technologies and proof of their reliability prevents their current use . until now , most genetic modifications of plants have been aimed at increasing or protecting crop yield . these modifications have generally focused on the portions of plants , such as cornstalks , that are not consumed by humans .