bataan . our audit team in iraq met with the commanding general , multi - national force - west ; commanding officer - third marine air wing forward aviation logistics department ; commanding officer and personnel from the regimental combat team ; commanding officer and personnel from hmm 161 , ch - 46 squadron ; vmm - 266 ( maintainers , operators , and crew chiefs ) ; v - 22 contractor representatives ; all located at al asad air base , anbar province . how much will it cost ? how much can dod afford to spend ? to what degree can a strategy be crafted for ensuring control over these future costs ? if the v - 22 is not or is only partially suitable , to what degree can another existing aircraft or some mixture of existing aircraft ( even including v - 22s ) or a new aircraft perform all or some of its roles more cost effectively ? some consideration should be given to evaluating the roles such aircraft play in today's theaters of war and whether their performance warrant their cost . we recommend the secretary of defense take the following two actions . given the difference between the now demonstrated and previously expected operational capabilities and costs of the v - 22 , we recommend that the secretary of defense re - examine the v - 22 by requiring a new alternatives analysis to redefine and revalidate the proper mix of aircraft to achieve the marine corps' current and future medium - lift needs , possibly to include other services' operational uses . such an analysis should weigh v - 22 capabilities and costs against the capabilities and costs of other existing helicopters and aircraft , upgrades to existing helicopters and aircraft , and potential future acquisitions , such as the upgrade to the ch - 53 currently under development . this analysis should be conducted within the context of anticipated future budgetary constraints , and the services should then adjust total v - 22 procurement and annual production and acquisition plans accordingly . given the unresolved operational effectiveness and suitability issues and increasing costs associated with the v - 22 system , we also recommend that the secretary of defense require the marine corps to develop a prioritized strategy to improve system suitability ( including identifying why measures such as component reliability and aircraft availability are low ) , reduce operational costs , and align future budget requests accordingly . dod provided written comments on a draft of this report , which are reprinted in appendix ii . dod also separately provided technical comments , which we reviewed and incorporated as appropriate . in its written comments , dod concurred with our recommendation for the development of a prioritized strategy to improve system suitability , reduce operational costs , and align future budget requests accordingly and non - concurred with our recommendation for a new v - 22 alternatives analysis .