irs performed this reconciliation individually for each it investment . however , irs reported that it did not review the summary of capital investments generated by treasury in its entirety for accuracy after it was generated from spike . leverage and collaborate with external stakeholders . cultivate a well - equipped , diverse , skilled , and flexible workforce . select highest value work , using data analytics and a robust feedback loop . drive more agility , efficiency , and effectiveness in irs operations . these future state themes are in addition to treasury's department - wide focus on strengthening cybersecurity and eliminating identity theft . irs reported that it adopted a new , more strategic approach to identify and select budget program priorities based on the future state themes . a user fee is charged to beneficiaries of certain goods or services provided by the federal government . in general , a user fee is related to a voluntary transaction or request for government goods or services above and beyond what is normally provided to the public . although irs services and operations are primarily funded through annual appropriations , irs has the authority to supplement its appropriations with other resources , such as user fees . until 1995 , irs user fee collections were deposited into the treasury's general fund . in 1995 , congress granted irs authority to retain and obligate up to $119 million in user fee revenue to supplement its annual appropriation . in 2005 , congress removed the limit of $119 million and irs was permitted to retain and obligate user fees that were implemented after september 30 , 1994 , or the portion of the fee that has been increased since september 30 , 1994 , for those fees that existed prior to that date . for example , fees for installment agreements — monthly payment plans for taxes owed — were established after september 30 , 1994 , and therefore irs retains the full amount of the fee collected . however , the fee for enrolling as an actuary is divided between irs and the general fund of the treasury because this user fee existed prior to september 30 , 1994 . in fiscal year 2016 , irs expects to collect about $422 million in user fee revenue from sources such as installment agreements ( about $155 million ) and income verification express services ( about $51 million ) . irs deposits user fees that it is authorized to retain into its miscellaneous retained fees fund — an estimated $411 million in fiscal year 2016 — before transferring funds to an appropriation account to be obligated . for fiscal year 2016 , planned user fee obligations ( $509 million ) account for about 4 percent of irs's total obligations ( $12,374 million ) . irs's user fee funds are available until expended ( no - year funds ) and funds that are not obligated in the fiscal year in which they are collected are carried over to the next fiscal year . it comprises a significant portion of irs's budget and plays a critical role in enabling irs to carry out its mission and responsibilities .