sec . 3512 ( c ) , ( d ) ( 2000 ) ( commonly referred to as the federal managers' financial integrity act ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 123 , revised june 21 , 1995 , management accountability and control . we found matters involving computer controls that we do not consider to be reportable conditions.we will communicate these matters to bpd's management , along with our recommendations for improvement , in a separate letter to be issued at a later date . our tests in fiscal year 2003 disclosed no instances of noncompliance with selected provisions of laws that would be reportable under u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards or omb audit guidance . however , the objective of our audit of the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2003 , was not to provide an opinion on overall compliance with laws and regulations . accordingly , we do not express such an opinion . bpd's overview on federal debt managed by the bureau of the public debt contains information , some of which is not directly related to the schedules of federal debt . we do not express an opinion on this information . however , we compared this information for consistency with the schedules and discussed the methods of measurement and presentation with bpd officials . based on this limited work , we found no material inconsistencies with the schedules . management is responsible for the following: preparing the schedules of federal debt in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ; establishing , maintaining , and assessing internal control to provide reasonable assurance that the broad control objectives of the federal managers' financial integrity act are met ; and complying with applicable laws and regulations . we are responsible for obtaining reasonable assurance about whether ( 1 ) the schedules of federal debt are presented fairly , in all material respects , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and ( 2 ) management maintained effective related internal control as of september 30 , 2003 , the objectives of which are the following: financial reporting: transactions are properly recorded , processed , and summarized to permit the preparation of the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2003 , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles . compliance with laws and regulations: transactions related to the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2003 , are executed in accordance with laws governing the use of budget authority and with other laws and regulations that could have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt . we are also responsible for testing compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations that have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt . further , we are responsible for performing limited procedures with respect to certain other information appearing with the schedules of federal debt .