the analysts agreed in their determinations for all seven interviews . to identify direct reports for interviews , we asked the former tses we interviewed to provide us with names of employees who reported directly to them when they were in tses positions and who they believed were still tsa employees ; among the 25 former tses staff who responded to our inquiry , we were given names of 52 tsa employees who had reported directly to these tses staff during their tenure at tsa . though this selection method relied upon the recommendations of separated tses staff , we attempted to adjust for any bias the tses staff may have had when recommending these individuals by ensuring that the direct reports we interviewed were evenly distributed across the following three categories: 1 ) reported to tses staff who left tsa for only nonadverse reasons ; 2 ) reported to tses staff who left tsa for a combination of nonadverse and adverse reasons ; and 3 ) reported to tses staff who left tsa for adverse reasons only . we then selected 26 direct reports for interviews from among the three groups . we were able to conduct a total of 22 interviews: 5 from the nonadverse category ; 4 from the nonadverse / adverse category ; and 13 from the adverse only category . to what extent are current tsa efforts to manage tses attrition consistent with effective human capital practices and standards for internal control in the federal government ? to address the first objective , we obtained fiscal year 2004 through 2008 data from the office of personnel management's ( opm ) central personnel data file ( cpdf ) to determine the rate of attrition among tses staff and ses staff in other dhs components and cabinet - level departments . we selected this time period because 2004 was the first full fiscal year during which tsa was a part of dhs after transferring from the department of transportation in march 2003 , and 2008 was the most recently completed fiscal year for which attrition data were available in cpdf . to calculate attrition rates , we divided the total number of tses who separated in a given fiscal year by the average number of tses employed by the agency for that fiscal year . for these calculations , we included all separation types — that is , the manner in which the tses or ses staff member left the agency or department , such as through resignation , transfer to another cabinet - level department , retirement , termination , and expiration of a term appointment . however , we did not include transfers from tsa to other ses positions within dhs because this information was not readily identifiable within cpdf data . we found cpdf data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this study . in addition to calculating the overall rate of attrition for tsa , dhs , and cabinet - level departments , we also calculated attrition rates for each separation type . to place tsa's senior executive attrition rate in context , we compared it to the overall dhs ses attrition rate ( excluding tsa ) and the overall ses attrition rate for all other cabinet - level departments ( excluding dhs ) .