least 70 countries . in addition , irs pointed to certain current qi requirements that provide irs with some information on fraud and illegal acts . however , as discussed in our draft report , we believe irs could draw on existing auditing standards to establish a consistent definition of fraud and illegal acts for the purposes of the qi program . in addition , the provisions to which irs refers rely in part on self - reporting by the qi and in part focus on “know your customer” rule violations alone . however , self - reporting by the qi is not equivalent to judgments by the auditors about whether there are indications that fraud or illegal acts have occurred . and the universe of potential fraud or illegal acts extends beyond potential violations of know your customer rules . therefore we reaffirm our recommendation . finally , irs agreed that while there are benefits to electronic filing of tax forms 1042 and 1042-s , irs said such a requirement would be a burden for qis that file only a few ( 3 or fewer ) forms . irs said it has implemented a procedure to include an application to electronically file for all qis applying for or renewing participation in the program . if irs were to require all qis to electronically file , we believe any burdens filers of few forms would face could be addressed by offering them a waiver opportunity similar to waivers that are available to all institutions that are currently required to file electronically ( those that file more than 250 returns ) . requiring electronic filing whenever possible would reduce irs's costs and improve the timeliness and accuracy of data for program oversight . money is mobile and once it has moved offshore , the u.s. government generally does not have the authority to require foreign governments or foreign financial institutions to help irs collect tax on income generated in the u.s. from that money . in 1913 , the united states enacted its first legislation establishing that u.s. persons and nras were subject to withholding at source before the investment income leaves u.s. jurisdiction . subsequent legislation made withholding applicable to dividends and certain kinds of bond income earned by nras , foreign corporations , foreign partnerships , and foreign trusts and estates . irs issued a comprehensive set of withholding regulations for nras in 1956 . these regulations have been changed over the years to reflect statutory changes or perceived abuses by taxpayers . to attract foreign investment , the tax rules were further adapted to exclude several types of nra capital income from u.s. taxation , such as capital gains from the sale of personal property , interest income from bank deposits , and “portfolio interest,” which includes u.s. and corporate debt obligations . the latter exemption helps finance the u.s. national debt by offering a u.s. tax free rate of return for foreigners willing to invest in u.s. bonds . among the types of u.s. source investment income sent to nras , some are exempt from u.s. tax and some are taxable . payors must report this income to irs , withhold where appropriate , and deposit such tax with treasury .