the disability determination process is the same for di and ssi applicants . an ssa field office determines that an applicant has met ssa's nonmedical eligibility requirements for disability benefits , and then the applicant's claim is sent to the state dds for an initial review of the claimant's medical eligibility . after assembling all medical and vocational information for the claim , a dds examiner , in consultation with appropriate medical staff , determines whether the claimant meets the requirements of the law for having a disability . claimants who are dissatisfied with the initial dds determination may choose to pursue several levels of appeal , including: a “reconsideration” of the claim , conducted by dds personnel who were not involved in the original decision ; a hearing before an administrative law judge ( alj ) ; and a review of the claim by the appeals council , which is comprised of administrative appeals judges and appeals officers . final ssa decisions are also subject to review in federal district court . if ssa determines that an individual is disabled , the agency is required to conduct periodic cdrs to ensure that only recipients who remain disabled continue to receive benefits . these reviews assess whether individuals are still eligible for benefits based on several criteria , including their current medical condition and ability to work . dds staff generally establish the timeframe for when ssa should conduct a cdr on the basis of the expected likelihood of a recipient's medical improvement . however , ssa also uses a profiling model to score and prioritize cdrs if funding is not available to conduct all scheduled cdrs . in response to prior concerns that some recipients were being arbitrarily removed from the disability programs via the cdr process , congress passed the social security disability benefits reform act of 1984 , which , among other things , established a medical improvement standard . under this standard , ssa may only discontinue benefits for an individual if it finds substantial evidence demonstrating both that a beneficiary's medical condition has improved and that the individual is able to engage in substantial gainful activity . if ssa determines that these conditions have not been met in the course of conducting a cdr , the recipient may continue to receive benefits until the individual receives a subsequent cdr ( which potentially could result in a discontinuation of benefits ) , dies , or transitions to social security retirement benefits . additionally , because di benefit payments are , on average , almost twice as much as ssi childhood payments , cdrs of adult di cases generally produce greater lifetime savings , according to ssa officials . however , ssa reported that it ceased about 12 percent of all adult di claims that received a cdr . in comparison , our analysis of ssa's data showed that 32 percent of child ssi claims that received a cdr were ceased in fiscal year 2011 . for example , of those childhood cdrs conducted for children under age 18 with mental impairments , ssa ceased benefits for about 28 percent on average in fiscal year 2011 , with personality disorders and speech and language delay having the highest cessation rates , 39 and 38 percent , respectively .