at the time of our review , that figure had not been finalized . ( see table 1. ) to determine whether the estimates of costs and savings from the planned consolidation of the eastern region's operations reflect all potential costs and savings , we analyzed the estimates as presented in deca's july 2000 proposal , along with the underlying assumptions and supporting detail . on a more limited basis , we also analyzed , but did not verify , the reliability of the revised estimates in deca's february 2001 proposal . we also discussed with deca officials their methodology for arriving at the estimates to ensure that the logic was sound . to determine whether the proposed consolidation was the best way to achieve efficiencies , we examined planning documentation and interviewed key officials across the agency . in reviewing the plan's documentation , we sought out alternatives that may have been considered in developing the proposal but found none . it involves the closure of the two area offices within the eastern region — the northern area office at fort meade , maryland , and the southern area office at maxwell air force base , montgomery , alabama — and the relocation of most operational functions to the existing eastern region headquarters in virginia beach . through consolidation and a succeeding regional headquarters reorganization , deca expects to reduce the number of eastern region personnel authorizations from 179 to 122 — a reduction of 57 spaces . the july 2000 plan also called for transferring the management of 25 stores located in the eastern region to the midwest region . had this transfer been retained in the revised plan , the number of stores in the eastern region would have been reduced to 81 , while the number of stores in the midwest region would have increased to 59 . however , the revised plan defers this aspect of the reorganization for further study . commissaries are , for the most part , geographically dispersed throughout the world , and are located in 45 states and many foreign countries . to assist regional management in overseeing store operations , the regions employ zone managers , whose role is to work with store managers to resolve problems and keep operations running smoothly . zone managers typically oversee from 7 to 10 stores , depending on , among other things , the geographical dispersion of the stores within the region . as part of a larger effort to reduce costs and improve operations on an agency - wide basis , deca prepared a plan to reorganize its regional management structure . in july 2000 , the agency submitted its plan for approval to the commissary operating board , which is comprised of representatives from each of the military services . the board , which has day - to - day operational oversight responsibilities for deca , reports to the under secretary of defense ( personnel and readiness ) , who exercises overall supervision of deca . after we expressed concerns about the july 2000 plan , deca redrafted its proposal and in february 2001 sent the revised plan to the commissary operating board for its approval .