technology . we previously reported that in january 2011 , after 5 years and a cost of nearly $1 billion , dhs ended the secure border initiative network ( sbinet ) , a multi - year , multi - billion - dollar technology effort aimed at securing u.s. borders because it did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards . dhs developed a successor plan to secure the border — the alternative ( southwest ) border technology plan — where cbp is to focus on developing terrain - and population - based solutions utilizing existing , proven technology , such as camera - based surveillance systems , for each border region beginning with high - risk areas in arizona . in november 2011 , we reported that cbp's planned technology deployment plan for the arizona border , the arizona border surveillance technology plan , was expected to cost approximately $1.5 billion over 10 years . however , we also reported that cbp did not have the information needed to fully support and implement the technology deployment plan in accordance with dhs and office of management and budget guidance , among other things.dhs determine the mission benefits to be derived from implementation of the plan and develop and apply key attributes for metrics to assess program implementation . dhs concurred with our recommendation and reported that it planned to develop a set of measures to assess the effectiveness and benefits of future technology investments . infrastructure . in may 2010 , we testified that cbp had not accounted for the effect of its investment in border fencing and infrastructure on border fencing was designed to impede people on border security . foot and vehicles from crossing the border and to enhance border patrol's ability to detect and interdict violators . cbp estimated that border fencing and other infrastructure had a life - cycle cost of about $6.5 billion for deployment , operations , and maintenance . cbp reported a resulting increase in control of southwest border miles , but could not account separately for the effect of the border fencing and other infrastructure . in a september 2009 report , we recommended that cbp conduct an analysis of the effect of tactical infrastructure on border security.with the homeland security institute ( hsi ) — a federally funded research and development center — to analyze the effect of tactical cbp concurred and reported that it had contracted infrastructure on the security of the border.had not provided an update on this effort . as of may 2012 , cbp integrating border security operations with federal , state , local , tribal , and international partners . leveraging the law enforcement resources of federal , state , local , tribal , and international partners was a key element of border patrol's 2004 strategy and border patrol's implementation of the strategy , on the northern and coastal borders where border patrol had fewer resources relative to the size of the geographic area , and on the southwest border where border patrol used the assistance of law enforcement partners to conduct surge operations in high - priority areas . border patrol headquarters officials stated that integration of border security operations will be a key element of the 2012-2016 strategic plan across all borders .