the forest service . the forest service's mission is to sustain the health , diversity , and productivity of the nation's forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations . the forest service manages 193 million acres of national forest and national grasslands . the nation's 155 national forests and 20 national grasslands contain much of the nation's terrestrial biodiversity and provide a range of ecosystem services . for example , national forests provide important habitat for many rare , threatened , and endangered species as well as timber and fresh water . the agency manages national forests for a variety of uses including recreation , timber harvesting , livestock grazing , mining , and wilderness protection . wildfires , invasive species , and extreme weather events are among the critical stressors currently affecting national forests , and they are all expected to be exacerbated by climate change . according to a 2011 report by the interagency climate change adaptation task force , these impacts put at risk the many benefits americans receive from forests . see figure 1 for a map of the national forest system . the forest service , noaa , the u.s . fish and wildlife service , and the national park service have all developed a strategic direction for addressing climate change adaptation through a variety of planning documents . the agencies have also developed guidance , training , and other tools for managers to use in adapting to climate change . the one field location we visited for each agency has taken various steps to address climate change adaptation , such as conducting vulnerability assessments . the bureau of land management has not developed a strategic direction for addressing climate change impacts , but it has taken some adaptation - related steps . managers at the bureau field location we visited , absent direction from headquarters , have not taken steps to address climate change adaptation . in october 2008 , the forest service developed a strategic framework for according to the framework , addressing responding to climate change.climate change adaptation must be a central priority for the agency because many ecosystem services provided by national forests — which include water for drinking and agriculture , as well as lumber and fiber for paper — may be lost or significantly altered if national forest ecosystems are left to adapt on their own . according to the u.s . global change research program , changes in the climate have been observed in the united states and its coastal waters and will adversely affect aspects of the nation's natural environment . as table 1 shows , changes in the climate — including warmer temperatures , changes in precipitation patterns , rising sea levels , and more intense storms — affect the natural environment in a number of ways including more severe drought , increased frequency of large wildfires , insect infestations , changed habitats , and possible loss of species that cannot survive in the changed conditions . according to a 2009 study by the u.s . global change research program , in areas where weather events become more intense and frequent with climate change , economic and social costs will increase .