( see fig . 3 for a depiction of the account's funding flow ) . the special account comprises multiple discrete accounts for the cip as well as for the cash transfer program . for planning purposes , these are considered one large account , but usaid and the egyptian foreign affairs ministry can track the funding to a cip or cash transfer deposit from a prior year . although the foreign assistance act and the annual memorandum give usaid a role in determining the uses of the funds in the account , the local currency belongs to the egyptian government . for fiscal years 1999-2003 , about three - quarters of the cip - generated funds from the special account were used for general and sector budget support to help reduce egypt's budget deficit . in addition , usaid used about 6 percent of cip - generated funds in the special account for some of its operating expenses . usaid also used about 9 percent of this local currency to finance various projects , technical and feasibility studies , evaluations , and assessments , among other things ; the remaining 8 percent covered other disbursements such as refunds for cancelled transactions . over the years , congressional committee reports have encouraged usaid to use funds from the account to support specific projects , such as the construction of a new campus for the american university in cairo . table 1 lists examples of activities funded with cip - generated funds from the special account during fiscal years 1999-2003 . various factors have limited the cip's ability to foster a competitive private sector in egypt . first , the cip has been operating in a policy and economic climate not conducive to business activity . although the government of egypt took steps , beginning in 1991 , to shift from a centrally planned economy to one more hospitable to private enterprise , the pace of reforms slowed in the late 1990s . for example: subsidies and government spending . the budget deficit as a percentage of gross domestic product declined from more than 17 percent in the early 1990s to 3 percent at the end of the decade . however , the deficit subsequently increased steadily , reaching 6.3 percent in 2002-2003 . the economist intelligence unit forecasts that egypt's budget deficit will widen to about 7 percent in fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , mainly because of subsidies to protect citizens from price increases and slow private sector economic activity . according to the state department , egypt's real gross domestic product growth slowed from nearly 6 percent in fiscal year 1999 to roughly 3 percent in fiscal year 2003 , and the private sector's share of this growth fell . a third factor limiting the cip's effect on the private sector has been egyptian banks' hesitancy to provide financing . because of experience with bad loans , the recent economic slowdown , and the resulting increased risk of nonrepayment , egyptian banks are reluctant to finance entrepreneurial activity , according to the economist intelligence unit . egyptian bank officials told us that they generally provide cip funds to firms they deem creditworthy , usually well - established customers with proven credit records .