gao - 13-438 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2013 . ( see fig . the 2012 phemce strategy lays out the four phemce strategic goals and their underlying objectives for building hhs's countermeasure capabilities to respond to a public health emergency . the 2012 phemce implementation plan updates the 2007 implementation plan and describes the activities that hhs and its interagency partners plan to conduct to achieve the four strategic goals and their associated objectives , the medical countermeasures hhs wants to develop and procure , and the capabilities hhs wants to build to support countermeasure development and procurement . the plan also includes 72 items that hhs selected as key priorities for fulfilling phemce's strategic goals within the next 5 years , which the agency placed into three categories . for the purposes of this report we refer to the items in these categories as “priority activities,” “priority threat - based approaches,” and “priority capabilities.” the 33 priority activities reflect activities that support phemce's overall mission and include pursuits such as developing systems to track countermeasure activities across all phemce partners , enhancing national laboratory capabilities , and developing guidance documents and information for the public on using medical countermeasures in an emergency . ( see table 1 for examples of phemce priority activities by strategic goal. ) in addition to the 33 priority activities , the 25 items identified as priorities for threat - based approaches are intended to directly address threats such as anthrax or smallpox . these priorities include pursuits such as publishing updated clinical guidance for anthrax countermeasures ; developing and qualifying with fda animal models to test the safety and efficacy of medical countermeasures for certain biological , radiological , and nuclear threats ; and developing new plans for the distribution and dispensing of pandemic influenza antivirals . the remaining 14 items identified as priority capabilities reflect what hhs refers to as crosscutting capabilities . the priority capabilities are a mix of programs or technological applications that may , for example , support the development of countermeasures for a range of existing cbrn threats or for any new threats that may emerge in the future , or build infrastructure to provide countermeasure developers assistance with advanced development and manufacturing services . the priority capabilities include such pursuits as initiating a research program to fill gaps in knowledge in the area of patient decontamination in a chemical incident and establishing a network of facilities to support the filling and finishing of vaccines and other countermeasures . in addition to the 72 items hhs selected as key priorities for fulfilling phemce's strategic goals , the implementation plan also identifies the medical countermeasures that constitute hhs's priorities for development and procurement to fulfill strategic goal 1 , which we refer to as “priority countermeasures” for the purposes of this report . ( see table 2. ) many of the threat - specific countermeasures for which phemce set procurement priorities in 2007 continue to be priorities for development and procurement in the 2012 plan , such as anthrax vaccine , smallpox antivirals , chemical agent antidotes , and diagnostic devices for radiological and nuclear agents .