databases . despite multiple searches by cbp , he was checked at the border approximately 20 times during april and may 2007 , and was able to cross into the united states . according to officials from both agencies , the mexican citizen did not turn over his visa when his physician initially requested it , which would have allowed cdc and cbp officials to locate information about him . on may 31 , approximately a month after state and local health officials first notified federal officials of the incident , the mexican citizen gave his visa to his physician . ( fig . ( 2 ) to what extent have hhs and dhs made changes to response procedures as a result of the tb incidents ? to determine what factors affected hhs's and dhs's responses to the two tb incidents , we reviewed the policies and procedures each had in place at the time of the incidents for conducting a coordinated response to a public health incident , as well as laws and regulations . we interviewed headquarters officials at hhs , cdc , dhs , cbp , and tsa about their responses . in addition , we visited a land port of entry that was involved in one of the incidents — the bridge of the americas in el paso , texas — and an air port of entry — dulles international airport outside of washington , d.c. — to obtain additional information about the procedures in place at the time of the incidents . we examined whether the existing procedures for information sharing between hhs and dhs provided for timely response to the incidents — that is , whether officials were sufficiently knowledgeable of their roles to respond to the incidents immediately . in so doing , we compared their responses to the incidents with prior gao reports on practices to enhance and sustain agency collaboration and our standards for internal control in the federal government for guidelines on internal controls — components of an organization's management that provide reasonable assurance that certain objectives , including effectiveness and efficiency of operations , are being achieved . to identify changes made to response procedures as a result of the tb incidents , we reviewed new and revised policy documents and interviewed hhs and dhs officials as to whether and how their procedures were changed and whether new ones were created . we observed the use of new agency procedures and interviewed hhs and dhs officials at the bridge of the americas and dulles international airport . to identify the extent to which these changes addressed limitations identified by the incidents , we reviewed agency documents , including hhs's and cdc's after - action reports on the tb incident involving the u.s. citizen . these after - action reports identified deficiencies in their response to the tb incidents and made recommendations to improve their response in future incidents . we also reviewed hhs's and cdc's plans and policies for tracking the steps they are taking to address the recommendations identified in the after - action reports .