ii ) . he stated that the department agreed with our characterization of the national institute of standards and technology's fisma responsibilities and activities and also said that nist is currently reviewing its guidance , including that for the depth and breadth of testing security controls . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of the report to other interested congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the deputy secretary of the department of commerce . we will make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . identifying the frequency of periodic testing . defining roles and responsibilities of personnel performing the testing . selecting a minimum set of security controls evaluated during periodic tests . identifying and testing common security controls . the scope of our review included ( 1 ) the 24 federal agencies , focusing on reviewing their policies and procedures and responses to our survey and ( 2 ) a selection of 30 systems at 6 of these agencies , focusing on in - depth evaluations of their periodic controls testing and evaluation practices and methods . to determine the adequacy and effectiveness of federal agencies' policies and procedures for testing and evaluating security controls for their information systems , we conducted a survey of the 24 major agencies , which included 21 questions for the agencies and 4 questions for the agencies' inspectors general . we also reviewed the agencies' policies that were submitted in response to the surveys and compared them against six policy elements from the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) standards and guidelines that we considered to be important for performing effective testing . determining the depth and breadth of periodic testing . including assessment results in remediation plans . to augment our work , we considered the responses to our survey by the agencies and the inspectors general . we selected and examined 5 systems comprised of low , medium , and high impact general support systems and major applications for a total of 30 systems across the six agencies . because we were evaluating the extent to which agencies periodically test and evaluate the effectiveness of security controls , we avoided selecting systems that had recently undergone certification and accreditation where more rigorous ( independent ) testing is conducted . in cases where an agency had recently certified and accredited the majority of its systems , we selected those having the oldest accreditation date within the selected time period . we evaluated government - owned and operated systems , and government - owned , contractor - operated systems ; all were operational and none were under development . we did not select systems that were recently or currently under review by an inspector general or those classified as national security or financial .