cost of casualties . faa uses $3 million as an estimate of the average loss per casualty , which is multiplied by the number of estimated casualties . property damage . faa applies a predetermined factor — which it recently changed from 50 percent to 25 percent — to the estimated cost of casualties to derive estimated losses from property damage . the total mpl is equal to the estimated cost of casualties plus property damage . faa has revised two components of its mpl methodology since our 2012 report . for example , in april 2016 , the agency adopted a new method for estimating the number of casualties , known as the risk profile method . this method uses different tools to simulate a range of possible scenarios to create a distribution of potential casualty numbers and the simulated probability of different levels of casualty numbers . the risk profile method replaced faa's “overlay method,” which was a method it had used since the early 1990s which the agency said did not work well for launches of small launch vehicles in remote areas , or for reentries . in addition , faa reduced the factor it uses to estimate losses due to property damage , based on tests of a new process for estimating such losses that showed the previous factor was too high . we have previously reviewed faa's mpl methodology in 2012 and 2017 . in 2012 we examined the u.s. government's indemnification policy , the federal government's potential costs for indemnification , and the effects of ending indemnification on the competitiveness of u.s. launch companies , among other aspects of faa's mpl methodology . cslca required faa to evaluate its mpl methodology incorporating three requirements , but the agency's report did not fully address these requirements . first , the act required faa to ensure a balance of risk between launch companies and the federal government . however , agency officials told us that they did not re - evaluate the probability thresholds — which are used to divide the risk of loss between launch companies and the federal government — as part of evaluating its mpl methodology when implementing the risk profile method due to resource constraints . second , the act required faa to consider the cost impact of implementing an updated mpl methodology , but the agency did not evaluate the impact of implementing its revised methodology on the direct costs to launch companies ( insurance premiums ) and to the federal government ( indemnification liability ) . third , the act required faa to consult with the commercial space sector and insurance providers in evaluating its mpl , but they did not consult such parties in response to the act . without fully addressing cslca's mandated requirements , faa cannot ensure that the federal government is not exposed to greater liability costs than intended or that launch companies are not required to purchase more insurance coverage than necessary .