appraisal subcommittee . asc has responsibility for monitoring the implementation of title xi by the private , state , and federal entities noted previously . among other things , asc is responsible for ( 1 ) monitoring and reviewing the practices , procedures , activities , and organizational structure of the appraisal foundation — including making grants to the foundation in amounts that it deems appropriate to help defray costs associated with its title xi activities ; ( 2 ) monitoring the requirements that states and their appraiser regulatory agencies establish for the certification and licensing of appraisers ; ( 3 ) monitoring the requirements established by the federal banking regulators regarding appraisal standards for federally related transactions and determinations of which federally related transactions will require the services of state - licensed or - certified appraisers ; and ( 4 ) maintaining a national registry of state - licensed and - certified appraisers who can perform appraisals for federally related transactions . among other responsibilities and authorities , the dodd - frank act requires asc to implement a national appraisal complaint hotline and provides asc with limited rulemaking authority . to carry out these tasks , asc has 7 board member positions and 10 staff headed by an executive director hired by the board . five of the board members are designated by the federal agencies that are part of ffiec — the bureau of consumer financial protection ( also known as the consumer financial protection bureau or cfpb ) , fdic , the federal reserve , ncua , and occ . the other two board members are designated by the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) — which includes the federal housing administration ( fha ) — and fhfa . asc is funded by appraiser registration fees that totaled $2.6 million in fiscal year 2011 . available data and interviews with lenders and other mortgage industry participants indicate that appraisals are the most frequently used valuation method for home purchase and refinance mortgage originations . appraisals provide an opinion of market value at a point in time and reflect prevailing economic and housing market conditions . data provided to us by the five largest lenders ( measured by dollar volume of mortgage originations in 2010 ) show that , for the first - lien residential mortgages for which data were available , these lenders obtained appraisals for about 90 percent of the mortgages they made in 2009 and 2010 , including 98 percent of home purchase mortgages . the data we obtained from lenders included mortgages sold to the enterprises and mortgages insured by fha , which together accounted for the bulk of the mortgages originated in 2009 and 2010 . the enterprises and fha require appraisals to be performed for a large majority of the mortgages they purchase or insure . for mortgages for which an appraisal was not done , the lenders we spoke with reported that they generally relied on validation of the sales price ( or loan amounts in the case of refinances ) against an avm - generated value , in accordance with enterprise policies that permit this practice for some mortgages that have characteristics associated with a lower default risk .