calculation errors . we found that errors calculating roughness led to an overstatement of results . for example , mca - nicaragua recorded zeros — an iri rating for a perfectly smooth road — for sections that could not be measured , incorrectly lowering the overall roughness calculation from 4.8 to 3.4 for one road and indicating that the road was smoother than it actually was . differing lengths of each segment of secondary road when aggregating the roughness values and therefore overstated its reported results at 3.2 instead of 3.3 . although this difference is not large , consistent methodologies should be used across compacts to allow a valid basis for comparing and evaluating results . for two of the road segments , the nonmeasurable sections of road were left blank and the calculation of the final iri used the value from the one measurable side of the road as the overall measure for that kilometer . mcc data show that three of the six compacts with road projects met original or revised targets for average annual daily traffic . the nicaragua and armenia compacts met their original targets and the vanuatu compact met a reduced target . for the other three compacts , cape verde did not meet its original target ; georgia did not meet its reduced target ; and mcc stated that a final traffic measure in honduras is not expected until late 2012 . ( see table 4. ) mcc did not consistently update the baseline estimates for the annual average daily traffic indicator either by projecting growth or by using new information when it became available . because mcc establishes the targets for some indicators by applying estimated growth rates to the baselines , these identified weaknesses may have affected mcc's ability to create accurate traffic targets , thus affecting its reported results . for the secondary roads project in nicaragua , mcc stated that it updated the baseline estimates established in 2007 by applying 1 year's growth rate to the traffic measures , because construction was expected to begin in fall 2008 . however , mcc did not use this method in cape verde , where there was a similar time lag . for the section of highway to be rehabilitated in nicaragua , mcc retained a baseline calculated in a 2000 traffic study had 2007 data for the specific 18 kilometers of road it planned to rehabilitate . in honduras , mcc used a baseline established before 2005 despite the availability of data from a 2008 traffic survey . the 2008 traffic survey results showed that traffic volumes already met or exceeded the end - of - compact targets for most road segments . because mcc used the 2005 data , the final results for the project indicate a larger change over the compact implementation timeframe than actually occurred . in addition , the 2000 traffic study was conducted for a 72-kilometer section of highway , rather than the 18 kilometers designated for the project . quality reviews for armenia included two of the three indicators , the compact was put on hold before mca - armenia could fully correct identified problems . in vanuatu , data quality reviews conducted in 2008 and 2009 identified problems with the measurement of annual average daily traffic .