we did not assess the accuracy of reported readiness data . to determine the extent to which dod has complied with legislative reporting requirements enacted since our prior report , we compared a complete listing of these requirements to dod's readiness reporting . first , we identified the legislatively mandated readiness reporting requirements enacted since our 1998 report . to accomplish this , we reviewed the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 1998-2002 to list the one - time and recurring reporting requirements related to military readiness . 482 ( b ) . dod also provided technical corrections and we have modified the report where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the ranking minority member , subcommittee on readiness , house committee on armed services ; the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on readiness and management support , senate committee on armed services ; other interested congressional committees ; secretary of defense ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me on ( 757 ) 552-8111 or by e - mail at curtinn@gao.gov . major contributors to this report were steven sternlieb , brenda waterfield , james lewis , dawn godfrey , and herbert dunn . to assess the progress the department of defense ( dod ) has made in resolving issues raised in our prior report concerning both the unit level readiness reporting system and the lack of specificity in dod's quarterly readiness reports to the congress , we met with dod officials and reviewed regulations and quarterly reports . specifically , we met with officials of the office of the undersecretary of defense for personnel and readiness ( ousd p&r ) responsible for readiness reporting , the joint staff , and the military services to discuss their individual progress in each of these areas . to assess progress regarding unit level readiness reporting , we reviewed the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff manual governing this system and the related service implementing instructions to determine if these documents had changed since our 1998 report or if the manual and service instructions continued to allow reporting in the same manner as reflected in our earlier report . through a comparison of the current and prior documents , discussions with pertinent officials , and our analysis , we determined whether the readiness reporting issues we raised in 1998 had been resolved . we also reviewed the content of quarterly reports to assess their quality and usefulness , and assess whether the problems we reported in 1998 had been rectified . we discussed our analysis with ousd p&r officials and provided them with our analyses in order that they could fully consider and comment on our methodology and conclusions . we also requested congressional staff and ousd p&r to review the list , and officials from both offices agreed it was accurate .