we will provide copies to others on request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff acknowledgements are provided in appendix iv . overall , in conducting this review , we relied in part on the information and analysis in our march 2008 report , status of selected aspects of the coast guard's deepwater program and testimony , coast guard: deepwater program management initiatives and key homeland security missions . we also reviewed the coast guard's 2007 deepwater expenditure plan and fiscal year 2009 budget request . additional scope and methodology information on each objective of this report follows . to assess the coast guard's efforts to increase accountability and program management through its reorganized acquisition function , we reviewed the coast guard's july 2007 blueprint for acquisition reform , organizational structures before and after the july 2007 reorganization , 2004 and 2008 deepwater program management plans , and project manager and integrated product team charters . we also interviewed senior acquisition directorate officials , program and project managers , and integrated coast guard systems ( icgs ) representatives to discuss the coast guard's increased role in program management and oversight and changes in roles and responsibilities of key positions . we held discussions with officials from the coast guard's engineering and c4isr technical authorities and the american bureau of shipping , and reviewed lists of certifications for the national security cutter ( nsc ) . to assess coast guard actions to improve the acquisition workforce , we reviewed additional documentation such as the acquisition human capital strategic plan , documentation of workforce initiatives , and organization charts for aviation , surface , and c4isr components showing government , contractor , and vacant positions . we supplemented the documentation review with interviews of acquisition directorate officials , including contracting and office of acquisition workforce management officials and program and project managers . we discussed workforce initiatives , challenges and obstacles to building an acquisition workforce , recruiting , difficulty in filling key positions , use of support contractors , inherently governmental positions , and tools for projecting acquisition workforce needs . we spoke with representatives of a support contractor developing one of the workforce planning tools . we also relied on our past work identifying management and workforce problems within the deepwater program and the department of defense ( dod ) . to evaluate the coast guard's transition to an asset - based paradigm for deepwater , including how system - level aspects such as c4isr are being managed , we analyzed a 2007 alternatives analysis prepared for the coast guard . we also discussed the planned c4isr procurement strategy with the acquisition directorate c4isr program manager and the coast guard chief , office of cyber security and telecommunications . we reviewed the overall deepwater and the nsc acquisition program baselines . other acquisition program baselines were in draft form and not made available to us .