orders . 8 / 08 / 03 state b's saa approves county b's grant application and awards a grant totaling $22,421,072 for the entire area encompassed by the county . a state b eso expenditure report shows that $98,865 of the total $22,505,947 awarded to county b had been expended . county's $9,824,000 share , and approves obligated all shsgp ii funds within the required 45-days . departmental budgets receiving grant funds . shsgp i funding . grant were removed . 7 / 11 / 03 saa notifies odp that state c has obligated all shsgp i funds within the required 45-day period . orders for equipment on regional task force behalf . counties that comprise the regional task 12 / 17 / 03 equipment purchased by the state for the regional task force is shipped to county c. state c submits its application to odp . to saa for approval . task force . county c's board of commissioners approves shsgp i funds for expenditure on planning , training , exercises , and program administration . the board also approves funds for equipment purchases 7 / 31 / 03 saa submits additional information to odp to remove special conditions . formal odp grant adjustment notice removing most of by the state for the regional task force . the special conditions . state c saa . task force ; all purchase orders made by the state for the regional task force are released . $18,570,000 in shsgp i funding , with special conditions . force equipment list . homeland security: effective regional coordination can enhance emergency preparedness . gao - 04-1009 . ( 2 ) what time frames did congress and odp establish for awarding and distributing grants , and how did these time frames affect the grant cycle ? homeland security: federal leadership needed to facilitate interoperable communications between first responders . in addition to this work , we have recently issued other reports and delivered congressional testimonies on issues relating to federal funding and oversight of grants for first responders , which include odp grants as well as grants from other federal sources . among other things , we reported that a major challenge in managing first responder grants is balancing two goals: ( 1 ) minimizing the time it takes to distribute grant funds to state and local first responders and ( 2 ) ensuring appropriate planning and accountability for effective use of the funds . ( see appendix v for the list of related gao products. ) to address the objectives in this report , we met with officials from odp and selected states and local jurisdictions to obtain information about the grant management process . we identified 25 domestic preparedness grant programs managed by odp in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , and for our detailed review , we selected the five largest in terms of federal funding provided to state and local jurisdictions . as part of our review , we also selected five states ( arizona , california , florida , missouri , and pennsylvania ) and 19 local jurisdictions within those states that have received state and urban area grants . the five states were selected on the basis of the amount of odp grant funding received , population size , and other factors .