iv ) . while funding in nominal dollars increased from $406.8 million in 2003 to $457.1 million in 2007 , when adjusted for inflation , funding in the 2 years is nearly the same — $465.7 million and $465.8 million , respectively — in constant 2008 dollars . at the same time , as we have previously noted , the number of fda - regulated domestic food firms increased more than 10 percent — from about 58,270 in 2003 to about 65,520 in 2007 . also , the number of different imported food product entry lines has tripled in the past 10 years , and imports account for 15 percent of the food supply . appendix iv provides detailed information on fda funding and ftes for each center . for fiscal years 1999 through 2007 , the fte staff years for the office of nutrition , labeling , and dietary supplements reached its highest level in 2002 ( 88 ) and its lowest in 2007 ( 65 ) , according to data provided by fda finance and other officials . we stand by this recommendation as amended . our final three recommendations are aimed at better leveraging resources . two are aimed at helping fda keep the food protection plan on track by ( 1 ) providing specific , detailed information to congress on how the new authorities in the food protection plan will help fda achieve its mission and ( 2 ) posting periodic updates on the status and time frames for implementing the plan on fda's public web site . fda stated that the plan was designed to address food safety and defense concerns , although some of the actions presented in it may have some bearing on food labeling issues . it was not our intent to suggest that the plan's primary focus was on food labeling ; we have clarified this in the report . nonetheless , in this report and in recent testimonies , we have expressed our concerns that fda has not given congress sufficient , detailed information on how it will implement the plan and use the new authorities — information congress needs to support the initiatives . furthermore , updates can reassure the public of fda's progress . fda did not explicitly address what action , if any , it would take in response to these two recommendations . with respect to our last recommendation — that fda collaborate with other federal agencies and stakeholders on evaluating options for developing a simplified , empirically valid system for conveying overall nutritional quality to help consumers — fda agreed with the need to evaluate the communication effects of nutrition symbols and presented a research agenda . because the agenda appears to be ambitious given fda's limited resources , our recommendation will continue to encourage fda to collaborate with other federal agencies and stakeholders who may be able to contribute resources , as it evaluates options to develop a simple , valid system to communicate nutritional quality . fda's written comments and our detailed evaluation appear in appendix vi . fda also provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the report , as appropriate .