authorization requirement . va requires authorizations for community providers to serve veterans under the choice program and receive reimbursement for their services ; however , if community providers deliver care after an authorization period or include services that are not authorized , the tpas typically deny their claims . according to tpa data , denials related to authorizations are among the most common reasons the tpas deny community provider claims . inadequate provider education on filing choice program claims . according to va and tpa officials as well as providers we interviewed , issues related to inadequate provider education may have contributed to the length of time it has taken the tpas to pay community providers under the choice program . these issues have included providers submitting claims with errors , submitting claims to the wrong payer , or otherwise failing to meet choice program requirements . for example , some va community care programs require the claims to be sent to one of va's claims processing locations , while the choice program requires claims to be sent to triwest or health net . claims sent to the wrong entity are rejected or denied and have to be resubmitted to the correct payer . ten of the 15 providers we interviewed stated that that they lacked education and / or training on the claims filing process when they first began participating in the choice program , including knowing where to file claims and the documentation needed to file claims that would be processed successfully . four of these 10 providers stated that they learned how to submit claims through trial and error . at the infancy of the choice program , november 2014 through march 2016 , va was unable to monitor the timeliness of its tpas' payments to community providers because it did not require the tpas to provide data on the length of time taken to pay these claims . effective in march 2016 , va modified its tpa contracts and subsequently began monitoring tpa payment timeliness , requiring tpas to report information on claims processing and payment timeliness as well as information on claim rejections and denials . however , because va had not established a payment timeliness requirement , va officials said that va had limited ability to penalize tpas or compel them to take corrective actions to address untimely claim payments to community providers . instead , the march 2016 contract modification established a non - enforceable goal for the tpas to process and pay clean claims within 30 days of receipt . as of july 2018 , according to va officials , va did not have a contractual requirement it could use to help ensure that community providers received timely payments in the choice program . officials from va's office of community care told us that va's experience with payment timeliness in the choice program informed va's rfp for new contracts for the veterans community care program , which includes provisions that strengthen va's ability to monitor its future tpas . for example , in addition to requiring future tpas to submit weekly reports on claim payment timeliness as well as claim rejections and denials , va's rfp includes claim payment timeliness standards that are similar to those in the department of defense's tricare program .