fig . 2 illustrates the level of detail provided , taken from an actual page of an invoice billed to doe . doe's wtp project directors , who were responsible for overseeing the design and construction of designated wtp facilities and thus had more knowledge of daily work activities , received an abbreviated version of the invoice twice a month for review . however , we found that the abbreviated invoice provided only summary totals for labor , other direct costs , and indirect costs and did not provide even the limited transaction detail that was included in the full invoice . thus , the project directors' reviews were limited primarily to assessing whether the total costs billed for their respective projects appeared reasonable given their projects' annual budgets and progress . although these project directors had project knowledge , the lack of invoice detail prevented them from performing any meaningful review of specific costs . for example , one report the project directors received for project management purposes was a biweekly report showing the construction materials bechtel used during that period . however , the abbreviated invoice did not show the type and amount of materials purchased or used , or even a summary total of construction materials billed . thus , the information on the two documents could not be compared and neither could be meaningfully used to confirm or question individual costs being billed to doe . according to doe officials , there was no requirement specifying how frequently invoices should be reviewed or how such reviews should be performed . doe had previously issued a local directive , dated september 23 , 2002 , specific to the wtp project that provided doe staff with instructions for reviewing bechtel's semimonthly invoices . however , doe officials stated the directive is inactive because it supplemented the wtp contract management plan that was undergoing revision , even though the plan had not been updated since july 11 , 2002 . according to doe's acquisition guide , voucher ( invoice ) processing and review is an important aspect of contract management , and thus the guide recommends that the contract management plan discuss the process for reviewing and approving invoices and discuss the roles and responsibilities of individuals who are directly involved in the process . the lack of a current contract management plan and corresponding requirements for invoice review — specifying an appropriate level , extent , and responsibilities — further impedes the effective administration of the wtp contract . the manager of the doe staff that previously performed the invoice reviews stated that he did not believe that the far required doe to review the invoiced charges because dcaa had already audited and considered bechtel's accounting system to be adequate . specifically , he stated that far 32.503-4 allowed doe to rely on the internal controls of bechtel's accounting system because dcaa had certified bechtel's system ; thus the invoice reviews doe performed in the past were beyond what the far required . however , far 32.500 explicitly states that that section of the far does not apply to payments under cost - reimbursement contracts and , therefore , far 32.503-4 does not apply to the wtp contract .