specifically , we requested files on 202 properties . we took several steps to address these objectives . for example , unneeded residential units can be in poor condition , which makes selling them challenging . also , officials told us that the state's primary mission of diplomacy overrides property disposal . in countries such as mexico , brazil , and india , policy changes with the diplomatic mission have led to retaining property previously marked as unneeded . for example , in ciudad juarez , mexico , a new consulate was built ; however , state retained property to accommodate and expand their mission . belgrade post officials spoke highly of the program as it has reduced the post's administrative burden in seeking waivers , by providing a more realistic ceiling , which has allowed the post to secure housing in a timelier manner . specifically , the foreign buildings act ( act ) of 1926 , as amended , authorizes the secretary of state to acquire by purchase , construction , exchange , or lease sites and buildings in foreign cities for use by diplomatic and consular establishments of the united states . the act allows state to alter , repair , furnish , and dispose of these properties , and to provide residential and office space and necessary related facilities to federal agencies abroad . it also authorizes the secretary to apply disposal proceeds toward real property needs or to deposit proceeds into the foreign service buildings fund and use the proceeds for authorized purposes . obo manages state's real property abroad to support u.s. government presence at embassies and consulates , which are also known as missions or posts . this office is responsible for managing u.s. government - owned and government - leased real property , which includes land , structures , and buildings such as embassies , warehouses , offices , and residences . obo coordinates directly with officials at posts tasked with managing the post's real property . posts are responsible for implementing obo policies related to the management , acquisition , disposal , and reporting of real property , outlined in state's fam . table 1 below provides an overview of obo's and the posts' roles and responsibilities for real property management . in 2004 , the administration added managing federal real property to the president's management agenda and the president issued an executive order directing executive agencies to submit real property information annually for inclusion in a single , comprehensive database , which is now known as the federal real property profile ( frpp ) that provides an annual report on the government's real property holdings . state is currently undertaking a multiyear , multibillion - dollar capital - security construction program to replace 214 of its facilities abroad due to security concerns . state is taking these steps due to continuing threats and incidences such as the terrorist bombings in 1998 of embassies in dar es salaam , tanzania , and nairobi , kenya , that killed more than 220 people and injured 4,000 others .