deceased individuals . states lack essential preventive controls , which are the most efficient and effective means to minimize fraud , waste , and abuse . social security numbers are a key element in the identification of a person's identity . our analysis of 1 year of liheap data found that for the selected states about 100,000 individuals' records contained a blank or obviously invalid social security number . hhs's prior interpretation of the privacy act prohibited states from requiring recipients to provide social security numbers in applying for liheap benefits . however , 42 u.s.c . § 405 allows states to require that individuals disclose their social security numbers for “the administration of any tax , general public assistance , driver's license , or motor vehicle registration law within its jurisdiction.” we believe that liheap falls within the scope of this statute . several state officials stated that they generally did not pursue investigations and prosecutions involving liheap . the aggressive investigation and prosecution of individuals who defraud the government is the final component of an effective fraud prevention model . schemes identified through investigations and prosecution can also be used to improve the fraud prevention program . however , pursuing recipients who commit fraud can be costly and time - consuming . the amounts of energy assistance benefits to individuals are relatively small , which may deter prosecution of the cases by federal or state prosecutors . because of this , it is important to have strong controls to prevent the occurrence of fraud . without an adequate fraud prevention framework , liheap in the seven states is vulnerable to individuals willing to commit fraudulent and improper activities to receive energy assistance benefits . given that the states are responsible for administering liheap and establishing the proper controls , each state needs an effective fraud prevention framework to provide reasonable assurance of the integrity of its program . without these proper controls , energy assistance benefits will continue to be provided to ineligible individuals , which limits the help that can be provided to those individuals who meet program requirements . however , the responsibility for actively partnering with and providing such guidance to the states rests with hhs . to establish an effective fraud prevention system for the liheap program in the seven states , the secretary of hhs should evaluate our findings and consider issuing guidance to the states addressing the following six recommendations: require applicants and household members to provide social security numbers for themselves and all members of the household in order to receive energy assistance benefits . evaluate the feasibility ( including consideration of any costs and operational and system modifications ) of validating applicant and household member identity information with ssa . develop prepayment edit checks to prevent individuals from receiving duplicate benefits . evaluate the feasibility of using ssa's or states' vital record death data to prevent individuals using deceased identities from receiving benefits . evaluate the feasibility of preventing incarcerated individuals from improperly receiving benefits , for example , by verifying social security numbers with state's prisoner information .