pub . 111-148 , §§ 1421 , 10105 , 124 stat . 119 ( mar . 23 , 2010 ) , ( codified at 26 u.s.c . cost $2 billion in fiscal year 2010 and $40 billion from fiscal years 2010 to 2019 . you asked us to review the implementation of the credit . specifically , we examined to what extent the credit is being claimed and what factors , if any , limit employer claims , and how these factors can be addressed ; how fully the internal revenue service ( irs ) is ensuring that the credit is correctly claimed by eligible employers ; and what data are needed to evaluate the effects of the credit . to describe the extent to which the credit is being claimed , we reviewed irs data on the claims for tax year 2010 . to identify any factors that may limit credit claims and to assess how they could be addressed , we interviewed irs officials as well as groups representing employers , tax preparers , and insurance brokers , and worked with them to assemble discussion groups on the credit . to assess how these factors could be addressed , we analyzed our interview results as well as relevant documents . where possible , we identified irs or meps data related to the factors . to assess how irs is ensuring that the tax credit is correctly claimed by eligible employers we reviewed its compliance plans for the credit and compared them to practices used successfully for prior tax provisionstheir compliance efforts . to assess what data would be needed to evaluate the effects of the credit , we conducted a literature review and interviewed interest groups and subject matter specialists from government , academia , research foundations and think tanks . we found the data we used to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . and irs strategic objectives . we interviewed irs officials on we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 through may 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( see app . i for our scope and methodology. ) small employers with low - wage employees do not commonly offer health insurance , compared with large employers with low - wage employees , as shown in figure 1 . a combination of factors explains why small , low - wage employers tend not to offer health insurance . for very low - wage employees , such as minimum wage employees , health insurance drives up total compensation costs for employees . low - wage employees working for small employers generally prefer to receive wages over insurance benefits as part of total compensation . on one hand , while employees pay both income and employment tax on wages , employees do not have to pay income or employment taxes on premiums paid by their employers for health insurance .