this report focuses only on the legacy vessel fleet . for more information on the recapitalization effort as a whole , see gao , coast guard: action needed as approved deepwater program remains unachievable . gao - 11-743 ( washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2011 ) . my testimony today summarizes the findings of our july 2012 report and addresses ( 1 ) how the physical condition of the coast guard's legacy vessel fleet changed from fiscal years 2005 through 2011 , and key actions the coast guard has taken related to the physical condition of its legacy fleet ; ( 2 ) key annual maintenance expenditure trends for the legacy vessel fleet , and the extent to which the coast guard's cost estimating process has followed established best practices ; and ( 3 ) the operational capacity of the legacy vessel fleet and the extent to which the coast guard faces challenges in sustaining the legacy vessel fleet and meeting mission requirements . for our report , we analyzed coast guard data from fiscal years 2005 through 2011 on the legacy vessels' condition , cost , and operational performance . we interviewed relevant coast guard headquarters officials and conducted site visits to five coast guard field locations where legacy vessels were based or undergoing maintenance . we also compared the documentation that the coast guard uses to compute its annual legacy vessel maintenance cost estimates against established best practices . we reviewed coast guard documents and other evidence that outlined challenges the coast guard faces in sustaining its legacy vessels and meeting mission requirements given delays in deploying replacement vessels . further , we evaluated the coast guard's actions against office of management and budget guidance . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . our july 2012 report provides further details on our scope and methodology . from fiscal years 2005 through 2011 , the physical condition of the coast guard's legacy vessels was generally poor . a primary coast guard measure of a vessel's condition — the operational percent of time free of major casualties — shows that the high endurance cutters , medium endurance cutters , and patrol boats generally remained well below target levels from fiscal years 2005 through 2011 . for example , over this 7- year period , the operational percent of time free of major casualties averaged about 44 percent for the high endurance cutters and about 65 percent for the medium endurance cutters versus a target of 72 percent ; and the patrol boats averaged approximately 74 percent versus a target of 86 percent . our july 2012 report provides additional information regarding these actions but , as noted in the report , the condition of these legacy vessels continues to decline despite these efforts . expenditures for the two key types of legacy vessel annual depot - level maintenance — scheduled and unscheduled maintenance — declined from fiscal year 2005 to fiscal year 2007 , and then rose from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2011 . for example , scheduled maintenance expenditures rose from about $43 million in fiscal year 2007 to about $70 million in fiscal year 2011 .