q . 9: overall , how good a job do you feel is being done by your immediate supervisor / team leader ? q . 36: i have a high level of respect for my organization's senior leaders . q . 37: in my organization , leaders generate high levels of motivation and commitment in the workforce . 23: in my work unit , steps are taken to deal with a poor performer who cannot or will not improve . q . 24: employees have a feeling of personal empowerment with respect to work processes . q . 26: creativity and innovation are rewarded . q . 28: awards in my work unit depend on how well employees perform their jobs . q . 29: in my work unit , differences in performance are recognized in a meaningful way . q . 30: my performance appraisal is a fair reflection of my performance . q . 31: discussions with my supervisor / team leader about my performance are worthwhile . q . 32: i am held accountable for achieving results . q . 40: managers review and evaluate the organization's progress toward meeting its goals and objectives . q . 56: how satisfied are you with the recognition you receive for doing a good job ? q . 2: i am given a real opportunity to improve my skills in my organization . q . 11: the workforce has the job - relevant knowledge and skills necessary to accomplish organizational goals . q . 14: my work unit is able to recruit people with the right skills . q . 15: the skill level in my work unit has improved in the past year . q . 16: i have sufficient resources ( for example , people , materials , budget ) to get my job done . q . 47: supervisors / team leaders provide employees with constructive suggestions to improve their job performance . q . 48: supervisors / team leaders in my work unit support employee development . q . 59: how satisfied are you with the training you receive for your present job ? in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were william doherty , assistant director ; ami ballenger ; laura miller craig ; judith kordahl ; and katherine hudson walker . in addition , barbara hills ; donna miller ; beverly ross ; and john smale provided key assistance . q . q . 39: managers communicate the goals and priorities of the organization . 51: managers promote communication among different work units ( for example , about projects , goals , needed resources ) . 55: how satisfied are you with the information you receive from management on what's going on in your organization ? 57: how satisfied are you with the policies and practices of your senior leaders ? 4: i feel encouraged to come with new and better ways of doing things . 22: promotions in my work unit are based on merit . q . q . q . q . q . q . opm has a number of gap closure plans in place .