gao - 08-251 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2008 . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2003 . combating terrorism: selected challenges and related recommendations . gao - 01-822 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2001 . homeland defense and homeland security are not synonymous . we sent a questionnaire to tags of all 49 states in northcom's area of responsibility and the district of columbia . the self - administered electronic survey was sent via electronic mail to the tags and their chiefs of staff . more specifically , we sent the questionnaire by e - mail in an attached microsoft word form that respondents could return electronically after marking checkboxes or entering narrative responses into open answer boxes . alternatively , respondents could return it by mail after printing the form and completing it by hand . we sent the original electronic questionnaire on april 4 , 2007 . we sent out reminder e - mail messages , with replacement surveys , at different time intervals to all nonrespondents in order to encourage a higher response rate . in addition , we made several courtesy telephone calls to nonrespondents to encourage their completion . all questionnaires were returned by september 19 , 2007 . we achieved a 100 percent response rate . the survey used was not a sample survey because it included the universe of respondents . therefore , the survey has no sampling errors . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in interpreting a particular question , sources of information available to respondents , or entering data into a database or analyzing them can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in developing the questionnaire , collecting the data , and analyzing them to minimize such nonsampling errors . for example , social science survey specialists designed the questionnaire in collaboration with gao staff who had subject matter expertise . in addition to an internal expert technical review by gao's survey coordination group , we pretested the survey with two tags by telephone to ensure that the questions were relevant , clearly stated , and easy to understand . since there were relatively few changes based on the pretests and we were conducting surveys with the universe of respondents , we did not find it necessary to conduct additional pretests . instead , changes to the content and format of the questionnaire were made after the pretests based on the feedback we received . the survey questionnaire and results can be found in appendix i . the survey was administered via electronic mail to the tags and their chiefs of staff , and responses were collected from april through september 2007 ; we had a 100 percent response rate . we also reviewed documents and conducted interviews with the tags from florida , indiana , nebraska , and washington .