see fig . 1 for an example of an asset management framework . asset management as a distinct concept developed in the 1980s , and since that time , organizations around the world have published a number of standards and leading practices . these include: publicly available specification ( pas ) 55: the british standards institution published this standard in its final form in 2008 . this standard focuses on the management of physical assets such as real property and describes leading asset management practices in areas such as life cycle planning , risk management , cost avoidance , and collaborative decision - making . additionally , the standard provides a checklist for organizations to assess the maturity of their asset management framework . some public services , utilities , and oil and gas sectors in the united kingdom and other countries have adopted this standard . the british standards institution formally withdrew this standard in 2015 after the publication of iso 55000 , but it remains in use as a reference for many organizations . iso 55000: this standard , published in 2014 , is a series of three documents , collectively referred to as “iso 55000.” it is based on the earlier pas 55 standard but with stated applicability to all types of assets as opposed to just the physical assets covered by pas 55 . committees with members from more than 30 countries identified common asset management practices and developed this international consensus standard that , according to iso , applies to the broadest possible range of assets , organizations , and cultures . some public and private sector organizations from around the world including utilities , infrastructure management firms , cities , federal agencies , and others have adopted the standard for their real property assets . see appendix iii for a summary of the key elements of the iso 55000 standards . international infrastructure management manual: initially published in 2000 , this manual became one of the first sets of internationally accepted asset management leading practices . the institute of public works engineering australasia published the most recent edition in 2015 . the current manual complements the iso 55000 standards and includes case studies of how organizations in different sectors have approached asset management . it provides detailed information on how to create and implement an effective asset management framework , such as how to incorporate estimates of future demand for services . various organizations , particularly in sectors that manage physical assets , have adopted the manual as a reference . in the united states , within the federal government's executive branch , omb and gsa are responsible for providing leadership in managing federal real property — one of the government's major assets . omb is tasked with overseeing how federal agencies devise , implement , manage , and evaluate programs and policies . omb has provided direction to federal agencies by issuing various government - wide policies , guidance , and memorandums related to asset management .