in no other case did the preference provision alter the award decision . dod officials identified the benefits they see in providing a preference to u.s. contractors based on their observations and experiences with working with u.s. and non - u.s. contractors in the officials' own country of operation . in addition , while we asked each office to provide observations on the potential benefits of expanding the preference throughout the centcom area of responsibility , many of the offices did not provide responses about the specific potential benefits of expanding the preference . the information presented below is a summary of officials' viewpoints and is not generalizable . officials from three army corps of engineers offices and the u.s. air force civil engineer center told us that u.s. contractors may be more familiar with u.s. contracting processes , regulations , codes , requirements , procedures , and quality - assurance standards , as well as u.s. business practices and engineering criteria . figure 1 reflects these geographical modifications . by its terms , the section 112 u.s. contractor preference as it appears in the fiscal year 2011 through 2014 appropriations acts applies only to projects funded by the military construction title of the act . as such , the section 112 u.s. contractor preference provision does not apply to other overseas construction or construction - related projects — such as construction services funded through foreign military sales programs or facilities sustainment projects funded through operation and maintenance appropriations . in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the fiscal year 2014 consolidated appropriations act , congress mandated that we examine the potential benefits and problems of amending section 112 to apply the preference to all of the countries within the centcom area of responsibility , which includes countries bordering the arabian sea and arabian gulf , as shown in figure 2 . as previously stated , the version of the 2015 military construction appropriations act passed by the house of representatives would expand the preference to all countries in the centcom area of responsibility . dod implements the u.s. contractor preference , including the current section 112 provision , through dfars section 236.273 and dfars clause 252.236-7010 . dfars clause 252.236-7010 is to be included in solicitations that are subject to the evaluation preference and defines “united states firm” for purposes of this section . the clause allows firms submitting offers to self - identify as a u.s. or non - u.s. firm , as shown in figure 3 . dod officials told us if both u.s. and non - u.s. firms compete for the contract , the contracting official increases the non - u.s. firms' bids by 20 percent for evaluation purposes . however , according to dod , the actual amount paid to a non - u.s. firm , if it wins the contract , is not increased by the additional 20 percent . the dod contracting agencies responsible for implementing the u.s. contractor preference include the u.s. army corps of engineers , which manages dod's construction in the middle east and the kwajalein atoll , and the naval facilities engineering command , which manages dod's construction on u.s. territories in the pacific .