investigation . during the unannounced investigation , state agency surveyors may conduct a document review and observe nursing home conditions . additionally , surveyors interview witnesses , including the resident about whose care the complaint was filed and other residents with similar care needs , being careful to protect the anonymity of those involved in the complaint . surveyors determine whether the allegations are substantiated and whether the nursing home should be cited for any deficiencies ( failure to meet federal or state quality standards ) , which may be related or unrelated to the complaint allegations . deficiencies are categorized according to scope and severity . scope refers to the number of residents potentially or actually affected and has three levels — isolated , pattern , or widespread . severity refers to the degree of relative harm and has four levels — immediate jeopardy ( actual or potential for death or serious injury ) , actual harm , potential for more than minimal harm , or potential for minimal harm . reporting of results . after the complaint investigation is completed , the state survey agency notifies the complainant and the nursing home of the outcome of the investigation , following guidelines specified in the state operations manual . prioritization . based on the nature of the allegations , staff assign a priority level to the complaint , which determines if an onsite investigation is required . four of the eight priority levels require an onsite investigation . ( see table 1. ) for example , investigations for complaints that allege “immediate jeopardy” to a resident's health , safety , or life must be started within 2 working days of receipt , while investigations for complaints that allege a high level of actual harm ( “actual harm - high” ) to a resident must be started within 10 working days of prioritization . cms oversees state survey agencies' complaint investigation processes using its complaints data and state performance standards system . cms's complaints data . as of january 1 , 2004 , state survey agencies were required to enter data about all complaints and incidents into the acts — automated survey processing environment ( aspen ) complaints / incidents tracking system — database according to guidance provided by cms . officials in cms's headquarters and regional offices can access all information in acts , though the information is stored on individual state servers . cms provides guidance to state survey agencies regarding acts database procedures , including what complaint information states are required to enter . the information is then uploaded into cms's national complaints database , which contains a variety of information about complaints , such as the date of the alleged event , the name of the nursing home involved , and the source of the complaint . ( see table 2. ) state performance standards system . cms's 10 regional offices are responsible for annually evaluating state survey agencies' nursing home complaint investigations using four performance standards . ( see table 3. ) cms developed the state performance standards system in fiscal year 2001 to assess whether state survey agencies were meeting the requirements for the survey and certification program and to identify areas for improvement .