iv. ) as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and the administrator of hrsa . in addition , the report will be available on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . provides individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds with an eligible health professions degree ( eg , dentistry , physician assistant ) opportunities to serve as faculty members in an accredited and eligible health professions school for a minimum of two years . for each year of service , participants are awarded up to $30,000 for their educational loans . designates federal hpsas ( areas in which there may be a shortage of primary medical care , dental , or mental health providers ) , medically underserved areas ( areas in which residents have a shortage of personal health services ) , and medically underserved populations ( which may include groups of persons who face economic , cultural , or linguistic barriers to health care ) . shortage designations are used to prioritize hrsa's health professional scholarship and loan repayment programs and other federal and state programs . offers assistance to hpsas in every u.s. state and territory to recruit and retain qualified primary care providers by providing scholarships or loan repayments to individuals who agree to provide services in shortage areas . supports the demand for more health care professionals to deliver primary health services to native hawaiians in the state of hawaii by providing scholarships in return for a commitment to serve in designated areas for a specified time period . alleviates the shortage of nurses and economic barriers that may be associated with pursuing a career in nursing or teaching as nurse faculty by offering loan repayment assistance to registered nurses in return for a commitment to serve as a nurse in a critical shortage facility ( in designated hpsas ) or as nurse faculty at an accredited eligible school of nursing , and offering scholarships to nursing students in return for service in a critical shortage facility . in partnership with hrsa's bureau of primary health care , this program supports cooperative agreements with 54 state primary care offices and territorial agencies to facilitate the coordination of activities such as needs assessments and technical assistance within a state that relate to the delivery of primary care services , and the recruitment and retention of critical health providers . provides infrastructure grants to schools to build and enhance advanced nursing education programs , and two traineeships — the advanced education in nursing traineeship and the nurse anesthetist traineeship . in addition , the advanced nursing education expansion program provides grants to schools of nursing to accelerate the production of primary care advanced practice nurses .