these related categories are networked organizations . however , whatever assessments are undertaken , it is important to note that the severity or circumstance of a particular disruption to an organization may be so severe or unusual as to make recovery not attainable even if the organization has evidenced attributes of resilience prior to the disruption . similarly , given the specific nature of the disruption or the specific circumstances of the disruption , perhaps one attribute relative to others may prove particularly useful in helping the organization to recover successfully . the attributes associated with organizational resilience are discussed in summary below and each attribute is discussed in greater detail in appendix ii . emergency planning identifies disruptions that could potentially affect an organization and defines and tests strategies to face those disruptions or similar challenges . for example , in 2004 , the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) hurricane pam exercise simulated a category 3 hurricane . in the exercise scenario , 15 to 20 feet of water inundated new orleans . this scenario was similar to the actual conditions of hurricane katrina . based on this exercise , fema was able to implement some strategies which proved helpful during hurricane katrina , such as fema's working with hospital and university officials to create temporary medical operations around the state . however , fema's exercise also identified other problems that it did not address , such as the need to plan for evacuating those with special needs . a resilient organization has a workforce that can respond to a range of disruptions with appropriate purpose , initiative , and comfort with change . one aspect of organizational flexibility is an ability to accept change as a learning opportunity . for example , the 9 / 11 commission report criticized the federal aviation administration for failing to consider in its planning the possibility of certain types of terrorist attacks . specifically , the commission determined that if the agency had examined a possible suicide hijacking and reviewed existing security provisions , they could have identified vulnerabilities . according to the commission , agencies tend to accept the status quo , and accept that efforts to identify or fix certain vulnerabilities are too costly , controversial , or disruptive to fix . a flexible organization that is receptive to change has a workforce that can respond to a range of disruptions flexibly and with agility . when employees have a wide breadth of expertise and the ability to work in different positions and areas of the organization , the organization has a broader array of human resources to draw on and compensate for any losses after a disruption . in addition , we interviewed 11 academic and practitioner experts — in emergency preparedness and disaster management , management and organizational psychology , critical infrastructure , and strategic planning — regarding organizational resilience . these experts were chosen based on their publications , contributions to their field , and the frequency with which other experts cited their work . despite irs's large size and distributed workforce , there are many formal ways for employees to communicate across different parts of the agency .