derivatives include futures , options , and swaps . some of these markets are subject to cftc oversight and some are largely unregulated . under the commodity exchange act ( cea ) , cftc regulatory oversight is focused on the surveillance of futures exchanges , protecting the public , and ensuring market integrity . spot transactions take place between commercial participants for a particular energy product for immediate delivery at a specific location . for example , the u.s. spot market for west texas intermediate ( wti ) crude oil is the pipeline hub near cushing , oklahoma , while a major spot market for natural gas operates at the henry hub near erath , louisiana . the prices set in the specific spot markets provide a reference point that buyers and sellers use to set the price for other types of the commodity traded at other locations . in addition to the cash markets , derivatives based on energy commodities are traded in financial markets . the value of the derivative contract depends on the performance of the underlying asset — for example , crude oil or natural gas . energy futures include standardized exchange - traded contracts for future delivery of a specific crude oil , heating oil , natural gas , or gasoline product at a particular spot market location . an exchange designated by cftc as a contract market standardizes the contracts , which participants cannot modify . the owner of an energy futures contract is obligated to buy or sell the commodity at a specified price and future date . however , the contractual obligation may be removed at any time before the contract expiration date if the owner sells or purchases other contracts with terms that offset the original contract . in practice , most futures contracts on nymex are liquidated via offset , so that physical delivery of the underlying commodity is relatively rare . options give the purchaser the right , but not the obligation , to buy or sell a specific quantity of a commodity or financial asset at a designated price . while the united states accounts for about a quarter of this demand , rapid economic growth in asia has also stimulated a strong demand for energy commodities . for example , eia data shows that from 1983 to 2004 , china's average daily demand for crude oil increased almost fourfold . this study also argued that hedge funds provided increased liquidity to the market and dampened volatility . still others told us that while speculative trading in the futures market could contribute to short - term price movements in the physical markets , they did not believe it was possible to sustain a speculative “bubble” over time , because the two markets were linked and both responded to information about changes in supply and demand caused by such factors as the weather or geographical events . in the view of these observers and market participants , speculation could not lead to artificially high or low prices over a long period of time . the developments in the derivatives markets in recent years have not occurred in isolation . conditions in the physical markets were also undergoing changes that could help explain increases in both derivative and physical commodity prices .