education agencies . child welfare officials in all six states talked about high rates of staff turnover , while education officials did so in two states ( colorado and wisconsin ) . staff turnover resulted in difficulties maintaining staff trained in trauma - informed approaches and sustaining institutional trauma knowledge and trauma - related activities , according to officials . colorado university officials partnering with a county child welfare agency said that staff turnover forced them to invest additional time in training replacement staff and made it more difficult for child welfare officials to conduct regular follow - ups . similarly , one education official in another part of colorado said that high turnover at many agencies , including education and child welfare , hindered the county's efforts to maintain institutional knowledge about trauma - informed practices and sustain the services these agencies were providing to children affected by trauma . some state and local officials in three states attributed high rates of staff turnover to fatigue and secondary traumatic stress , which is the emotional duress that staff may experience when they hear about children's traumatic experiences ( see sidebar ) . unsuccessful implementation . according to officials in a third state , turnover among high - level leaders contributed to difficulties integrating trauma - informed practices at the state's child welfare agency , and the agency was not successful at implementing a trauma screening process . officials in all six selected states talked about limitations on their agency's or organization's capacity to support children affected by trauma . limitations included high rates of staff turnover , limited staff time to focus on trauma , insufficient numbers of clinicians trained in trauma - focused , evidence - based therapies , and insufficient funding for trauma initiatives . some agencies and organizations had taken actions to address these challenges . secondary traumatic stress according to the national child traumatic stress network ( nctsn ) , secondary traumatic stress ( sts ) is the emotional duress experienced when hearing about another person's traumatic experiences . professionals working with children affected by trauma , such as child welfare workers , are commonly at risk of developing sts . sts can compromise these professionals' ability to do their jobs and may drive them to leave their job or their professional field . nctsn notes that several factors can increase the risk for developing sts , including heavy caseloads of children affected by trauma , social or organizational isolation , and feeling unprepared for the job due to lack of training . nctsn suggests taking a multi - dimensional approach to sts , which includes both prevention and intervention . this could include strategies such as establishing self - care groups , helping workers maintain work - life balance , and training organizational leaders on sts . some agencies said that they sought to address staff turnover by supporting employees through training on secondary traumatic stress ; at least one agency in each of the six states offered such training . officials from ohio and wisconsin told us that another way they were addressing the issue was by participating in an hhs - funded project to improve child welfare workforce outcomes .