this report will also be available at www.gao.gov . the same consulting company presented both workshops . we raise no issues regarding the advice provided at the seminar we attended , which was sponsored by the american academy of physician assistants . we conducted our investigation from july 2000 to june 2001 in accordance with investigative standards established by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . medicare and medicaid have consistently been targets for fraudulent conduct because of their size and complexity . private health care insurance carriers are also vulnerable to fraud due to the immense volume of claims they receive and process . those who commit fraud against public health insurers are also likely to engage in similar conduct against private insurers . the coalition against insurance fraud estimates that in 1997 fraud in the health care industry totaled about $54 billion nationwide , with $20 billion attributable to private insurers and $34 billion to medicare and medicaid . in addition to losses due to fraud , the department of health and human services' oig has reported that billing errors , or mistakes , made by health care providers were significant contributors to improperly paid health care insurance claims . while the conduct promoted by the consultant is not overt discrimination on the basis of race , color , or national origin , under certain circumstances , such conduct might disproportionately harm members of protected groups and raise questions about title vi compliance . the oig defined billing errors as ( 1 ) providing insufficient or no documentation , ( 2 ) reporting incorrect codes for medical services and procedures performed , and ( 3 ) billing for services that are not medically necessary or that are not covered . for fiscal year 2000 , the oig reported that an estimated $11.9 billion in improper payments were made for medicare claims . in a march 1997 letter to health care providers , the department of health and human services' ig suggested that providers work cooperatively with the oig to show that compliance can become a part of the provider culture . the letter emphasized that such cooperation would ensure the success of initiatives to identify and penalize dishonest providers . one cooperative effort between the ig and health care groups resulted in the publication of model compliance programs for health care providers . the oig encourages providers to adopt compliance principles in their practice and has published specific guidance for individual and small group physician practices as well as other types of providers to help them design voluntary compliance programs . a voluntary compliance program can help providers recognize when their practice has submitted erroneous claims and ensure that the claims they submit are true and accurate . in addition , the oig has incorporated its voluntary self - disclosure protocolinto the compliance program , under which sanctions may be mitigated if provider - detected violations are reported voluntarily . evaluation and management services refer to work that does not involve a medical procedure — the thinking part of medicine . the key elements involved in evaluation and management services are ( 1 ) obtaining the patient's medical history , ( 2 ) performing a physical examination , and ( 3 ) making medical decisions .