fema . fema's public assistance grant program provides grants to state , tribal , territorial , and local governments , and nonprofits that can be used to repair and replace damaged infrastructure , including drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . in addition , fema's pre - disaster mitigation and hazard mitigation grant programs can provide financial assistance to states , communities , or tribes that can be used to reduce the risks to drinking water and wastewater infrastructure from future disasters . fema officials said they have developed guidance for states and communities to incorporate climate resilience into the planning for projects funded by all three programs . however , officials said that states and utilities do not consider climate change resilience consistently in planning and designing of projects that use financial assistance from fema . specifically , according to fema officials , funding through the public assistance program and the hazard mitigation grant program is limited to states and localities with a presidentially - declared disaster and generally is not provided for projects that incorporate climate resilience into their planning and design . in addition , according to fema officials , states and localities have discretion over the projects they choose to submit for funding and fema cannot require them to incorporate climate resilience into the planning and construction of projects that states fund without a change to program requirements . hud . hud provides grants to states and local governments through its community development block grant program to fund housing ; economic development ; neighborhood revitalization ; and other community development activities , including drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . in addition , hud can provide grants that can be used for reconstruction of drinking water and wastewater infrastructure to help communities recover from presidentially declared disasters through its community development block grant program . according to hud officials , the agency has taken action to encourage states and local governments to incorporate climate resilience planning in the projects they fund after disasters . officials also said that hud provides guidance on how financial assistance requirements for states and entitlement communities can be waived so that states and communities can use community development block grant funding for disaster recovery and resilience in presidentially - declared disaster areas . in addition , in 2016 , hud finalized rules requiring states and localities to consider incorporating resilience to natural hazard risks and climate change into their planning documents for community development block grant funding in low - and moderate - income communities . however , officials said that states do not consider climate change resilience consistently when planning and designing projects using financial assistance from hud . specifically , according to hud officials , the agency can only directly provide financial assistance to projects that enhance climate resilience using community development block grant - disaster recovery grants if climate change resilience is specified in disaster relief appropriations language . further , states and localities have discretion regarding whether to incorporate climate resilience into their project applications , and hud cannot require them to incorporate climate resilience into the planning of projects that receive financial assistance , according to hud officials . usda .