territories . usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) oversees the program , which is administered by state and local agencies through approximately 10,000 clinic sites . federal wic appropriations and participation have generally increased since the program was established and totaled $7.2 billion and 9 million participants in fiscal year 2011 ( see figure 1 ) . wic is almost entirely federally - funded . wic is not an entitlement program ; the federal government is not legally required to provide benefits to every eligible individual . instead , wic is a federal grant program for which congress appropriates a specific amount of funds each year . ( 2 ) to what extent are individuals who would otherwise be ineligible for wic deemed eligible for the program under adjunctive eligibility ? ( 3 ) how does the usda assist and monitor states' processes for determining wic income eligibility ? as criteria for our review , we examined relevant federal laws as well as usda regulations and guidance related to wic income eligibility determination and administrative oversight . to answer our research questions , we collected and analyzed information through several methods . at the federal level , we analyzed wic administrative data on participant characteristics from 2010 and usda's national survey data on state and local wic policy variation , which we determined were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also examined usda's monitoring reports from all reviews conducted from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 that assessed states' certification policies and procedures and interviewed usda officials . at the state level , we collected wic policy manuals from a nongeneralizable sample of 10 states that were selected to ensure diversity in population size and geography and reviewed sections related to income eligibility determination . we also interviewed state and local wic administrators representing nine states , two indian tribal organizations , and six local agencies , all of whom are members of the national wic association . to gather additional information on the effect of adjunctive eligibility on wic participation , we conducted a literature review and examined six research studies that assessed the relationship between recent changes in income eligibility thresholds for medicaid and wic participation . we assessed the methodologies and findings of each of these studies and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this performance audit from october 2012 through february 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . established as a national program in the mid 1970s , wic is designed to improve the health and nutritional well - being of pregnant and postpartum women , infants , and young children by providing nutritious supplemental foods , nutrition education , and referrals to health and social service programs .