family support services . community - based services to promote the safety and well - being of children and families designed to increase the strength and stability of families , to increase parental competence , to provide children a safe and supportive family environment , to strengthen parental relationships , and to enhance child development . examples of such services include parenting skills training and home visiting programs for first time parents of newborns . time - limited family reunification services . services provided to a child placed in foster care and to the parents of the child in order to facilitate the safe reunification of the child within 15 months of placement . these services include counseling , substance abuse treatment services , mental health services , and assistance to address domestic violence . states reported using nearly 11 percent of their subpart 1 funds to make recurring payments for the room and board of foster children who were not otherwise eligible for federal reimbursement . for example , new jersey officials reported spending over half of the state's subpart 1 funds on foster care maintenance payments . states reported using over 70 percent of their subpart 2 dollars on serving families , with nearly half of these funds used to fund family support and prevention services . these services included mentoring programs to help pregnant adolescents learn to be self - sufficient , financial assistance to low - income families to help with rent and utilities , parenting classes , child care , and support groups provided by community - based resource centers . the remaining subpart 2 funds were split fairly evenly among family preservation , family reunification , and services to support and preserve adoptive families . family preservation services accounted for nearly 12 percent of subpart 2 dollars . services provided by washington state in this category included counseling and parent training services for up to 6 months for families with children who were at risk of being placed in foster care . adoption support and preservation services accounted for over 11 percent of subpart 2 dollars . with these funds , states provided services such as counseling for children who were going to be adopted , family preservation services to adoptive families , and respite care for adoptive families . officials in ohio reported using almost half of its subpart 2 dollars for adoption services , including post adoption services and services to recruit families for children in need of homes . family reunification services accounted for over 9 percent of subpart 2 funds . these services included supervised visitation centers for parents to visit with their children who were in foster care and coordinators for alcohol and drug treatment services for families whose primary barrier to reunification was substance abuse . new jersey funded a supervised visitation program that offered parenting education , counseling , transportation , and support groups and was located in a private home , allowing families to visit together in a homelike setting and engage in more natural interactions .