department of education 7 . student financial assistance 4 . department of health and human services 13 . foster care – title iv - e 14 . state children's insurance program 15 . child care and development fund 5 . department of housing and urban development 16 . low income public housing 17 . first , is it reasonable to expect that federal agencies have significant information on the condition of internal controls over their programs and activities ? second , should agencies be able to identify their programs and activities that are susceptible to improper payments and to meet the other requirements established by the improper payments act ? community development block grants ( entitlement grants , states / small cities ) 6 . department of labor 21 . federal employee compensation act 22 . workforce investment act 7 . department of the treasury 23 . earned income tax credit 8 . department of transportation 24 . airport improvement program 25 . based on the legislative and administrative initiatives over the past 20-plus years , i think that the answer to both is an emphatic yes . many positive improvements have resulted from the various initiatives related to internal control and financial management over the past 20-plus years . however , i am concerned that we continue to see a trend in agency actions to address internal control problems . agencies often get off to a good start , but they do not sustain their efforts . given this history and the unknown and potentially significant magnitude of improper payments governmentwide , it is clear that we are facing a major management challenge in adequately addressing the problem . the needed governmentwide initiatives are in place , they must now be effectively implemented . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information , please contact mccoy williams , director , financial management and assurance , at ( 202 ) 512-9508 , or tom broderick , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-8705 . you can also reach them by e - mail at williamsm1@gao.gov or broderickt@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included bonnie mcewan and donell ries . department of agriculture 2 . commodity loan program 3 . national school lunch and breakfast 4 . women , infants , and children 2 . department of defense 6 . military health benefits 3 . section 8 tenant based 18 . section 8 project based 19 . highway planning and construction 26 . federal transit – capital investment grants 27 . federal transit – formula grants ( continued from previous page ) 9 . department of veterans affairs 29 . dependency and indemnity compensation 10 . environmental protection agency 32 . clean water state revolving funds 33 . drinking water state revolving funds 11 . national science foundation 34 . research and education grants and cooperative agreements 12 . office of personnel management 35 . retirement program ( civil service retirement system and federal employees' retirement system ) 36 . federal employees health benefits program 37 . federal employees' group life insurance 13 . railroad retirement board 38 . retirement and survivors benefits 39 .