all information is reported as of the end of fiscal year 2000 . appendix i is available only on the internet at http: / / www.gao.gov / gao - 01-1012sp / . hazards requiring cleanup were found on 2,676 of the eligible properties . appendix i contains summary data on all 9,171 properties identified for potential inclusion in the fuds cleanup program . the properties are listed by state , the district of columbia , and six u.s. territories and possessions . for each property , the data include the property name , corps' property number , the county and congressional district where the property is located , the eligibility status , and whether hazards are present . also included for eligible properties with hazards are the number of eligible cleanup projects , the actual cleanup - related costs incurred to date , and the estimated cost to complete the cleanup projects . a project next moves into the remedial action phase . the remedial action phase can involve several steps including constructing or installing the selected cleanup approach , operating the approach , and long - term monitoring , if necessary . a flow chart for the site inspection through long - term monitoring process is shown as figure 2 . corps review of potential fuds properties found that many properties are ineligible because they are still part of an active dod installation or there are no records available showing that dod ever owned or controlled the property . many of the eligible properties did not require cleanup under the fuds program because the corps determined that no dod - related hazards existed . as of october 1 , 2000 , there were 9,171 properties that had been identified by the corps , the states , or other parties as potentially eligible for cleanup under the fuds program . of these properties , 9,055 had received a preliminary assessment of eligibility , 42 were still being assessed , and 74 properties had not been assessed yet . based on preliminary assessments , the corps determined that 6,746 properties were eligible and that 2,309 of the properties — more than a quarter of those assessed — were ineligible . in most cases , properties were ineligible either because the properties were still under dod control ( 915 ) or because there were no records found showing that dod had ever controlled the property ( 787 ) . table 1 shows the reasons that properties were found to be ineligible . although the corps initially found that 6,746 properties were eligible for cleanup , the corps subsequently determined , on the basis of site inspections , that most of these properties do not require cleanup after all . specifically , the corps determined that 4,070 properties either do not have any hazards requiring dod cleanup or else have hazards that do not meet the level requiring cleanup . figure 3 shows the breakout of properties by eligibility and those where hazards were found . a flow chart showing the decision process in the preliminary assessment of eligibility phase is shown in figure 1 . upon completion of the preliminary assessment of eligibility phase , a property enters the site inspection phase .