iii ) . fda generally agreed with our recommendations . fda stated that it will continue to review its 3r incentives to ensure that their use is consistent with the agency's guidance for the use of 3r incentives . in response to its recommendation , hhs acknowledged the need to revise its 3r incentive policy and stated that it is in the process of reviewing and making the appropriate changes . hhs also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . opm provided written comments , which are included in appendix iv . opm agreed with our recommendation and stated that it will develop future guidance on the importance of considering succession planning in the decision process for awarding retention incentive . opm stated that it is working with agencies to review the 3r incentive program and its current regulations , guidance , and monitoring policies to identify areas where improvements can be made , such as developing and using metrics to monitor and evaluate 3r incentive usage . opm also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . as we agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of hhs , commissioner of fda , director of opm , and other interested parties . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which the food and drug administration ( fda ) is linking its use of recruitment , relocation , and retention ( 3r ) incentives to its strategic human capital approaches to address its current and emerging challenges ; ( 2 ) the extent to which fda's 3r incentives were awarded consistent with the law , regulations , and guidance and the internal controls fda has in place to ensure proper disbursement of 3r incentives and encourage efficient use ; and ( 3 ) the steps the office of personnel management ( opm ) has taken to help ensure that agencies , including the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , have effective strategic oversight of their 3r incentive programs , and how hhs is providing oversight of its 3r incentive program . to address our first objective , we collected and analyzed aggregate pay data as provided by hhs on the amount and number of 3r incentives by various categories for employees in fda and the rest of hhs from january 1 , 2007 , through july 4 , 2009 , and data on fda's workforce from opm's central personnel data file ( cpdf ) for fiscal year 2008 .