our analysis confirmed this shortcoming . for example , 25 of the 31 functions belonging to the five activities we visited did not have recently validated mission documents on which to base their manpower reviews . the fleet forces command stated that the critical mission documents had not been updated because of the large amount and rapidity of change and the lack of sufficient manpower analysts to keep up with changes . according to a command official , the activities' commanders generally applied their judgment to update the most recently approved mission documents before conducting their analyses to mitigate the risks . however , this official agreed that use of these outdated mission documents may have increased the likelihood that manning was not correct in the associated manpower documents . without validated and accurate mission documents to serve as a baseline for manpower numbers , some of the zero­ based review's determinations about capabilities and manpower requirements may have been inaccurate . implementation of the navy's zero - based review's recommendations will change the mix of active and reserve forces by decreasing the number of reserve personnel and increasing the number of active and civilian personnel . some cost savings are projected as a result of the recommended changes . the zero - based review's recommendations will also have the active force assume greater command and control responsibility over the reserve force . how will the recommendations from the zero - based review affect the reserve's manpower , funding , and command and control relationship with the active force ? as indicated in table 1 , the chief of naval operations approved a net reduction of over 16,000 reserve positions , a net increase of about 880 positions in the active force , and a net increase of 450 civilian personnel positions . at the activities we visited , we found that the reasons for these recommended changes in manpower varied . for example , the bureau of medicine and surgery recommended cutting 2,198 reserve positions because it had reduced the requirement for the number of fleet hospitals from three to two and had rarely filled all of its specialized medical reserve positions in the past . to answer these questions , we analyzed the criteria , process , and guidance the fleet forces command used to conduct the zero - based review by reviewing the documentation for selected navy activities . as part of our analysis , we examined the review results for 10 navy activities and visited the naval air forces command and four other selected activities to assess the zero - based review process at the activity level and obtain detailed information about recommended reserve manpower changes . in addition , we obtained information from navy headquarters and navy reserve headquarters to determine how the review's results would impact active and reserve command and control relationships and reviewed planned funding documents to assess the extent that recommended reserve manpower changes were reflected in future budgets . we also obtained information from the office of the assistant secretary of the navy , manpower and reserve affairs to determine the relationship between the department of the navy human capital strategy and the navy's zero - based review .