funding constraints . funding constraints cited by federal and nonfederal entities included concerns about securing funds for future restoration efforts and the administrative challenges associated with combining multiple sources of funding to carry out projects . according to partnership officials we interviewed , many of the near - term actions called for in the ccmp are at risk of not being carried out because funding has not been secured for these actions . discussion group participants also cited difficulties securing funds as a barrier for project implementation and stated that the challenges associated with having to cobble together funds from multiple sources can delay or threaten the success of restoration projects . the participants explained that managing the requirements of multiple funding sources can increase administrative burden and project complexity . moreover , discussion group participants explained that the single - year funding cycles for some programs and the restrictions that are sometimes placed on how funds can be used present additional challenges , as they are not always compatible with the needs of more complex multi - year restoration projects . participants in the discussion groups noted a critical need for predictable , consistent , multi - year funding to adequately and efficiently plan and carry out restoration activities . the factors identified by federal and nonfederal entities as posing a risk to the success of puget sound restoration efforts are consistent with some of our prior work on large - scale ecosystem restoration efforts in other parts of the country . specifically , we previously reported that similar factors — including population growth , the effects of climate change , and funding constraints — may limit restoration efforts in the great lakes and chesapeake bay . restoring puget sound is a large , complex , and potentially costly endeavor that involves many federal , state , local , tribal , and nongovernmental partners , and it faces a number of factors that may limit long - term success . federal and nonfederal entities have made progress in coordinating the numerous restoration efforts underway by establishing the puget sound management conference and the puget sound federal task force and by developing the ccmp and the draft federal action plan . the partnership , through its plans to develop a more complete inventory of restoration efforts and related funding , can make important information available for coordinating the management of the efforts moving forward . in addition , the partnership has led the management conference's efforts to assess restoration progress under the framework laid out in the ccmp , reporting in 2017 that while progress had been made in some areas , many key indicators had not shown improvement . however , these assessments have been limited by insufficient data , resources , and the lack of measurable targets , which have not been established for 16 of the 47 indicators . by working with the management conference on future updates to the ccmp to help prioritize among the indicators that currently lack measurable targets and ensure that such targets are developed for the highest priority indicators where possible , epa would better position the partnership to assess progress toward restoration goals .