at the same time , it is not a panacea . ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services and follow - up care is likely to remain a challenge . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of this committee may have . but covering an initial examination does not ensure that beneficiaries receive the recommended preventive services they need . the results of a cms demonstration conducted in the late 1980s and early 1990s indicated that offering medicare beneficiaries packages of broad - based preventive services slightly improved the use of some services , such as immunizations and cancer screenings , but did not consistently improve health or lower costs . cms is exploring an alternative for medicare preventive care that , by means other than a physician's examination , would provide systematic health risk assessments to medicare beneficiaries . a key component of this demonstration , which is still in development , is to address concerns that to be effective , risk assessments must be coupled with follow - up interventions , such as referrals for follow - up care . despite how often medicare beneficiaries visit physicians , relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of recommended preventive services covered by medicare . as we reported in 2002 , for example , although 91 percent of female medicare beneficiaries in our analysis received at least one preventive service , only 10 percent were screened for cervical , breast , and colon cancer and were also immunized against influenza and pneumonia . our analysis of additional data for our 2003 report showed that many medicare beneficiaries still did not receive certain recommended preventive services . the task force recommends , for example , that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination and at least one pneumonia vaccination . my testimony today is based on reports and testimony we have issued since 2002 . our work for these products included a synthesis of information on preventive care received by people age 65 or older from four nationally representative health surveys ; a review of the results of past related research demonstrations and congressionally mandated studies ; and interviews with department of health and human services ( hhs ) and cms officials and other experts . this work allows us to discuss the benefits and limitations of the delivery of preventive services through a one - time examination . this body of work was conducted from august 2001 through august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in july 2004 , we updated information on recommended preventive services and on the status of a cms effort to explore another delivery option . in summary , although they typically visit a physician several times during a year , most medicare beneficiaries receive some but not all recommended preventive services . our analysis of year 2000 data shows that nearly 9 in 10 medicare beneficiaries visited a physician at least once that year , and beneficiaries made an average of six visits or more within the year . despite these opportunities , many beneficiaries did not receive recommended preventive services .