other agencies . if agencies do not have a defined role in administering a tax expenditure , they may choose not to identify the tax expenditure's contributions to agency goals . at the three agencies we selected to interview — usda , doe , and hud — officials reported that they sometimes do not include tax expenditures as contributors to goals in their performance processes or reporting , because the agencies do not have a defined role in administering the tax expenditures . for example , in hud's fiscal year 2016 performance plan and fiscal year 2014 performance report , the agency describes a strategic objective involving “green and healthy homes.” though hud does not identify related tax expenditures , agency officials told us they understood that many homeowners and residential property owners who undertake energy efficiency retrofits or install solar panels take advantage of , or benefit from , energy - related tax credits , particularly for solar investment . however , they also noted the potential for political influence in having any executive branch agency conduct the evaluations , and that hiring nongovernmental organizations to conduct these evaluations could be an alternative to executive branch reviews . one expert suggested that a tax expenditure commission with appointees from a balance of political parties could identify which of these organizations would conduct each review . how might policymakers address data challenges ? agencies may not have access to confidential taxpayer data that they might need to conduct evaluations , and existing irs data may not be sufficient for evaluating the efficiency , equity , and other effects of specific tax expenditures . for these challenges with lack of access to data , congress has allowed some exceptions to laws limiting the disclosure of taxpayer information to third parties . for the challenge of lack of tax expenditure data , any party conducting an evaluation could , to some extent , use data from other agencies or other sources , such as public records , state agency records , and surveys , as previously discussed . irs could also be directed to collect more data that could be used to evaluate a given tax expenditure , although such an effort could increase taxpayer burden . policymakers could also weigh the availability of data on specific tax expenditures when deciding which tax expenditures should or should not be evaluated . omb could conduct reviews of portfolios of programs and other policy instruments — including tax expenditures — used to help pursue similar objectives . currently , omb generally reviews spending by agency rather than by policy area . we have previously reported that while the evaluation of spending programs in isolation may be revealing , it is often critical to understand how federal spending programs fit within a broader portfolio of tools and strategies — such as regulations , direct loans , and tax expenditures — to advance federal missions and achieve federal performance goals . likewise , such an analysis could help congress and executive agencies identify whether a program complements and supports other related programs , whether it is duplicative or redundant , or whether it actually works at cross - purposes to other initiatives .