organization . in addition to the contact named above , thomas gosling , assistant director ; arthur james ; stanley kostyla ; jacqueline mccoll ; marjorie pratt ; and paul rades made key contributions to this report . other: describe other status of the secondary . was the discrepancy resolved to your item . please specify the question ( s ) to which your comments refer . type your explanation here . comments ? or prime contractor ? receipt of the item ( s ) . if no , skip to question 16. prime contractor to acknowledge receipt of the item ( s ) . provided routine reports to the army or prime contractor that identified items on hand , ( eg , asset picture ) . other: describe other means used to notifiy the responsible army organization or prime contractor . how did you report the discrepancy ? please select all 18 . what is the current status of the gfm or secondary that apply . repair item ( s ) ? please select all that apply . if gfm item ( s ) , select from the responses listed below . submitted a report of discrepancy ( rod ) / supply discrepancy report ( sdr ) using standard form ( sf ) 364 . submitted a transportation discrepancy report ( tdr ) using standard form ( sf ) 361 . submitted a discrepancy report online through alteration , modification , or the army electronic product support production of a higher assembly . ( aeps ) website . contacted the responsible army organization remains in your inventory . ( eg , inventory control point , program manager , program office , field activity , etc. ) item was not consumed , and was or prime contractor by telephone , e - mail , or passed to another commercial or faxed memo . government repair facility . other: describe other method for reporting discrepancy . item was returned to the army supply system or to the original source of supply . other: describe other status of the gfm item . if secondary repair item ( s ) , select from the which you filed the discrepancy report ? responses listed below . item ( s ) is currently being repaired or awaiting repair . was the discrepancy resolved ? if no , please explain below , in your inventory . and then skip to question 18 . item ( s ) is awaiting disposition . satisfaction ? if no , please explain below . company: «contrname1» system ? do you have a defense contract management agency ( dcma ) approved property control system ? yes , for gfm only………….. your most recent approval . yes , for secondary repair items only…………………... no………….. . yes , for both gfm and 2 . do you receive gfm items at this facility ? gfm is defined as “a” condition serviceable assets that are used 7 . if you have any additional comments , please type them in the repair , alteration , modification , or production of a in the space below . please specify the question ( s ) to higher assembly . which your comments refer . type your comments here . do you receive secondary repair items at this facility ?