we note this in the report . however , our recommendation focuses on ocr sharing information about the results of its investigations with cms , which is not currently done . sharing this information could allow cms to better ensure that recipients of financial incentives under the hitech act's meaningful use program have met the requirements for those incentives . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the department of health and human services . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have questions about this report , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 . he can also be reached by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe the expected benefits and cyber threats to electronic health information ; ( 2 ) determine the extent to which the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) security and privacy guidance for electronic health records reflect and align with federal guidance ; and ( 3 ) assess the extent to which hhs oversees compliance with hhs information security and privacy requirements at covered entities . to address our first objective , we analyzed prior gao reports that identified benefits of electronic health records and security and privacy threats to data and information systems to identify major risks that can affect systems that collect , maintain , and share electronic health information . we also reviewed independent analyses of the threat landscape affecting electronic health data and systems and interviewed subject matter experts and stakeholders from organizations that collect and analyze data on this subject . we identified these experts and stakeholders through interviews with agency officials and other stakeholders . they were considered subject matter experts and stakeholders based on job titles , organizational affiliation , and publications . further , we analyzed information reported by hhs on health care data breaches affecting over 500 individuals and interviewed knowledgeable hhs officials about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes by interviewing knowledgeable agency officials and reviewing the data for obvious outliers . regarding our second objective , we reviewed relevant information security and privacy laws , including the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 and the health information technology for economic and clinical health act . additionally , we reviewed the security , breach notification , and privacy rules issued by hhs .