( see fig . both agencies forecast steady growth in receipts from fiscal years 2002 through 2012 . for example , both treasury and cbo project the average annual growth of highway - related excise taxes will be about 3 percent . in january 2002 , the administration announced that the fiscal year 2003 raba adjustment would be a negative $4.965 billion . the administration subsequently announced that an error had been made in calculating the raba adjustment and that the correct amount was a negative $4.369 billion — a $600 million difference . the error , which was made in treasury's allocation of projected highway tax revenues to various accounts rather than in its economic models , affected the look ahead part of the fiscal year 2003 raba calculation . specifically , it occurred in treasury's allocation of projected revenues from gasohol sales to the general fund , the leaking underground storage tank trust fund , and the highway and transit accounts within the highway trust fund . in short , the error resulted in the incorrect distribution of projected gasohol receipts among the funds . because gasohol has six different blends — all with different tax rates and distributions — the gasohol allocations are complicated and require many “links” among several spreadsheets . the sum of these differences is the raba adjustment . table 2 shows the raba calculations for fiscal years 2000 through 2003 . as shown , the raba adjustments for fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2002 were positive — increasing highway funding levels by a total of over $9 billion . however , the raba adjustment for fiscal year 2003 is negative $4.369 billion . eighty percent of the fiscal year 2003 raba adjustment is attributable to the look back portion of the calculation . the actual fiscal year 2001 highway account receipts were about $1.6 billion lower than projections in tea - 21 . according to treasury , actual fiscal year 2001 receipts were lower than expected due to the slowdown in the economy , which especially affected heavy truck sales , and increased gasohol use . we reviewed the amounts distributed to the highway trust fund for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2001 , and concluded that these amounts were reasonable and adequately supported on the basis of available information . with respect to the look ahead portion of the calculation , we reviewed treasury's process for projecting highway account revenues . although we did not independently evaluate the methodology and the economic models treasury used to develop its revenue projections , our review of a qualitative description of the process , key inputs , and changes to the models gave us no reason to question the resulting projections . the secretary of the treasury transfers applicable excise tax receipts , including receipts from gasoline and other highway taxes , from the general fund to the excise tax related trust funds , including the highway trust fund , on a monthly basis . these transfers are based on estimates because actual data on which to base the allocations are not available when the deposits are initially made . ota prepares these estimates on the basis of historical irs certification data and actual excise tax revenue collections .