see figure 2 . we found four differences between the published and unpublished applications filed with uspto between november 29 , 2000 , and november 28 , 2003 . first , uspto published , or plans to publish , applications filed by inventors qualifying as large entities at a somewhat higher rate ( 85 percent ) than those filed by inventors qualifying as small entities ( 74 percent ) . of the approximately 580,000 applications filed by large entities , uspto published about 60 percent and listed another 25 percent as eligible for publication — that is , the applications will be published 18 months after they were first filed . about 12 percent of the applications filed by inventors qualifying as large entities are ineligible for publication — typically because the applicants certified that they will file only in the united states . uspto's database does not provide the information needed to determine the publication status for the remaining 3 percent . for the approximately 225,000 applications filed by inventors qualifying as small entities , uspto published about 46 percent and lists another 28 percent as eligible for publication . about 22 percent of the applications filed by inventors qualifying as small entities are ineligible for publication . uspto's database does not provide the information needed to determine the publication status for the remaining 4 percent . see figures 3 and 4 . second , although the rate at which uspto issued patents to published and unpublished applications differed only slightly , the rate at which applicants abandoned published applications and unpublished applications differed significantly . of the approximately 456,000 applications uspto published , about 70 percent are still pending , about 22 percent were issued patents , and 8 percent were considered abandoned . similarly , of the approximately 117,000 applications uspto did not publish , about 56 percent are still pending , about 25 percent were issued patents , and 19 percent were considered abandoned . for a summary of these differences , see table 1 . third , uspto took longer to issue patents that had been published ( a median time of about 20 months ) than those that had not been published ( about 15 months ) . according to agency officials , the difference occurs primarily because examiners sometimes complete their review and decide to issue a patent in fewer than 18 months . in these cases , uspto does not publish the application because the issued patent will itself be published and become public information . as a result , the median length of time for unpublished patents is less . fourth , for applications considered abandoned , the median length of time between filing and abandonment was longer for published applications ( about 18 months ) than for those not published ( about 8 months ) . according to uspto officials , this difference occurs primarily because nearly all patent applications abandoned within about 18 months of filing are not published . in commenting on a draft of this report , uspto provided technical comments that we have incorporated , as appropriate .