advice for a fee . after obtaining written comments from the public and holding two public hearings on the proposed regulation , labor announced it will repropose its rule on the definition of a fiduciary in early 2012 . labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) is the primary agency responsible for protecting private pension plan participants from the misuse or theft of their pension assets by enforcing erisa . to carry out its responsibilities , ebsa issues regulations and guidance , conducts investigations of plan fiduciaries and service providers , seeks appropriate remedies to correct violations of the law , and pursues litigation when it deems that necessary . how much do plan sponsors and participants pay for services performed by service providers ? what , if any , challenges do sponsors face in understanding how fees are charged to their plan ? what actions has the department of labor ( labor ) taken to help plan sponsors understand and monitor fees charged by service providers ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations pertaining to 401 ( k ) fees and fee disclosure . we also reviewed research and available guidance provided to plan sponsors by labor and the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and industry research related to understanding and disclosing fee information . we interviewed labor , sec , and internal revenue service ( irs ) officials ; industry experts ; plan sponsors ; and service providers about factors that affect the amount of 401 ( k ) fees that can be charged to sponsors and participants as well as current and proposed regulations and the requirements governing the disclosure of fee information . to obtain information about the fees sponsors pay for services performed by providers , the factors they considered in selecting service providers , and labor resources they may have used during calendar year 2010 , we conducted a representative survey of 401 ( k ) plan sponsors . we drew a stratified random sample of 1,000 plan sponsors from a population of 468,194 unique 401 ( k ) plans from 2009 form 5500 annual return / report filings ( form 5500 ) . typically , service provider compensation comes in the form of fees charged as a percentage of total plan assets , per participant , an itemized fixed rate , or a combination of all three . how fees are assessed largely depends on the type of service provided and the plan sponsor . for example , fees for investment management services , which can vary by investment option , are generally charged as a percentage of assets and indirectly charged against participants' accounts , because they are deducted directly from investment returns . administrative fees , on the other hand , can be assessed as an overall percentage of total plan assets regardless of participants' investment choices , in addition to a flat rate for some fixed services , such as the printing of plan documents . in the latter , the sponsor has the option of passing along some or all of the administrative fees to participants .