attorneys . regarding seizures of monetary assets , we obtained data from the federal government's applicable asset forfeiture funds . we discussed the sources of these data with federal agency officials and worked with them to resolve any inconsistencies . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review . also , to more fully understand and illustrate the results of alien - smuggling investigations , we identified and summarized recent alien - smuggling cases prosecuted in federal district courts in three districts — the district of arizona , the southern district of california , and the southern district of texas — each of which is coterminous with the u.s. - mexico , or southwest , border ( see app . v ) . to identify recent alien - smuggling cases federally prosecuted in these districts , we reviewed press releases issued by the respective u.s. attorney's office during january through june 2004 . we discussed each of these cases with u.s. attorney's office and ice officials . because these cases were selected using a nonprobabilistic method , they are not representative of all cases in the districts or nationwide . we conducted our work from april 2004 to march 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i presents more details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . by definition , alien smuggling ( sometimes called people smuggling or human smuggling ) is transnational in that it involves more than one country and also usually involves persons who have consented to be transported to another country . this activity generally produces short - term profits for the smugglers . for the sole purpose of prostitution , women from ukraine , moldova , belarus , and other eastern european countries are trafficked through the balkans for destinations throughout western europe , great britain , and the united states . also , the fbi's june 2004 response to our inquiry indicated that fbi officials had recently met with host government officials in albania and greece to address various crime problems , including alien smuggling and trafficking of persons . as a result , the fbi noted that it will seek to establish a task force in albania as part of an “upstream” effort to address crimes that affect the united states before problems become insurmountable . department of the treasury components that have roles in combating the smuggling of aliens into the united states include internal revenue service - criminal investigation and the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) . criminal investigation ( ci ) is the law enforcement arm of the internal revenue service ( irs ) . at times , irs - ci has conducted alien - smuggling investigations jointly with ice , particularly in areas of high - volume illegal immigration , such as texas , arizona , and new york . in june 2004 , in response to our inquiry , irs - ci provided us the following examples of alien - smuggling investigations conducted jointly with ice ( or legacy ins ) : valente sillero , et al . ( austin , tex. )