training . at fra conferences , the bridge specialists teach fra track inspectors about bridge conditions . this training supports communication between fra track staff and bridge specialists and is designed to increase the number of fra personnel that can detect immediate safety concerns on bridges . conducting bridge safety surveys . during a bridge safety survey , a bridge specialist interviews railroad bridge staff and uses fra guidelines as criteria for reviewing a railroad's bridge management policies , procedures , and records . ( 2 ) what is the federal role in overseeing railroad bridge and tunnel safety ? ( 3 ) how are public funds currently used for freight railroad infrastructure capital investments , including those for bridges and tunnels ? ( 4 ) what criteria and framework could be used to guide the future federal role , if any , in freight - related capital investments , including those for railroad bridges and tunnels ? our overall approach to addressing these topics was to ( 1 ) review federal legislation , regulations , and guidance ; transportation planning literature ; and forecasts of future freight railroad demand and capacity from private railroads , public agencies , and industry organizations ; ( 2 ) interview a wide variety of representatives ; and ( 3 ) review pertinent documentation from railroads of various sizes ; federal , regional , state , and local governments ; and industry groups . in particular , we interviewed representatives from six class i railroads , two class ii railroads , and nine class iii railroads . at the federal and state levels , we interviewed officials from six federal agencies that have some relationship dealing with railroad bridges and tunnels on the freight railroad network — including officials in the department of transportation's ( dot ) federal railroad administration ( fra ) , which has primary responsibility for overseeing the safety of the nation's freight railroad network — as well as officials in nine state dots . we selected the railroads and the state and local government agencies for interviews to include a cross section of characteristics , including geographic diversity , the presence of noteworthy public - private partnerships between the railroads and government agencies , and state dots that actively participated in planning or funding railroad infrastructure projects . we conducted our review from june 2006 through july 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for further details about our scope and methodology . currently , seven class i railroads own and maintain over 61,000 bridges and over 800 tunnels , and 40 class ii and 509 class iii railroads own and maintain over 15,000 bridges . according to fra documents , in 2002 , the u.s. railroad network contained approximately one bridge for every 1.4 miles of track . class i railroads operate on approximately 70 percent of the total route miles in the united states and generate 90 percent of total railroad revenues . class ii and iii railroads also play a critical role in the national freight railroad network , serving as feeders to class i main lines .