most of the decline was in home health aide visits . the four states we reviewed allocated different proportions of medicaid long - term care expenditures for the elderly to federally required long - term care services , such as nursing facilities and home health , and to state optional home and community - based care , such as in - home personal support , adult day care , and care in alternate residential care settings . as the following examples illustrate , the states also differed in how they designed their home and community - based services , influencing the extent to which these services were available to elderly individuals with disabilities . therefore , as the amount of informal care changed in the different scenarios , the hours of in - home help offered in louisiana did not change as much as they did in the other states . in kansas , case managers often offered fewer hours of in - home care than were offered in other states , which may have been in part influenced by kansas's supervisory review whereby more costly care plans were more extensively reviewed than lower cost care plans . new york spent $2,463 per person aged 65 or older in 1999 on medicaid long - term care services for the elderly — much higher than the national average of $996 . while nursing home care represented 68 percent of new york's expenditures , new york also spent more than the national average on state optional long - term care services , such as personal support services . because most home and community - based services in new york were covered as part of the state medicaid plan , these services were largely available to all eligible medicaid beneficiaries needing them without caps on the numbers of individuals served . louisiana spent $1,012 per person aged 65 or older , slightly higher than the national average of $996 . nursing home care accounted for 93 percent of louisiana's expenditures , higher than the national average of 81 percent . instead , case managers in oregon exclusively recommended either adult foster care or an assisted living facility in the five care plans recommending care in another residence . it was also noteworthy that two case managers in oregon recommended that either abby or brian obtain care in other residential care settings in a scenario when she or he lived with a family member , expressing concern that continuing to provide care to abby or brian would be detrimental to the family . case managers in kansas , louisiana , and new york only recommended out - of - home placement for abby or brian in scenarios when they lived alone . state differences also were evident in how case managers used adult day care to supplement in - home or other care . for example , across all care plans the case managers developed for abby and brian ( 24 care plans in each state ) , adult day care was offered four times in new york and oregon and three times in kansas .