i and app . ii , respectively , for the surveys we sent to asylum officers and supervisory asylum officers and their aggregate responses. ) to gain a better understanding of asylum adjudications , we visited three uscis asylum offices — los angeles , san francisco , and new york . the views we obtained at these three offices may not be generalized to all eight asylum offices . how do key factors affect asylum officers' adjudication of asylum cases ? what key factors affect immigration judges' adjudication of asylum cases ? to address the first two questions , we reviewed applicable laws , regulations , and agency documents , including asylum adjudication policies and procedures , asylum officer training materials , and fraud referral data . we compared uscis and eoir quality - assurance mechanisms with criteria in gao standards for internal control in the federal government . we also reviewed governmental and nongovernmental reports and academic journals on asylum issues . in addition , we surveyed all 256 asylum officers and all 56 supervisory asylum officers who were on board as of september 30 , 2006 , to obtain their views on quality assurance mechanisms and factors that affect asylum officers' ability to adjudicate asylum cases . this report addresses the following questions: to what extent have quality assurance mechanisms been designed within the u.s. asylum system to ensure the integrity of the adjudication process ? we obtained a 74 percent and 77 percent response rate , respectively , from the asylum officers and supervisors . ( see app . however , because we selected these offices based on their diversity in size ( based on the number of asylum officers and cases adjudicated ) , variation in the percentage of cases granted asylum , and disparate geographic location , they provided us with an overview and perspective of the asylum process as well as potential challenges facing asylum officers . at these offices , we conducted semistructured interviews with asylum office directors and deputy directors , quality assurance and training coordinators , fraud detection and national security immigration officers , and selected asylum officers and supervisory asylum officers ; and observed interviews that asylum officers conducted with asylum applicants . in addition , we interviewed the asylum officer representative to the american federation of government employees . we also interviewed the directors of the other five asylum offices as well as headquarters officials from uscis's asylum division and office of fraud detection and national security . to further our understanding of federal efforts to address fraud in the asylum system , we attended the asylum division's december 2007 fraud prevention conference . finally , we interviewed dhs officials in the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement's ( ice ) forensic document laboratory regarding document verification and identity and benefit fraud branch regarding asylum investigations . we interviewed officials in the department of state ( state ) regarding their role in providing information that may help adjudicators distinguish between genuine and fraudulent asylum claims . to address the third question and further examine the first question in the context of the immigration courts , we surveyed all 207 immigration judges who were on board as of september 30 , 2006 , and obtained a 77 percent response rate .