i would be happy to answer any questions at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors to this testimony include marshall hamlett , assistant director ; catherine gelb ; john mcgrail ; and jennifer schwartz . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . gprama also highlighted the importance of program evaluation for federal agencies . specifically , gprama requires agencies to describe program evaluations that were used to establish or revise strategic goals . further , from 2000 through 2012 , the agencies had conducted program evaluations of 13 of the 30 financial assistance programs that support entrepreneurs we reviewed . based on our review , we found that sba has conducted program evaluation studies on 5 of its 10 programs . we also found that usda has evaluated 1 of its 8 financial assistance programs , but the study did not address the extent to which the program was achieving its mission . the work on which this statement is based was performed during the june 2011 through february 2014 time period in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . programs providing financial assistance to entrepreneurs are fragmented — which occurs when more than one agency or program is involved in the same broad area of national interest . of the 30 financial assistance programs we reviewed , 16 can provide or guarantee loans that can be used for a broad range of purposes by existing businesses and nascent entrepreneurs in any industry . examples of programs in this category include sba's 7 ( a ) loan program and usda's business and industry loans . other programs can support loans for a more narrow range of purposes or industries or can only support other types of financial assistance , such as grants , equity investments , and surety guarantees . in addition , a number of programs overlap based on the characteristics of the targeted beneficiary . entrepreneurs may fall into more than one beneficiary category — for example , an entrepreneur may be in an area that is both rural and economically distressed . such entrepreneurs may be eligible for multiple subsets of financial assistance programs based on their specific characteristics .