do not include federal expenditures . line 1g: other . include expenditures on any other programs related to poverty relief that are not included above . describe such programs on an attached sheet . please be careful to count expenditures only once ! do not include capital expenditures . do not include indirect administrative costs or management information systems ( mis ) expenditures , but do include direct administrative costs such as case management expenditures in relevant program line items . if it is impossible to break out these direct costs by program , include them in the other lines under the most relevant sub - category . if necessary , estimate the percentage of direct costs that apply to the programs eligible for our survey . include the costs of fringe benefits for state personnel . ( a rough estimate of fringe benefit costs is all that is necessary. ) identify funding streams included in the columns labeled “other” on a separate worksheet . for columns labeled “ssbg” ( social services block grant ) : if state officials cannot isolate spending on individual programs , obtain either ( 1 ) estimates for these amounts , or ( 2 ) totals with an explanation of the general areas in which ssbg funds are spent . for tanf funds transferred from tanf to ssbg , document them as ssbg expenditures with a note on the level attributable to the transfer . compile and provide copies of all supporting documentation for the data entered in the survey , e.g . expenditure reports , annual financial statements . when possible , identify the caseload and eligibility criteria for each program and provide supporting documentation . suggested format for data submission: for example , line 2b , work preparation , could include expenditures from several programs across two or more agencies . each of these agencies would complete the survey as well as provide the supporting documentation . the various agencies' contributions could be compiled and summarized . line 1b: child support payments . include all child support collections from non - custodial parents that are passed on to custodial parents who are receiving cash assistance through tanf , in excess of $50 per monthly payment . line 1c: emergency assistance . include all expenditures for emergency assistance , including prevention of eviction , utility cut - off , etc . document , to the extent possible , how emergency assistance funds are allocated . line 1d: food assistance . include expenditures on programs designed to provide food or nutritional assistance to low - income people . do not include any 100% federally funded program such as free or reduced - school breakfast or lunch programs . include , however , the state and federal expenditures on administrative expenses for those programs and any state supplemental programs . line 1e: housing assistance . include expenditures on programs designed to provide housing assistance to low - income people , such as vouchers , state low - income housing tax credits , or any other state support for low - income housing efforts . line 1f: ssi supplements . include expenditures on state supplementation of the federal supplemental security income program .