postal service . in addition , violations are investigated by other federal agencies , such as the social security administration office of the inspector general , the u.s. secret service , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the u.s. department of state , the u.s. department of education office of inspector general , and the internal revenue service . the department of justice may also prosecute federal identity theft cases . ( see app . i , table 3 , which highlights some of the jurisdictional responsibilities of some key federal agencies. ) many states have laws prohibiting the theft of identity information . for example , new york law makes identity theft a crime . in other states , identity theft statutes also address specific crimes committed under a false identity . for example , arizona law prohibits any person from using deceptive means to alter certain computer functions or use software to collect bank information , take control of another person's computer , or prevent the operator from blocking the installation of specific software . in addition , idaho law makes it unlawful to impersonate any state official to seek , demand , or obtain personally identifiable information of anothe r person . assistance provisions in their laws . for example , washington state law requires police and sheriffs' departments to provide a police report or original incident report at the request of any consumer claiming to be a victim of identity theft . idaho code § 18-3126a ( 2005 ) . certain circumstances . recently , some county governments have also completed or begun redacting or truncating ssns that are displayed in public records — that is removing the full ssn from display or showing only part of it . some are responding to state laws requiring these measures , but others have acted on their own based on concerns about the potential vulnerability of ssns to misuse . while steps have been taken at the federal , state , and local level to prevent identity theft , vulnerabilities remain in both the public and private sectors . these vulnerabilities can be grouped into different areas , including: ( 1 ) display and use of social security numbers ; ( 2 ) availability of personal information through private information resellers ; and ( 3 ) security weaknesses in federal agency information systems that may lead to data security breaches involving personally identifiable information ; among others . ssns are a critical piece of information used to perpetrate identity theft . although the ssn was created as a means to track workers' earnings and eligibility for social security benefits , it is now also a vital piece of information needed to function in american society . because of its unique nature and broad applicability , the ssn has become the identifier of choice for public and private sector entities , and it is used for numerous non - social security purposes . today , u.s. citizens generally need an ssn to pay taxes , obtain a driver's license , or open a bank account , among other things . ssns , along with names and birth certificates , are among the three personal identifiers most often sought by identity thieves .