our review was subject to some limitations . we did not assess the reliability or quality of taxpayer and other personal information that is shared and verified between education and irs . we relied on officials to identify those irs offices that use personal information because there is no central , coordinating point within irs for receipt of this type of information . additionally , we relied on irs and education officials' views on possible impediments or missed opportunities to match / cross - check information , any additional data sharing and verification needs , and the benefits and challenges of increased disclosure of taxpayer information . we conducted our work from august 2002 through june 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the irs commissioner and education officials raised no concerns . in his comments , the commissioner noted that although we did not make any recommendations , the report provides an accurate and comprehensive review of the issue , and will be a good source document for policymakers as they address increased sharing of taxpayer information . additionally , the chief operating officer acknowledged the potential for saving hundreds of millions of dollars annually in overpayments and other benefits through an effective data matching program with irs , and said that education officials would continue to support necessary legislative changes . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time we will send copies to the chairman and ranking minority member , house committee on ways and means ; the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means ; the secretary of education ; the secretary of the treasury ; and the commissioner of internal revenue . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or on brostekm@gao.gov , or signora may at ( 404 ) 679-1920 or on maysj1@gao.gov . other staff who made key contributions to this report were michelle bowsky , michele fejfar , jyoti gupta , shirley jones , anne laffoon , and miltresa mcmichael . to respond to your request , we performed our work at various internal revenue service ( irs ) offices , including the office of governmental liaison ; the office of safeguards ; the office of program , evaluation , and risk analysis ; and the privacy advocate's office . irs does not use student aid application data because irs officials believe that the data irs receives are more accurate than student aid application data . this belief is supported by irs data and by education studies , and thus there appears to be little benefit to attempting to use the education data for tax administration purposes . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of internal revenue and the secretary of education .