privacy . with the emphasis on information sharing , privacy issues have emerged as a major , and contentious , concern . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , data mining has been seen increasingly as a useful tool to help detect terrorist threats by improving the collection and analysis of public and private - sector data . our may 2004 governmentwide report on data mining described 14 data mining efforts reported by dhs . mining government and private databases containing personal information creates a range of privacy concerns because agencies can quickly and efficiently obtain information on individuals or groups by exploiting large databases containing personal information aggregated from public and private records . concerns have also been raised about the quality and accuracy of the mined data ; the use of the data for other than the original purpose for which the data were collected without the consent of the individual ; the protection of the data against unauthorized access , modification , or disclosure ; and the right of individuals to know about the collection of personal information , how to access that information , and how to request a correction of inaccurate information . in april 2003 , dhs appointed its first chief privacy officer . according to this officer , among other things , the dhs privacy office promotes best practices with respect to privacy , guides dhs agencies in developing appropriate privacy policies , and serves as a resource for questions related to privacy and information collection and disclosure . privacy concerns have also been a critical factor in the development and acquisition of us - visit and capps ii . with respect to capps ii , the 2004 dhs appropriations act designated privacy as one of eight key issues that tsa must address before capps ii is deployed or implemented . in our february 2004 report on whether tsa had fulfilled these legislative requirements , we stated that the agency's plans appear to address many of the requirements of the privacy act , the primary legislation that regulates the government's use of personal information . however , while tsa had taken initial steps , it had not finalized its plans for complying with the privacy act . we also looked at the tsa's plans in the larger context of eight fair information practices , which are internationally recognized privacy principles that include practices such as data quality and security safeguards . the tsa's plans reflect some actions to address each of these practices . however , to meet its evolving mission goals , the agency also appears to limit the application of some of these practices . this reflects tsa's efforts to balance privacy with other public policy interests , such as national security , law enforcement , and administrative efficiency . compliance with the information collection requirements of the paperwork reduction act . the paperwork reduction act prohibits an agency from conducting or sponsoring the collection of information unless ( 1 ) the agency has submitted the proposed collection and other documents to omb , ( 2 ) omb has approved the proposed collection , and ( 3 ) the agency displays an omb control number on the collection .