circular no . a - 123 guides agencies on how to integrate organizational performance and erm to yield an “enterprise - wide , strategically - aligned portfolio view of organizational challenges that provides better insight about how to most effectively prioritize resource allocations to ensure successful mission delivery.” the updated requirements in circulars a - 123 and a - 11 help modernize existing management efforts by requiring agencies to implement an erm capability coordinated with the strategic planning and strategic review process established by the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) , and with the internal control processes required by the fmfia and in our standards for internal control in the federal government . this integrated governance structure is designed to improve mission delivery , reduce costs , and focus corrective actions towards key risks . more specifically , circular no . a - 123 discusses both internal control and erm and how these fit together to manage agency risks . our standards for internal control in the federal government describes internal control as a process put in place by an entity's oversight body , management , and other personnel that provides reasonable assurance that objectives related to operations , compliance , and reporting will be achieved , and serves as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets . internal control is also part of erm and used to manage or reduce risks in an organization . prior to implementing erm , risk management focused on traditional internal control concepts to managing risk exposures . beyond traditional internal controls , erm promotes risk management by considering its effect across the entire organization and how it may interact with other identified risks . additionally , erm also addresses other topics such as setting strategy , governance , communicating with stakeholders , and measuring performance , and its principles apply at all levels of the organization and across all functions . implementation of omb circulars is expected to engage all agency management , beyond the traditional ownership of a - 123 by the chief financial officer community . according to the a - 123 circular , it requires leadership from the agency chief operating officer ( coo ) and performance improvement officer ( pio ) or other senior official with responsibility for the enterprise , and close collaboration across all agency mission and mission - support functions . the a - 123 guidance also requires agencies to create a risk profile that helps them identify and assess risks arising from mission and mission - support operations , and consider those risks as part of the annual strategic review process . circular a - 123 requires that agencies' risk profiles include risks to strategic , operations , reporting and compliance objectives . a federal interagency group of erm practitioners developed a playbook released through the performance improvement council ( pic ) and the chief financial officers council ( cfoc ) in july 2016 to provide federal agencies with a resource to support erm . in particular , the playbook assists them in implementing the required elements in the updated a - 123 circular .