pub . 113-76 , 128 stat . 5 , div . c , title vi , 128 stat . 101 ; div . j , title ii , 128 stat . measurement.ipo acting director , deputy director , and other dod and va program officials to understand current efforts related to improving interoperability between the departments . appendix i describes our objectives , scope , and methodology in greater detail . further , we interviewed cognizant officials , such as the we conducted this performance audit from september 2014 to august 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . historically , patient health information has been scattered across paper records kept by many different caregivers in many different locations , making it difficult for a clinician to access all of a patient's health information at the time of care . lacking access to these critical data , a clinician may be challenged in making the most informed decisions on treatment options , potentially putting the patient's health at risk . the use of technology to electronically collect , store , retrieve , and transfer clinical , administrative , and financial health information has the potential to improve the quality and efficiency of health care . electronic health records are particularly crucial for optimizing the health care provided to military personnel and veterans . while in active military status and later as veterans , many dod and va personnel , along with their family members , tend to be highly mobile and may have health records residing at multiple medical facilities within and outside the united states . each department operates separate electronic health record systems that they rely on to create and manage patient health information . in particular , dod currently relies on ahlta , which comprises multiple legacy medical information systems that were developed from commercial software products and customized for specific uses . for example , the composite health care system ( chcs ) , which was formerly dod's primary health information system , is used to capture information related to pharmacy , radiology , and laboratory order management . in addition , the department uses essentris ( also called the clinical information system ) , a commercial health information system customized to support inpatient treatment at military medical facilities . for its part , va currently uses its integrated medical information system — vista — which was developed in - house by va clinicians and information technology ( it ) personnel . the system consists of 104 separate computer applications , including 56 health provider applications ; 19 management and financial applications ; 8 registration , enrollment , and eligibility applications ; 5 health data applications ; and 3 information and education applications .