postal service . the forest service and irs also reported donating property , such as office furniture and equipment , through the state agencies for surplus property program . four agencies reported selling some of their property from a space reduction project . for example , hud's regional office in denver sold some of its excess office furniture , which dated to 1992 , and recycled or discarded the remainder . when disposing of property from a space reduction project , some agencies sought assistance from gsa . gsa's office of personal property management ( gsa oppm ) assists agencies , when requested , in disposing of personal property , and officials at selected agency locations reported receiving assistance and training . in one example , gsa officials told us that a regional office of a selected agency needed to dispose of an office full of furniture and , in addition to using the disposal process , contacted gsa oppm for additional assistance . because of the large amount of property , gsa oppm took steps to make other agencies in the area aware of the available property and facilitated access to allow agencies to view the property . in another example , gsa oppm officials met with officials from another agency in the planning stages of a relocation to answer questions and provided advice and guidance for disposing of personal property . when the forest service's lease on its denver - area office expired , the agency leased space in another location , requiring a move but reducing its office by over 21,000 square feet . the agency sought to conform to new space utilization standards , which required more efficiently - designed furniture than its existing office furniture . because the forest service did not reuse most of its old furniture in its new space , it no longer had a need for it . the forest service retained some of the furniture for use in other forest service offices within the region and declared the remainder as excess . through gsaxcess , the forest service transferred some of its excess furniture to other federal agencies , such as the bureau of land management and the u.s . postal service . the forest service sold some furniture at auction ; broken items were recycled . agencies may dispose of large amounts of property during a space reduction project , but overall , agency officials reported few challenges in doing so . this may be in part because any effects from space reductions are distributed across an entire agency . although selected agencies' average reduce the footprint space reduction goals ranged from 97,000 square feet to 662,000 square feet each fiscal year from 2016 to 2020 , each agency's efforts consisted of dozens of geographically dispersed projects of various sizes to be completed over several years . for example , as of fiscal year 2016 , epa had 21 space reduction projects planned from fiscal years 2016 through 2021 , with individual anticipated reductions ranging from less than 1,000 square feet to more than 140,000 square feet . at least one project is present in 8 of epa's 10 regions . agencies' ability to pay for space reduction projects may also have affected these projects' effects .