we also discussed program goals with ojp officials . finally , to assess the extent to which ojp has controls associated with federal conflicts of interest and lobbying requirements , we identified federal statutes and regulations governing conflicts of interest and lobbying . we are reviewing ojp documentation and statements from ojp officials to determine the extent to which ojp has controls in place consistent with those requirements . this work is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . analysis of dna evidence from crime scenes can help law enforcement link offenders or victims to crime scenes . after crimes occur , law enforcement submits physical evidence from crime scenes , victims , and suspects ( hereafter referred to as “crime scene evidence” ) to labs for analysis . labs then perform “dna analysis,” which , as used in this statement , refers to ( 1 ) biology screening ( locating , screening , identifying , and characterizing blood and other biological stains and substances ) ; and / or ( 2 ) dna testing ( identifying and comparing dna profiles in biological samples ) . we found that ojp has established an agency - wide ethics program and uses tools such as the doj ethics handbook and annual financial disclosure reports , among others , to help employees and their supervisors to determine whether they have potential conflicts of interest . see table 2 below for a list of the federal conflicts of interest requirements we identified , as well as our preliminary assessment of related ojp controls to ensure that the requirements are met . we found that ojp has established some controls related to lobbying but has not fully established controls needed to meet applicable requirements . specifically , federal law sets forth several requirements related to lobbying “certification” and “disclosure.” lobbying certification refers to agreeing not to use appropriated funds to lobby , and lobbying disclosure refers to disclosing lobbying activities with respect to the covered federal action paid for with nonappropriated funds . federal regulation requires recipients of all federal awards over $100,000 to file certification documents and disclosure forms ( if applicable ) with the next tier above , and to forward those same forms from the tier below if they issue subawards for $100,000 or more . in the case of cebr grants , tiers include ojp , grantees , subgrantees , contractors under grantees and subgrantees , and subcontractors . subawards include subgrants , contracts under grants or subgrants , and subcontracts . we found that ojp had established controls to obtain lobbying certification documents and disclosure forms from grantees , but had not fully established controls to ensure grantees obtain these documents from tiers below them , see table 3 below . ojp has established mechanisms to ensure it obtains lobbying certification documents and disclosure forms from grantees .