the costs of these hours were billed to and paid by fbi . saic management acknowledged that billings were not consistent with the march 2003 policy and indicated that it would research the issue further to determine whether corrections are necessary . based on our review of the labor charges , fbi may have overpaid for more than 4,000 hours . using average , fully burdened labor rates for employees who billed incorrectly , we estimated that fbi may have overpaid these overtime costs by as much as $400,000 . questionable labor rates we also found that csc / dyncorp may have charged labor rates that exceeded ceiling rates that gsa asserts were established pursuant to a dyncorp task order . in short , gsa and csc disagree on whether ceiling rates for a csc / dyncorp subcontractor , dyncorp information systems ( dynis ) , were ever established . when dyncorp entered into the contractual agreement with gsa , it agreed to ceiling rates for various labor categories and agreed to negotiate subcontractor ceiling rates separately for each task order . the may 2001 dyncorp task order award document stated that ceilings were in place on all dynis labor category and indirect rates , subject to negotiation pending the results of a defense contract audit agency audit . gsa officials told us they believed that dynis labor category rates in dyncorp's trilogy proposal represented established ceilings , and that they negotiated dynis labor category ceiling rates with dyncorp . however , csc stated that it never negotiated labor category ceiling rates with gsa . based on our review of dyncorp's labor invoices , we noted that several of dynis's rates charged exceeded the labor rates that gsa contended were ceiling rates . for example , csc / dyncorp billed over 14,000 hours for work performed by senior it analysts during 2001 on the trilogy project based on an average hourly rate of $106.14 . however , if ceiling rates were established , the dyncorp proposal indicated that the trilogy project would be charged a maximum of $68.73 per hour for a senior it analyst working in the field or $96.24 per hour for a senior it analyst working at headquarters during 2001 . if ceiling rates were established , we estimated that fbi overpaid csc / dyncorp by approximately $2.1 million for dynis labor costs . other questionable costs we also identified about $7.5 million in other payments to contractors that were for questionable costs . in most cases , these costs were not supported by sufficient documentation to enable an objective third party to determine if each payment was a valid use of government funds . for example , csc did not provide us adequate supporting documentation for almost $2 million of subcontractor labor charges and about $5.5 million of odc charges we selected to review . while gsa accepted our recommendations , it did not believe that one of them was needed , and described some of the improvements to its internal controls and other business process changes already implemented . gsa also expressed concern with some of our observations and conclusions related to the invoice review and approval process and our analysis of airfare costs .