these audits will confirm that companies have security programs and processes . according to acc , all of its members have conducted vulnerability assessments , and most have completed security enhancements and had them verified . the synthetic organic chemical manufacturers association ( socma ) , which represents manufacturers who produce specialty chemicals at small - to medium - sized facilities , also adopted these security requirements for all of their member facilities , which include 77 of the 15,000 rmp facilities . acc and socma's self - initiated membership requirements incorporate elements of a risk management framework , which can aid in assessing risk by determining which vulnerabilities should be addressed in what ways within available resources , and were designed to strengthen security at facilities that comply with its requirements . the actions required by responsible care® may exceed efforts taken by non - participating facilities . despite these efforts , the overall extent of security preparedness at chemical facilities is unknown . while dhs has a number of programs underway to identify high - risk facilities and assess their vulnerabilities , these programs are in their infancy . as a result , neither dhs nor any other federal entity has yet assessed the overall extent of security preparedness at the nation's chemical facilities . we plan to issue a report on our findings later this year . the homeland security act of 2002 established dhs and set forth its mission to , among other things , prevent terrorist attacks within the united states , reduce the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism , and minimize the damage and assist in the recovery from terrorist attacks that do occur within the united states . following passage of the act , a december 2003 presidential directive states that dhs is responsible for coordinating the overall national effort to enhance the protection of the critical infrastructure and key resources of the united states . the secretary of homeland security serves as the principal federal official to lead , integrate , and coordinate the implementation of efforts among federal departments and agencies , state and local governments , and the private sector to protect critical infrastructure and key resources . the directive identified the chemical sector as a critical infrastructure sector along with other sectors , including agriculture , banking and finance , defense industrial base , emergency services , energy , food , government , information and telecommunications , postal and shipping , public health , transportation , and water . under this presidential directive , dhs is now the lead agency for the chemical infrastructure sector , a change from national strategies issued in july 2002 and february 2003 , which named epa as the lead federal agency . the presidential directive emphasized those critical infrastructure and key resources that could be exploited to cause catastrophic health effects or mass casualties . because many chemicals are inherently hazardous , the release of chemicals or the risk of contamination at chemical facilities poses a potential threat to public health and the economy .