gao - 07-518 . washington , d.c.: may 11 , 2007 . nnsa site office oversight . the site offices have initiated efforts to address concerns about inadequate federal oversight by instituting more - formal oversight procedures , seeking to fill vacant positions , and providing additional training . the site offices at lawrence livermore and sandia have revised their operating procedures and documentation on staff responsibilities , qualifications of technical staff , and schedules for evaluating laboratory operations . los alamos and lawrence livermore site officials told us they have begun to fill vacant positions , including hiring a senior nuclear safety expert at lawrence livermore who directly advises the site office manager . the site offices told us that they have also been formalizing their process to provide training related to general scientific and technical expertise , applicable regulations , contract administration , and safety management . many of these efforts are still under way , however , and their effect on safety performance is not clear . to hold its contractors more accountable for safety performance , nnsa has incorporated into its contracts at los alamos and sandia new contract mechanisms that provide for additional fee or contract extensions for meeting annual safety and other goals . under the new contract incentives , contractors can earn substantially larger fees — or , in the case of sandia , a one - year contract extension as well — if they improve safety performance . at los alamos , incentive fees are offered for improving safety documentation and decreasing rates of illness and injury , for example . in 2005 , sandia had the opportunity to earn the 1-year extension but could not do so , primarily because of safety problems . nnsa officials we spoke with were hopeful that these contract incentives would foster greater accountability but said that improvements could take years to achieve . moreover , officials expressed concern that incentives to reduce accidents could actually lead to underreporting , rather than actual reductions in the number of accidents . nnsa also is expecting to hold contractors more accountable through a newly implemented regulation — referred to as the “851 rule” — that requires contractors to follow worker safety requirements and imposes penalties for violations . promulgated in response to a 2002 congressional requirement , and similar to nuclear safety regulations , the worker safety regulation ( effective as of february 2007 ) encourages contractors to report violations of worker safety requirements and provides for doe's office of enforcement to levy civil penalties carrying monetary fines up to $70,000 per day . as of september 2007 , doe had not yet levied any fines against its contractors . nnsa faces two principal challenges in its continuing efforts to improve safety at the nation's weapons laboratories . the workers were provided immediate treatment . an internal doe accident investigation found a number of factors behind this accident — which , because of the number of workers involved and the potential radiological doses , ranked among the top 10 worst radiological intake accidents in 41 years of data gathering by doe and its predecessor agencies .