this is not accurate . msap compensation data can be stratified into two statistically valid subsets based on asset size of the credit unions surveyed . in addition , limited descriptive conclusions can be derived from the data about other asset subgroups . as referenced in msap and this response , ncua recognizes the difficulty in addressing the issues of membership profiles and the transparency of executive compensation in the absence of comprehensive data . ncua also understands that the time allotted for completion of the report did not allow for consideration of the msap data and similar data being compiled by nascus . b . composition of the fcus the report provides an extensive review of the characteristics and growth patterns of community - chartered fcus . however , the proportion of fcus that are community - chartered , the need for charter conversions to ensure continued viability , and the challenges community - chartered fcus face when converting from a single or multiple common bond charter , as well as other issues , are not thoroughly addressed . for example: 1 . despite recent growth in fcu community charters , they still only represent approximately 20 percent of fcus and 30 percent of fcu membership . this is a significant portion of the fcu system , but , as noted in the report , this growth has primarily been within the last five years . additionally , it should be emphasized that much of this growth is a result of fcus converting from an already existing occupational or associational fom . instead , the report concentrates on the growth of this subset when characterizing the entire fcu system , in particular the perceived “blurring” of the distinction between fcus and other depository institutions . a thorough assessment of the causes for the recent community charter conversions is not provided . the primary reason for these conversions has been to ensure continued viability of fcus in changing economic and financial industry environments . a review of several examples documents this point . clearview fcu ( formally us airways ) ; bethpage fcu ( formally grumman ) ; jax fcu ( formally jacksonville naval base ) ; and new cumberland fcu ( formally new cumberland army depot defense distribution center ) all converted to community charters in response to changes in their primary sponsors . the time necessary to successfully implement a different business model when converting to a community charter is not adequately addressed . this is critical since the cutoff for the scf data is 2003 , yet the period under review extends to and includes 2005 . consequently , the scf does not allow for an assessment of any appreciable changes based on the recent growth of fcu community charters , as the majority of the conversions to a community charter have occurred since 2000 , and 192 have occurred since 2003 . since the growth of community charters is discussed at length , it should also be fully explained that relative to the overall issue of reaching out to low - and moderate - income individuals , the impact of this growth can not be expected to be represented in the scf data .