leading and coordinating the homeland security enterprise . while dhs is one of a number of entities with a role in securing the homeland , it has significant leadership and coordination responsibilities for managing efforts across the homeland security enterprise . to satisfy these responsibilities , it is critically important that dhs develop , maintain , and leverage effective partnerships with its stakeholders , while at the same time addressing dhs - specific responsibilities in satisfying its missions . before dhs began operations , we reported that the quality and continuity of the new department's leadership would be critical to building and sustaining the long - term effectiveness of dhs and achieving homeland security goals and objectives . we further reported that to secure the nation , dhs must form effective and sustained partnerships between components and also with a range of other entities , including federal agencies , state and local governments , the private and nonprofit sectors , and international partners . dhs has made important strides in providing leadership and coordinating efforts . for example , it has improved coordination and clarified roles with state and local governments for emergency management . dhs also strengthened its partnerships and collaboration with foreign governments to coordinate and standardize security practices for aviation security . however , dhs needs to take additional action to forge effective partnerships and strengthen the sharing and utilization of information , which has affected its ability to effectively satisfy its missions . for example , in july 2010 , we reported that the expectations of private - sector stakeholders have not been met by dhs and its federal partners in areas related to sharing information about cyber - based threats to critical infrastructure . in 2005 , we designated information - sharing for homeland security as high risk because the federal government faced serious challenges in analyzing information and sharing it among partners in a timely , accurate , and useful way.failure to link information about the individual who attempted to conduct the december 25 , 2009 , airline bombing , prevented the individual from being included on the federal government's consolidated terrorist watchlist , a tool used by dhs to screen for persons who pose risks to the country . the federal government and dhs have made progress , but more work remains for dhs to streamline its information sharing mechanisms and better meet partners' needs . moving forward , it will be important that dhs continue to enhance its focus and efforts to strengthen and leverage the broader homeland security enterprise , and build off the important progress that it has made thus far . in addressing ever - changing and complex threats , and with the vast array of partners with whom dhs must coordinate , continued leadership and stewardship will be critical in achieving this end . gao , high - risk series: an update , gao - 11-278 , ( washington , d.c.: feb. 2011 ) . acquisition and information technology management policies and controls , to provide enhanced guidance on investment decision making .