these problems persist . my testimony today will focus on: ( 1 ) the status of space acquisitions , ( 2 ) the efforts dod is taking to address causes of problems and increase credibility and success in its space systems acquisitions , and ( 3 ) what remains to be done . notably , dod has taken the important step of acknowledging the acquisition problems of the past and is taking action to address them , including better management of the acquisition process and oversight of its contractors . moreover , several high - risk space programs have finally resolved technical and other obstacles and are close to begin delivering capability . we look forward to working with the dod to help ensure that these and other questions are addressed . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this statement , please contact cristina chaplain at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and pubic affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include art gallegos , assistant director ; greg campbell ; rich horiuchi ; alyssa weir ; and peter zwanzig . prioritize investments so that projects can be fully funded and it is clear where projects stand in relation to the overall portfolio . follow an evolutionary path toward meeting mission needs rather than attempting to satisfy all needs in a single step . match requirements to resources — that is , time , money , technology , and people — before undertaking a new development effort . research and define requirements before programs are started and limit changes after they are started . ensure that cost estimates are complete , accurate , and updated regularly . commit to fully fund projects before they begin . ensure that critical technologies are proven to work as intended before programs are started . assign more ambitious technology development efforts to research departments until they are ready to be added to future generations ( increments ) of a product . use systems engineering to close gaps between resources and requirements before launching the development process . use quantifiable data and demonstrable knowledge to make go / no - go decisions , covering critical facets of the program such as cost , schedule , technology readiness , design readiness , production readiness , and relationships with suppliers . do not allow development to proceed until certain thresholds are met — for example , a high proportion of engineering drawings completed or production processes under statistical control . empower program managers to make decisions on the direction of the program and to resolve problems and implement solutions . hold program managers accountable for their choices . require program managers to stay with a project to its end . hold suppliers accountable to deliver high - quality parts for their products through such activities as regular supplier audits and performance evaluations of quality and delivery , among other things . encourage program managers to share bad news , and encourage collaboration and communication .