i am happy to answer any questions you have . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the information is also shared with agencies using os ii . our review of gsa's os ii vendor files found that gsa has taken a more active role in oversight and is holding the vendors accountable for performance . we were not able to fully quantify the impact of these limitations . additionally , other agencies questioned the study's specific findings related to price premiums , but their own studies of price premiums support gsa's conclusion that better prices can be obtained through consolidated , leveraged purchasing . since purchasing of office supplies is highly decentralized , gsa obtained data for its study from multiple disparate sources , such as the federal procurement data system - next generation , the department of defense ( dod ) electronic mall , and purchase card data from commercial banks . this also helped gsa determine the number of blanket purchase agreements that would be awarded . as part of the overall strategy , a gsa commodity council identified five overarching goals , in addition to savings , for the os ii initiative . these goals and the methods used to address them are in table 1 . several new business practices have been incorporated in the os ii program to meet the goals . for example , to meet the capture data goal , gsa is collecting data on purchases and vendor performance that are assimilated and tracked through dashboards , which are high - level indicators of overall program performance . the dashboard information is used by the gsa team members responsible for oversight to ensure that the vendors are meeting terms and conditions of the blanket purchase agreements and that the program is meeting overall goals . for example , gsa has issued letters of concern to four vendors and has issued one cure notice to a vendor . these letters and notices are used to inform vendors that the agency has identified a problem with the vendor's compliance . to determine the amount of funds spent on office supplies and to conduct related analyses , gsa had to sort through about 7 million purchase transactions involving over 12 million items . the agency took steps to clean the data prior to using them . for example , it removed duplicate purchases and items that did not meet its definition of office supplies . the gsa study noted that the estimated amount of funds and related calculations were to be considered sound and reliable estimates derived from rigorous data analysis techniques . we also identified additional data and other limitations in gsa's study , including: gsa may not have been able to properly control for purchases of different quantities of the same item .