roles and responsibilities . similarly , the governing bodies have not fully defined the roles and responsibilities for making enterprise - wide decisions that affect individual agency budgets and for enforcing enterprise - wide budget priorities . nspm - 14 directs the heads of agencies to monitor , evaluate , and hold accountable their agencies for implementation of the strategy , and describes how agencies will develop their budgets with consideration of the agreed upon joint policy guidance developed by the agencies and the white house . however , as with other parts of the nspm - 14 implementation process , the details regarding specific roles and responsibilities for directing and enforcing budget decisions lack detail and specificity . additionally , officials from four agencies stated that the charter for the biodefense coordination team has not been finalized , further delaying the articulation of roles and responsibilities and the ability to establish a shared agenda and common operating picture . as a result , some officials remain skeptical of the effectiveness of any decisions made . for example , officials from four agencies said the biodefense steering committee does not have the authority to decide how individual agencies in the broader biodefense enterprise should allocate resources or prioritize programs . officials we spoke with also provided examples of how this part of the implementation process requires attention and will from stakeholders outside the biodefense steering committee , including the national security council staff , omb , and the congress . for example , officials from two agencies said turnover within the national security council staff had contributed to a lack of consistent leadership from the white house , which created a “lapse in momentum” and disrupted the implementation process . additionally , officials said that key parts of the implementation process , such as the finalization of metrics , milestones and end states , as well as agreement on the federal agency roles and responsibilities for the biodefense activities articulated in the strategy , had not been approved by the national security council staff . as of january 2020 , these documents had not received national security council staff approval as the process for the development of metrics , milestones and end states is considered ongoing , which could lead to inefficiencies and delay effective implementation of the strategy's goals . finally , officials we interviewed also discussed congress's key role as part of the regular federal budget process in determining agency appropriations . for example , officials from two agencies said it will be hard to predict whether the budget component expressed in nspm - 14 to assess and prioritize biodefense programs and activities will achieve its intended outcome . some agency officials also believed the process to use joint policy guidance to inform annual budget submissions would not be entirely dissimilar to the annual budgetary process , as agencies will continue to submit their proposed budgets and wait for congress to make appropriation decisions . however , we have previously reported that sustained congressional attention helps ensure that agencies continue to achieve progress resolving complex issues . we previously reported that determining the sources and types of resources needed and where those resources should be targeted are key decisions that effective national strategies should support .