this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this testimony , please contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or by e - mail at koontzl@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include ronald famous , richard hung , tammi nguyen , colleen phillips , angela watson , and glenda wright . the objectives of our review were to ( 1 ) provide an overview of our nation's polar - orbiting weather satellite program , ( 2 ) identify plans for the npoess program , and ( 3 ) identify key challenges in managing future npoess data volumes and the four processing centers' plans to address them . to provide an overview of the nation's polar - orbiting weather satellite system , we reviewed noaa and dod documents and web sites that describe the purpose and origin of the polar satellite program and the current poes and dmsp satellites' supporting infrastructures . we assessed the polar satellite infrastructure to understand the relationships among the satellites , ground control stations , and satellite data processing centers . we also reviewed documents and interviewed officials at the integrated program office and four processing centers to identify the processes for transforming raw satellite data into derived weather products and weather prediction models . to identify plans for the npoess program , we obtained and reviewed documents that describe the program's origin and purpose , and interviewed integrated program office officials to determine the program's background , status , and plans . we assessed the npoess acquisition strategy and program risk reduction efforts to understand how the program office plans to manage the acquisition and mitigate the risks to successful npoess implementation . we reviewed descriptions of each of the npoess sensors and assessed npoess program requirement documents to determine the types of products that npoess will produce and how these products will be used . to assess npoess data management challenges , we reviewed documents from the program office and the four processing centers and discussed challenges with dod and noaa officials . we assessed descriptions of each center's current and planned polar satellite infrastructure to identify plans for infrastructure growth . we also identified each processing centers' views on which npoess products will require infrastructure changes or scientific advancements in order to be used . we analyzed this information to determine whether the centers face challenges in their ability to process npoess data and their scientific capability to assimilate npoess data into their weather prediction models . we reviewed documents that describe noaa , dod , and integrated program office efforts to address the challenges that we identified , and we evaluated current and planned efforts to address those challenges . we interviewed program office and processing center officials to discuss these documents and their plans to address npoess data management challenges . we obtained comments from noaa and dod officials on the facts contained in this statement . these officials generally agreed with the facts as presented and provided some technical corrections , which we have incorporated .