only asbestos tested . epa's conclusions were based only on tests for asbestos , rather than other contaminants , and the conclusions focused on airborne contamination rather than contamination in dust inside residences . sampling protocols varied . epa did not explain that over 80 percent of the samples were taken after professional cleaning was completed as a part of epa's program . in addition , epa did not identify the portion of the samples that were collected following aggressive , as opposed to modified aggressive , techniques . in several cases we have clarified the language in the draft report to address epa concerns . in regard to epa's comments about the transparency of the wtc expert technical review panel process , we reported on the factors that limited the panel's ability to meet its goals and not on the overall transparency of the process . we stated that two factors limited the panel's ability to meet its goals: ( 1 ) epa officials' assertion that other agencies were better equipped to address public health and ( 2 ) epa's approach for managing the panel process . regarding epa's management of the panel process , however , expert panel members told us that epa did not have a transparent process for adopting or rejecting their recommendations , as we stated in the draft report . regarding panel members' views on the responsiveness of epa's second program to concerns of residents and workers , we clarified our report to note that the source of the views included all of the expert panel members who responded to a follow - up inquiry regarding this question . we disagree that the draft report provided panel member views in a misleading manner . however , we clarified the report language to indicate that 9 of 18 panel members reported that the decision - making process behind epa's changes to its plan were not at all transparent . in doing so , we reported the category with the largest number of responses and , as indicated in the draft report , the full range of responses can be found in appendix iv . as stated in the draft report , in order to determine the factors that affected the expert panel's ability to meet its goals , we conducted structured interviews with all 18 expert panel members . we analyzed these responses in order to describe the panel process , including epa's management of the panel process . regarding comments supporting inadequate time for decision making , panel members requested at the final panel meeting that epa allow time for additional discussion . according to the december 2005 meeting summary , the panel co - chair “summarized that the overall sense of the panel members is that there is a need for additional discussion.” 5 . we acknowledge that epa would have preferred for us to include more detailed information in our discussion of the agency's second wtc program , the wtc expert technical review panel process , and its programs for responding to disasters . however , the purpose of our report was not to reiterate the technical details of epa's efforts but to summarize specific findings related to our key objectives .