these networks then allocate resources to their respective facilities . vera was intended to equitably allocate resources by providing comparable resources to networks with comparable workloads . before vera was implemented , resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures . by aligning resources with workloads , vera shifted approximately $921 million among va's networks in fiscal year 2001 compared to what the allocations would have been under the previous allocation system . in my remarks today , i will briefly discuss our conclusion that vera's design is reasonable and highlight our recommendations for improving its implementation to better align resources with workload . my comments are based on a report we issued on february 28 , 2002 . to examine these issues , we reviewed va documents and consultants' reports on vera's original design , proposed vera changes , and actual vera changes . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks . i will be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or james musselwhite , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7259 . marcia mann and thomas walke also contributed to this statement . the combined effect of including basic vested priority 7 veterans in vera's workload and using all 44 va patient classes in vera's case - mix adjustment would provide additional resources to some northeastern and midwestern networks and reduce resources for some southern and western networks ( see fig . the allocation change would represent about 2 percent of networks' budgets but would be more substantial for some networks . network 1 ( boston ) would get approximately a 5 percent increase and network 20 ( portland ) approximately a 5 percent decrease . while va concurred with our recommendations to better align vera's measure of workload with actual workload served and to incorporate more ( not necessarily 44 ) categories into vera's case - mix adjustment , it plans to wait for further study before making a decision about modifications to vera for the fiscal year 2003 allocation . va and others have conducted various studies on including all priority 7 workload in vera and increasing the number of vera case mix categories . given the extensive studies by va and others of vera's workload and case - mix measures , we believe that va should make needed improvements to vera for the fiscal year 2003 allocation and further refine vera as needed in subsequent years . to improve its process to protect patients from network budget shortfalls , we also recommend that va's supplemental funding process determine to what extent networks need supplemental resources due to such factors as imperfections in vera , lack of network efficiency , or lack of managerial flexibility to close or consolidate programs or facilities . va's supplemental funding processes have not collected the information necessary to make these determinations . as a result , va cannot provide adequate assurance that supplemental allocations are appropriate or take needed action to correct problems that cause networks to have budget shortfalls .