ii ) . forty - seven states received equity bonus funding every year during the safetea - lu period . most of the funds from the highway account of the highway trust fund ( about 83.3 percent ) were apportioned to states across 13 formula programs during the 5-year safetea - lu period . included among these are 6 “core” highway programs ( see table 1 ) . in addition to formula programs , congress also directly allocated about 7.4 percent of highway account funds to state departments of transportation through congressionally directed high priority projects , which provided funding for a total of 5,091 specific projects identified in safetea - lu . the remaining funds , about 9.3 percent of the total , represent dozens of other authorized programs allocated to state departments of transportation , congressionally directed projects other than high priority projects , administrative expenses , and funding provided to states by other dot agencies , such as the national highway traffic safety administration and federal motor carrier safety administration ( see fig . some of the apportioned programs use states' contributions to the highway account of the highway trust fund as a factor in determining funding levels for each state . as previously mentioned , fhwa has to estimate the fuel tax contributions made to the fund by users in each state . the collection and estimation process takes place over several years ( see fig . 2 ) , and thus , the data used to calculate the formula are two years old . for example , the data used to apportion funding to states in fiscal year 2009 were based on estimated collections attributable to each state in fiscal year 2007 . by the early 1980s , construction of the interstate highway system was nearing completion , and a larger portion of the funds authorized from the highway trust fund were for non - interstate programs . the surface transportation assistance act of 1982 provided , for the first time , that each state would for certain programs receive a “minimum allocation” of 85 percent of its share of estimated tax payments to the highway account of the highway trust fund . this approach was largely retained when congress reauthorized the program in 1987 . since then , each state has received a specific share of the total program ( defined as all apportioned programs plus high priority projects ) and rate - of - return considerations into funds states received for the interstate maintenance , national highway system , and surface transportation programs . in 2005 , congress implemented through safetea - lu the equity bonus program that was designed to give states a guaranteed rate of return of 92 percent by fiscal year 2008 . in june 2010 , we reported that every state but one received more funding for highway programs than users contributed to the highway account . the only exception , texas , received about $1.00 ( 99.7 cents ) for each dollar contributed . among other states , this ranged from a low of $1.02 for both arizona and indiana to a high of $5.63 for the district of columbia .