updating performance measures . officials said that some performance measures are also outdated , such as those that result in duplication when reported annually . officials also said that some performance measures are confusing to grantees . nevertheless , as part of an ongoing ojp - wide review of performance measures , ojjdp is in the process of reviewing and updating all ojjdp performance measures and plans to provide updated definitions and instructions to grantees . increasing grantee response rate for data verification . to increase grantee response rates to data verification requests , ojjdp reported that it is exploring possible consequences for grantees if they do not respond , such as increased scrutiny by ojjdp staff who oversee awards or temporary withholding of funds until verifications are submitted . according to officials , whatever approach ( or approaches ) they decide on , they will implement them by march 2020 . the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) within the department of justice is responsible for administering grant programs under the juvenile justice and delinquency prevent act of 1974 . one of these programs , the title ii formula grant program , authorizes the award of formula grants to states to develop programs for juveniles and improve their juvenile justice systems . on december 21 , 2018 , the juvenile justice reform act of 2018 ( “reform act” ) enacted amendments to the title ii formula grant program , including new accountability and oversight requirements for grantees and ojjdp . the amendments were not effective until the fiscal year 2020 grant award cycle and did not apply to the period of performance we evaluated for this report , which was through fiscal year 2018 . table 4 summarizes the accountability and oversight requirements now in effect for the title ii formula grant program and the status of ojjdp's efforts to implement them . the reform act also requires several evaluations and assessments to help strengthen ojjdp's internal controls and identify fraud , waste or abuse in its programs . table 5 summarizes selected oversight requirements related to the title ii formula grant program . the title ii formula grant program — so called because it was authorized by title ii of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act of 1974 ( jjdpa ) — is a state formula grant program , administered by the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) . the program has been amended several times since 1974 — most recently , by the juvenile justice reform act of 2018 ( “reform act” ) , which also called for this evaluation of ojjdp's performance . the performance data we reviewed ( which covers title ii formula grants from october 2015 through september 2018 ) corresponds with statutory requirements in effect at that time , not the current requirements , as amended by the reform act , which apply to grant awards made in fiscal year 2020 and subsequent fiscal years . to be consistent with the data we reviewed , this appendix presents information on program requirements that applied prior to fiscal year 2020 .