private school tuition can cost more . for example , one 4-year private for - profit collegiate aviation school lists estimated annual undergraduate tuition of nearly $36,000 , not including room and board or flight training costs . flight training costs also vary considerably . according to the university aviation association's 2016 directory of collegiate aviation schools , a majority of pilot programs ( 27 of 45 ) have total approximate flight training costs of more than $50,000 , with an upper cost of about $81,000 . flight training costs may vary , depending on the school requirements , student interest , and aptitude . pilot program curriculum may differ and some students may choose to take additional classes . each additional certificate and rating adds to the total cost of the training . issues included insufficient space to store and maintain aircraft , insufficient classroom and office space , and crowded airspace that cannot accommodate the desired flight operations to train the number of pilot students they could with their existing resources . few representatives identified infrastructure availability at the airport as a great ( 1 school ) or moderate ( 3 schools ) challenge , while 6 representatives reported that infrastructure posed only a slight challenge and 7 said it was not a challenge at all . va education benefit program administration — publication of specific training hours and costs . representatives from eight schools and two stakeholders expressed some concern about new enforcement of va education benefit rules from the post 9 / 11 gi bill , as amended by the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance improvements act of 2010 . va issued two policy advisories in 2015 to notify collegiate aviation schools about statutory education benefit policies and bring them into compliance . one policy advisory notified schools that they must publish the specific number of training hours , as well as the specific cost of training , for each flight course , effectively setting a maximum number of training hours and fixed fees for each course taken as part of a standard degree program . according to va , before the agency issued the policy advisories there was great public and congressional outcry about individual pilot students receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars from va for their education . va issued the policy advisories to specify what pilot training activities are appropriate uses of va money , and under what circumstances . va funds cannot be used to pay for pilot training to proficiency because that would entail an unlimited amount of funds to be available for an individual's flight training . representatives from five selected schools reported that this rule made it difficult to provide efficient and effective flight training for all pilot students . depending on the program structure , students who cannot finish the course in the set number of hours must either pay out of pocket for additional training or accept a failing grade and take the course again . va education benefits pay for eligible beneficiaries to repeat the course if needed . in contrast , faa imposes a minimum but not a maximum number of hours per certificate , because the training goal is to achieve a certain level of proficiency for each certificate .