this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the committee may have . for more information on this testimony , please contact barry t. hill at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included elizabeth curda , preston s. heard , vincent p. price , and barbara timmerman . to examine the establishment , funding , and oversight of national heritage areas and their potential effect on private property rights , we ( 1 ) evaluated the process for identifying and designating national heritage areas , ( 2 ) determined the amount of federal funding provided to support these areas , ( 3 ) evaluated the process for overseeing and holding national heritage areas accountable for their use of federal funds , and ( 4 ) determined the extent to which , if at all , these areas have affected private property rights . to address the first issue , we discussed the process for identifying and designating heritage areas with the park service's heritage area national coordinator and obtained information on how the 24 existing heritage areas were evaluated and designated . to determine the amount of federal funding provided to support these areas , we discussed funding issues and the availability of funding data with the national coordinator , the park service's comptroller , and officials from the agency's northeast , midwest , southeast , and intermountain regional offices . we also obtained funding information from 22 of the 24 heritage areas for fiscal years 1997 through 2002 , and discussed this information with the executive directors and staff of each area . as of mid - march 2004 , two heritage areas had not provided us with funding data . to verify the accuracy of the data we obtained from these sources , we compared the data provided to us with data included in the heritage areas' annual audit and other reports that we obtained from the individual areas and the park service regions . we also discussed these data with the executive directors and other officials of the individual heritage areas and regional office officials . to evaluate the processes for holding national heritage areas accountable for their use of federal funds , we discussed these processes with the national coordinator and regional officials , and obtained information and documents supporting their statements . to determine the extent to which , if at all , private property rights have been affected by these areas , we discussed this issue with the national coordinator , regional officials , the executive director of the alliance of national heritage areas — an organization that coordinates and supports heritage areas' efforts and is their collective interface with the park service — the executive directors of the 23 heritage areas that were established at the time of our work , and representatives of several private property rights advocacy groups and individuals , including the american land rights association , the american policy center , the center for private conservation , the heritage foundation , the national wilderness institute , and the private property foundation of america .