developing guidance . irs's chief counsel , in coordination with treasury's office of tax policy , drafts tax regulations and also works with irs bods and the public . draft tax regulations are circulated throughout irs and treasury for review and approval before being published as a proposed tax regulation in the federal register . the public is given the opportunity to provide comments , which are analyzed and incorporated as appropriate into another draft of the regulation . the draft tax regulation is again circulated through irs and treasury for review and approval , before being published as a final tax regulation in the federal register . in some instances , once the draft proposed and final regulations have gone through the irs and treasury approval process , regulations may be subject to review by oira . taxpayers who hold investments at least 10 years can elect to have their investments valued at the fair market value when they dispose of the investments , and thus would not need to pay taxes on any gains on their initial investments . irs plans to use taxpayer - reported information and possibly some fund - reported information on the forms listed above in table 3 to identify taxpayers who have invested in qualified opportunity funds to confirm eligibility for tax benefits for investing in and holding those investments in qualified opportunity funds . in other instances , third - party information is not available for irs to corroborate taxpayer - related information . for example , above certain income thresholds only businesses engaged in an eligible trade or business qualify for the qbi deduction and this information is self - reported . our past work has found that one of the important factors contributing to the tax gap is the extent to which information is reported to irs by third parties . for example , according to 2011 – 2013 irs data , for income types where there is little or no third - party information reporting ( eg , business income ) , taxpayers misreported more than half of this income . without reliable information reporting , irs will likely need to conduct labor - intensive audits , such as correspondence or face - to - face audits , to ensure compliance with certain tcja provisions . the potential need to conduct labor - intensive audits could create challenges for irs given recent trends in audit rates and staffing reductions . specifically , irs audit rates of large corporations with assets of $10 million or greater declined from 17.7 percent in fiscal year 2011 to 7.9 percent in fiscal year 2017 . we previously reported that irs's staffing has declined each year since 2011 , and has significantly reduced enforcement activities . in september 2019 , tigta reported lb&i had difficulty hiring personnel with the skills needed for tcja implementation . this could limit irs's ability to conduct correspondence or face - to - face audits to ensure taxpayer compliance , including tcja provisions . lb&i and sb / se officials expressed their confidence in irs's ability to audit tcja provisions sufficiently . sb / se has developed compliance plans for tcja provisions identified as having the potential for fraud .