three states did not have any matches . we obtained documentation from bop and prison officials from the eight states to confirm that the selected individuals were incarcerated on the dates of passport application and issuance . the department of justice did not have any comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the attorney general . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or lords@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . you asked that we assess potential fraud in the department of state's ( state ) passport program . this report examines potentially fraudulent or high - risk issuances among passports issued during fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . to examine potentially fraudulent and high - risk passport issuances in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 , we matched state's passport - issuance data for approximately 28 million passport issuances to databases containing information about individuals who were ( 1 ) deceased , ( 2 ) incarcerated in a state prison facility , ( 3 ) in the custody of the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) , or ( 4 ) the subject of an active warrant at the time of the passport we conducted this matching on the basis of common data issuance.elements including social security number ( ssn ) , name , and date of birth . we also analyzed the passport data to identify issuances to applicants who provided an invalid ssn , which was defined as an ssn that had not been assigned at the time of the passport application , or had a high risk of misuse . because our review focused on passport issuances with certain fraud indicators , we did not review other types of passport fraud , such as identity theft involving individuals who were not deceased or imprisoned . similarly , since we focused on high - risk issuances involving applicants with active warrants , we did not match the passport data against all databases with individuals at risk of misusing a passport , such as the federal bureau of investigation's terrorist screening center data . we randomly selected a nongeneralizable sample of 15 cases from the population of unique , likely invalid ssns for additional review ( see fig . in seven cases , state improperly recorded the applicants' ssns in tdis . some individuals in our sample may have been issued multiple passports . in addition , we examined policies , guidance , including the foreign affairs manual , and other materials provided to passport specialists . we reviewed changes to state's controls since fiscal years 2009 and 2010 with respect to preventing certain fraudulent or high - risk passport issuances .