v ) . whether audits and other enforcement programs vary from each other depends on a number of factors . with regard to legal characteristics , audits and other enforcement programs are all authorized to contact taxpayers about apparent noncompliance and to determine and adjust taxpayers' tax liability . however , audits have the broadest authority to detect possible noncompliance , significant powers to obtain information , and the most restrictions on how irs is to interact with taxpayers . with regard to operational characteristics , the extent to which audits are operationally similar to or different from other enforcement programs varies depending on the type of audit . audits done in taxpayer locations and irs offices are not similar operationally to other enforcement programs and audits done through correspondence with the taxpayer , while still different , are more operationally similar to some of the other programs . irs officials were unaware of any research on whether taxpayers perceive differences among irs's enforcement programs . however , looking at audits and other enforcement programs from the taxpayers' perspective , irs officials and officials we interviewed who represent taxpayers believe that taxpayers may not perceive distinctions among many of the enforcement programs . in a general sense , the irc provisions for enforcement are similar in that they authorize irs to contact taxpayers about apparent noncompliance and to determine and adjust taxpayers' tax liability . however , the irc provisions grant irs the authority to review all matters that may affect a taxpayer's tax liabilities under audits but only certain specified tax issues under other enforcement programs . the irc also establishes more rules — including significant powers to obtain information as well as restrictions on those powers — that govern the nature of audit contacts with taxpayers than for the other programs . the irc does not explicitly limit the tax issues to be covered by an audit , unlike for the other enforcement programs . under the authority of section 7602 , audits can cover any issue on a tax return , including those that the other programs cover . in contrast , the irc specifies the scope of legal authority for the three other enforcement programs . for example , after five statutory expansions since 1976 , math error authority now covers 11 tax issues ( see app . document matching — which grew primarily through the 1980s as congress authorized more information reporting — now covers over 20 types of individual income as well as certain tax credits and deductions ( see app . ii ) . the irc also specifically authorizes the nonfiler program to pursue unfiled tax returns that should have been filed . the irc also establishes more rules governing irs's contacts with individual taxpayers under the audit program than it does for the math error , document matching , and nonfiler programs . these rules give irs significant powers to obtain information needed to determine an individual's tax liabilities when doing an audit and , in turn , places restrictions on the use of those powers . if resolving issues raised under the other enforcement programs requires that irs auditors become involved , the contacts with taxpayers become audits subject to these greater powers and restrictions .