hhs concurred with our recommendation . orr relies on grantees to provide care for unaccompanied children , such as housing and educational , medical , and therapeutic services , and to document in children's case files the services they provide . however , in our february 2016 report we found that documents were often missing from the 27 randomly selected case files we reviewed . specifically , 14 case files were missing a legal presentation acknowledgement form , 10 were missing a record of group counseling sessions , and 5 were missing clinical progress notes . grantees are required to provide these services and document that they did so . in addition , we identified several cases in which forms that were present in the files were not signed or dated . although orr uses its web - based data system to track some information about the services children receive , and grantees report on the services they provide in their annual reports , the documents contained in case files are the primary source of information about the services provided to individual children . without all of the documents included in the case files , it is difficult for orr to verify that required services were actually provided in accordance with orr policy and cooperative agreements . orr's most comprehensive monitoring of grantees occurs during on - site monitoring visits . however , we found that onsite visits to facilities has been inconsistent . according to orr documents , during on - site monitoring visits , orr project officers spend a week at facilities touring , reviewing children's case files and personnel files , and interviewing children and staff . prior to fiscal year 2014 , project officers were supposed to conduct on - site monitoring of facilities at least once a year . however , our review of agency data found that many facilities went several years without receiving a monitoring visit . for example , orr did not visit 15 facilities for as many as 7 years . in 2014 , orr revised its on - site monitoring program to ensure better coverage of grantees and implemented a biennial on - site monitoring schedule . nevertheless , orr did not meet its goal to visit all of its facilities by the end of fiscal year 2015 , citing lack of resources . monitoring visits are intended to provide an opportunity to identify program deficiencies or areas where programs are failing to comply with orr policies . according to standards for internal control , management should establish and operate monitoring activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results . monitoring generally should be designed to assure that it is ongoing and occurs in the course of normal operations , is performed continually , and is ingrained in the agency's operations . we concluded that without consistently monitoring its grantees , orr cannot know whether they are complying with their agreements and that children are receiving needed services .