providing census results . this includes tabulating and summarizing census data and disseminating the results to the public . automation and it are to play a critical role in the success of the 2010 census by supporting data collection , analysis , and dissemination . several systems will play a key role in the 2010 census . for example , enumeration “universes,” which serve as the basis for enumeration operations and response data collection , are organized by the universe control and management ( uc&m ) system , and response data are received and edited to help eliminate duplicate responses using the response processing system ( rps ) . both uc&m and rps are legacy systems that are collectively called the headquarters processing system . geographic information and support to aid the bureau in establishing where to count u.s. citizens are provided by the master address file / topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing ( maf / tiger ) system . the decennial response integration system ( dris ) is to provide a system for collecting and integrating census responses from all sources , including forms and telephone interviews . the field data collection automation ( fdca ) program includes the development of handheld computers for the address canvassing operation and the systems , equipment , and infrastructure that field staff will use to collect data . paper - based operations ( pbo ) was established in august 2008 primarily to handle certain operations that were originally part of fdca . collecting and integrating respondent information . this includes delivering questionnaires to housing units by mail and other methods , processing the returned questionnaires , and following up with nonrespondents through personal interviews ( nonresponse follow - up ) . it also includes enumerating residents of group quarters ( group quarters enumeration ) and occupied transitional living quarters ( enumeration of transitory locations ) , such as recreational vehicle parks , campgrounds , and hotels . it also includes a final check of housing unit status ( field verification ) where bureau workers verify potential duplicate housing units identified during response processing . pbo includes it systems and infrastructure needed to support the use of paper forms for operations such as group quarters enumeration activities , nonresponse follow - up activities , enumeration at transitory locations activities , and field verification activities . these activities were originally to be conducted using it systems and infrastructure developed by the fdca program . finally , the data access and dissemination system ii ( dads ii ) is to replace legacy systems for tabulating and publicly disseminating data . as stated in our testing guide and the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ( ieee ) standards , complete and thorough testing is essential for providing reasonable assurance that new or modified it systems will perform as intended . to be effective , testing should be planned and conducted in a structured and disciplined fashion that includes processes to control each incremental level of testing , including testing of individual systems , the integration of those systems , and testing to address all interrelated systems and functionality in an operational environment . further , this testing should be planned and scheduled in a structured and disciplined fashion .