response . tsa is responsible for coordinating information sharing between federal agencies and pipeline stakeholders , and phmsa is responsible for coordinating federal agency activities with the affected pipeline operator and state pipeline safety agency . the plan also states that the fbi is responsible for investigating attempted or successful attacks on pipeline infrastructure including those that are believed to have a nexus to terrorism . recovery . phmsa is primarily responsible for working with the pipeline operator , along with other supporting federal agencies , to facilitate service restoration . doe is responsible for monitoring flows of throughput in the affected pipeline system or systems , assessing regional , national , and global impacts of an incident on energy infrastructure throughout all three phases . ( 3 ) to what extent has federal incident response processes and procedures for pipeline security breaches been communicated to stakeholders ? to identify the extent to which the 2006 annex to the mou between dhs and dot delineates tsa and phmsa responsibilities for pipeline security , we reviewed relevant tsa and phmsa documents including the 2006 mou annex , action plans for implementing provisions of the mou annex , and documents related to the agencies' process for revising the annex . ( 2 ) how do tsa and phmsa communicate their roles and responsibilities related to pipeline safety and security and what are industry stakeholder views on the clarity of the communication ? we assessed tsa and phmsa efforts to revise the 2006 mou annex against relevant standards in the standards for internal controls in the federal government and project management guidance related to periodically reviewing policies and developing project timelines with milestone dates . we also reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and statements of executive branch policy , including presidential directives . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent does the 2006 annex to the mou between dhs and dot delineate tsa's and phmsa's responsibilities for pipeline security ? in addition , we conducted semi - structured interviews with tsa and phmsa officials to obtain their perspectives on respective pipeline security roles and responsibilities . we conducted interviews with tsa and phmsa officials to identify the types of activities they conduct to communicate and clarify their respective roles and responsibilities to stakeholders . to assess industry stakeholder views on the clarity of the communication , we interviewed representatives of the four of the five major associations with ties to the pipeline industry . to identify the extent to which federal incident response processes and procedures for pipeline security breaches have been communicated to stakeholders , we reviewed tsa's pipeline security and incident recovery protocol plan against criteria outlined in the standards for internal control in the federal government related to periodic review of policies , procedures , and related control activities . to determine the extent that the plan remains current and reflects relevant federal laws and policies , we reviewed federal laws related to critical infrastructure protection that had been enacted since tsa issued the plan in march 2010 , and federal incident management policies referenced by the plan including , the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) national response framework ( nrf ) and national incident management system ( nims ) .