pub . 108-199 , div . g , tit . v , ยง 501 ( f ) ( 2 ) , 118 stat . 419 , 422 ( 2004 ) ( codified as amended at 7 u.s.c . last 6 to 12 months when performing inspections under the neutral scheme targeting module in fiscal year 2013 ; and ( 3 ) oeca audit specific categories of studies that opp officials considered critical to their pesticide approval decisions . an oeca official told us that as of march 2014 , oeca inspectors had completed all of the eight opp - requested inspections . an opp official told us that opp would like to continue to provide input to oeca prior to the beginning of each fiscal year to increase the opportunity for opp to react to findings before a product is registered . the two offices appear to be communicating and prioritizing laboratories for glp inspections informally , but according to an epa official , there are no documented procedures that define the responsibilities of each office in coordinating and prioritizing glp inspections . epa has stated that formal procedures are not needed and that the current method of communication and coordination is satisfactory . however , by relying on informal coordination mechanisms , oeca and opp are depending on relationships with individual officials to ensure effective coordination , and these informal relationships could end once personnel turnover occurs . without documented procedures for effective coordination between the two offices , there is no assurance that the two offices will consistently coordinate on glp inspections in the future . under federal standards for internal control , agencies are to clearly document internal controls , and the documentation is to appear in management directives , administrative policies , or operating manuals . when oeca's glp inspectors find deficiencies at a laboratory , they share the inspection reports with major or significant violations with opp . according to opp officials , once opp receives the oeca inspection report , it sends it to the opp registration division responsible for the registration ( or pending registration ) of products being supported by the studies audited . the opp registration division then reviews the report and conducts a scientific reexamination of the studies that the laboratory in question conducted and that were submitted in support of the pesticide registration . once opp finishes its reexamination , if it finds that deficiencies affect a study's findings , opp is to reject the study and may request that the registrant repeat the study , submit other materials that support that aspect of the registration , or perform other corrective action deemed satisfactory to opp . after the reexamination is complete , opp informs both oeca's glp compliance monitoring program and the registrant of the outcome . we found that , from fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2012 , oeca glp inspectors referred for reexamination the inspection results from 26 laboratories and 73 studies to opp . table 2 lists the action taken by opp as a result of its reexamination of studies , as of march 2014 .