limited oversight of duplicate discounts . we found that hrsa audits do not fully assess compliance with the 340b program prohibition on duplicate discounts for drugs prescribed to medicaid beneficiaries . specifically , covered entities are prohibited from subjecting manufacturers to “duplicate discounts” in which drugs prescribed to medicaid beneficiaries are subject to both the 340b price and a rebate through the medicaid drug rebate program . however , hrsa only assesses the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid fee - for - service and not medicaid managed care , despite the fact that the majority of medicaid enrollees , prescriptions and spending for drugs were in managed care . hrsa officials told us that they do not assess the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care as part of their audits because they have yet to issue guidance as to how covered entities should prevent these duplicate discounts . we concluded that until hrsa develops guidance and includes an assessment of the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care as part of its audits , the agency does not have assurance that covered entities' efforts are effectively preventing noncompliance , and manufacturers are at risk of being required to erroneously provide duplicate discounts for medicaid prescriptions . lack of information on full scope of noncompliance . we found that hrsa requires covered entities for which it identifies issues of noncompliance during audits to assess the full extent of the noncompliance , but it does not provide guidance as to how entities should make these assessments . specifically , hrsa does not specify the time period covered entities must review to see if any related noncompliance occurred and instead , relies on each entity to make this determination . for example , 66 percent of the 380 diversion findings in hrsa audits since 2012 involved drugs distributed at contract pharmacies , and 33 of the 813 audits for which results were available had findings for lack of contract pharmacy oversight . we concluded that as a result of the lack of specific guidance and the numerous hrsa audit findings of noncompliance occurring at contract pharmacies , hrsa does not have assurance that covered entities' contract pharmacy oversight practices are sufficiently identifying 340b noncompliance . specifically: incomplete data . we found that hrsa does not have complete data on all contract pharmacy arrangements in the 340b program to inform its oversight efforts , including its audits of covered entities — the agency's primary method for assessing entity compliance with program requirements . although hrsa requires covered entities to register their contract pharmacies with the agency , it does not require covered entities to separately register contract pharmacies to each site of the covered entity with which a contractual relationship exists . hrsa officials told us that the number of registered contract pharmacy arrangements increases a covered entity's chance of being randomly selected for a risk - based audit . our analysis of hrsa data showed that the registration of contract pharmacies for 57 percent of covered entities with multiple sites only specified relationships between contract pharmacies and each entity's main site , as opposed to all sites contracted to distribute drugs on that entity's behalf .