for sharing information ? how do agencies balance the need to keep information secure and the need to share information to maximize interagency efforts ? how can agencies encourage effective information sharing ? what are ways in which the security clearance process can be streamlined and security clearance reciprocity among agencies can be ensured ? in addition , the following staff contributed to the report: john h. pendleton , director ; marie mak , assistant director ; hilary benedict ; cathleen berrick ; renee brown ; leigh caraher ; grace cho ; joe christoff ; elizabeth curda ; judy mccloskey ; lorelei st. james ; and bernice steinhardt . military training: dod needs a strategic plan and better inventory and requirements data to guide development of language skills and regional proficiency . gao - 09-568 . washington , d.c.: june 19 , 2009 . influenza pandemic: continued focus on the nation's planning and preparedness efforts remains essential . gao - 09-760t . washington , d.c.: june 3 , 2009 . u.s. public diplomacy: key issues for congressional oversight . gao - 09-679sp . washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2009 . military operations: actions needed to improve oversight and interagency coordination for the commander's emergency response program in afghanistan . gao - 09-61 . washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2009 . foreign aid reform: comprehensive strategy , interagency coordination , and operational improvements would bolster current efforts . gao - 09-192 . washington , d.c.: april 17 , 2009 . iraq and afghanistan: security , economic , and governance challenges to rebuilding efforts should be addressed in u.s. strategies . who should be responsible for developing the shared outcomes ? how will agencies ensure effective implementation of overarching strategies ? to what extent do strategies developed by federal agencies clearly identify priorities , milestones , and performance measures to gauge results ? what steps are federal agencies taking to ensure coordination of planning and implementation of strategies with state and local governments when appropriate ? u.s. government agencies , such as the department of state , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the department of defense ( dod ) , among others , spend billions of dollars annually on various diplomatic , development , and defense missions in support of national security . at a time when our nation faces increased fiscal constraints , it is increasingly important that agencies use their resources efficiently and effectively . achieving meaningful results in many national security – related interagency efforts requires coordinated efforts among various actors across federal agencies ; foreign , state , and local governments ; nongovernment organizations ; and the private sector . given the number of agencies involved in u.s. government national security efforts , it is particularly important that there be mechanisms to coordinate across agencies . however , differences in agencies' structures , processes , and resources can hinder successful collaboration in national security , and adequate coordination mechanisms to facilitate collaboration during national security planning and execution are not always in place . congress and the administration will need to consider the extent to which agencies' existing structures , processes , and funding sources facilitate interagency collaboration and whether changes could enhance collaboration .