( app . i lists states that are subject to safeguards , as of august 2006. ) india , israel , and pakistan are not parties to the npt or other regional nonproliferation treaties . india and pakistan are known to have nuclear weapons programs and to have detonated several nuclear devices during may 1998 . israel is also believed to have produced nuclear weapons . additionally , north korea joined the npt in 1985 and briefly accepted safeguards in 1992 and 1993 , but expelled inspectors and threatened to withdraw from the npt when iaea inspections uncovered evidence of undeclared plutonium production . north korea announced its withdrawal from the npt in early 2003 , which under the terms of the treaty , terminated its comprehensive safeguards agreement . iaea's safeguards objectives , as traditionally applied under comprehensive safeguards agreements , are to account for the amount of a specific type of material necessary to produce a nuclear weapon , and the time it would take a state to divert this material from peaceful use and produce a nuclear weapon . iaea attempts to meet these objectives by using a set of activities by which it seeks to verify that nuclear material subject to safeguards is not diverted to nuclear weapons or other proscribed purposes . for example , iaea inspectors visit a facility at certain intervals to ensure that any diversion of nuclear material is detected before a state has had time to produce a nuclear weapon . iaea also uses material - accounting measures to verify quantities of nuclear material declared to the agency and any changes in the quantities over time . additionally , containment measures are used to control access to and the movement of nuclear material . finally , iaea deploys surveillance devices , such as video cameras , to detect the movements of nuclear material and discourage tampering with iaea's containment measures . the nuclear suppliers group was established in 1975 after india tested a nuclear explosive device . in 1978 , the suppliers group published its first set of guidelines governing the exports of nuclear materials and equipment . these guidelines established several requirements for suppliers group members , including the acceptance of iaea safeguards at facilities using controlled nuclear - related items . in 1992 , the suppliers group broadened its guidelines by requiring countries receiving nuclear exports to agree to iaea's safeguards as a condition of supply . as of august 2006 , the nuclear suppliers group had 45 members , including the united states . ( see app . ii for a list of signatory countries. ) iaea has taken steps to strengthen safeguards by more aggressively seeking assurances that a country is not pursuing a clandestine nuclear program . in a radical departure from past practices of only verifying the peaceful use of a country's declared nuclear material at declared facilities , iaea has begun to develop the capability to independently evaluate all aspects of a country's nuclear activities . the first strengthened safeguards steps , which began in the early 1990s , increased the agency's ability to monitor declared and undeclared activities at nuclear facilities .