controlled . the project office has not implemented a change - control process that preserves a baseline of the schedule so that progress can be meaningfully measured . project officials said that the ioc project schedule has not been baselined . nonetheless , they stated that they follow the configuration - management process as documented in the february 2010 ioc configuration management plan when there are significant delays or when additional work activities are added to the schedule . these officials also stated that the configuration control board is notified of smaller date changes or delays , and noted that the ioc project manager chairs the control board . to what extent has the coast guard adhered to established guidance in defining watchkeeper requirements and its associated cost and schedule ? to address the first objective , we analyzed pertinent provisions of the safe port act , as amended . we analyzed status reports provided by each of the 35 coast guard sectors and compared the coast guard's analysis of those status reports with the ioc requirements as defined in an internal coast guard message from the assistant commandant for capability , and a draft annex to the u.s. coast guard sector on the basis of our review of the sectors' status organization manual.reports and interviews with the coast guard official who developed the criteria for the ioc requirements and analyzed the status reports , we determined the coast guard's analysis was reasonable to use for the purposes of our review . we interviewed coast guard officials in the office of shore forces responsible for ioc requirements , as well as coast guard officials responsible for ioc implementation at their respective sector locations . we also conducted site visits to the five sectors where watchkeeper was first implemented — charleston , south carolina ; hampton roads , virginia ; jacksonville , florida ; detroit , michigan ; and san diego , california . while the results of our site visits to these sectors cannot be generalized across all 35 coast guard sectors , we chose these locations to allow us to observe firsthand the status of ioc implementation efforts . to evaluate the support dhs has provided to the coast guard for ioc implementation , we interviewed the coast guard's chief of ioc implementation and the coast guard's information sharing executive agent . we also interviewed officials from dhs's information sharing & safeguarding governance board , the board providing support for ioc implementation . further , we assessed dhs's involvement against criteria in the department of homeland security information sharing strategy , which states that dhs should promote information sharing with federal partners . to address the second objective , we used the coast guard's monthly log - on data to determine the number of port partners to whom the sectors provided watchkeeper access and the extent to which these port partners accessed watchkeeper .