we disagree . as discussed above , in the slides we pointed out that a single , common project or system is not necessarily the best solution , and we do not advocate such a system as the best solution . we concluded that successful collaboration on a joint solution — whether that solution is iwn or an alternative approach — is necessary to promote efficient use of resources , reduce duplicative efforts , and encourage interoperability . although a joint solution could be based on a single , nationwide network , such as an extension of the original iwn design , it could also be , for example , a mutually agreed - upon strategy for developing separate but interoperable networks and systems . regarding the breakdown of the original collaborative structure for the iwn program , dhs commented that dhs and doj are employing different radio designs funded by congress that are commensurate with spectrum needs in their environments and that the two departments have different regional priorities , such that a common system will not work on a national level . in the briefing , we recognized that the two departments had different priorities and that those differences led to an inability to resolve conflicts on the original iwn program . however , as discussed above , in effectively abandoning collaboration on a joint solution , the departments risk duplication of effort and inefficient use of resources as they continue to invest significant resources in independent solutions . given their differences , adoption of key collaboration practices will be critical to ensuring that separate projects in the two departments are successfully coordinated in the future so that radio communications are improved among federal agencies , costs reduced , and duplication eliminated wherever possible . dhs also commented that we had not discussed the departments' concerns about the projected expense of expanding the seattle / blaine pilot project to a national level . while we did not discuss specific cost projections for this option , which is no longer being considered , we recognize that any investment in coordinated future communications between the departments will be substantial . accordingly , it will be critical to ensure a properly coordinated approach so that duplication and overlap is avoided . regarding current collaboration with doj and treasury , dhs noted that a memorandum of understanding had been signed in january 2008 and described how decisions are to be made under this agreement . dhs went on to describe internal priorities , such as the need for radio system upgrades in customs and border protection , and stated that any cross - departmental efforts should not result in delays to these priorities . we do not dispute the urgency for upgrading radio systems that dhs cites . however , given that all three departments have differing priorities , as discussed in the slides , it remains critical that key collaboration practices are adopted to ensure successful coordination across departments . finally , dhs briefly outlined its vision for a “tiered” strategy for achieving effective radio communications in a timely and cost - effective manner . dhs stated that the first goal of the partnership will be to define an outcome and an associated joint strategy .