we are not making recommendations in this report . we did not assess the quality of assessment narratives in this review . to increase management oversight of contractor performance assessments , the cpars program office in 2010 , in conjunction with ofpp , developed system tools and metrics within ppirs to track compliance with the reporting requirements . this allows managers to track compliance at the department , component , or contracting office level . for example , contracting managers can identify overall compliance for their office and identify specific non - compliant contracts with this new tracking tool . officials at dod components told us that having the ability to track completion of required assessments through ppirs has greatly improved the ability to effectively oversee and manage compliance , and has also improved accountability for completing assessments . in an effort to increase accountability , the director of defense procurement and acquisition policy issues quarterly compliance reports to senior procurement executives . senior procurement executives at dod components have required reporting of actions taken by individual contracting activities , set goals for compliance , and encouraged or required training . in addition , dod officials told us contractor past performance is now discussed at senior level acquisition quarterly and monthly meetings . dod plans to continue implementing existing policies contained in the cpars guide , which addresses most of the required elements specified in section 806 . specifically , the cpars guide aligns with section 806 through the following: contractor performance assessment must be finalized within 120 days after the end of the evaluation period . for contracts and orders with performance exceeding one year , annual interim assessments are required and a final assessments is required when the work is completed . roles and responsibilities for documenting contractor performance: the assessing official , usually the contracting officer , is responsible for preparing and finalizing the assessment . the reviewing official reconciles any disagreements between the assessing official and the contractor . the cpars focal point provides overall support for the cpars process for a particular organization and assigns key roles for each contract requiring an assessment based on information from the contracting officer , program , or project manager . although compliance with the reporting requirements for performance assessments has increased , dod still faces challenges with completing assessments on time . as shown in figure 2 , the total number of assessments completed more than doubled from 2010 to 2012 . we conducted this performance audit from february 2013 to june 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . when selecting contractors , the far requires agencies to consider past performance as one evaluation factor in most competitive procurements .