performance management . the performance management capabilities are intended to move dhs's existing primarily paper - based performance management processes into an electronic environment and capture performance - related information throughout the performance cycle ( eg , recording performance expectations discussed at the beginning of the rating period and performance ratings at the end of it ) . each component is responsible for its own palms implementation project , and is expected to issue a task order using a blanket purchase agreement that was established in may 2013 with an estimated value of $95 million . the headquarters palms program management office is responsible for overseeing the implementation projects across the department . additionally , the office of the chief information officer is the component acquisition executive responsible for overseeing palms . in addition , according to dhs officials , as of september 2014 , palms was expected to address part of our high risk series on strengthening dhs's management functions . specifically , palms is intended to address challenges in integrating employee training management across all the components , including centralizing training and consolidating training data into one system . dhs has made very limited progress in addressing the 15 strategic improvement opportunities and the 77 associated projects included in hrit . according to the human capital segment architecture blueprint , dhs planned to implement 14 of the 15 strategic improvement opportunities and 68 of the 77 associated projects by june 2015 ; and the remaining improvement opportunity and 9 associated projects by december 2016 . however , as of november 2015 , dhs had fully implemented only 1 of the strategic improvement opportunities , which included 2 associated projects . table 1 summarizes the implementation status and planned completion dates of the strategic improvement opportunities — listed in the order of dhs's assigned priority — as of november 2015 . dhs has partially implemented five of the other strategic improvement opportunities , but it is unknown when they will be fully addressed . further , hrit officials stated that dhs has not yet started to work on the remaining nine improvement opportunities , and the officials did not know when they would be addressed . additionally , dhs developed an hrit strategic plan for fiscal years 2012 through 2016 that outlined the investment's key goals and objectives , including reducing duplication and improving efficiencies in the department's human resources processes and systems . the strategic plan identified , among other things , two performance metrics that were focused on reductions in the number of component - specific human resources it services provided and increases in the number of department - wide hrit services provided by the end of fiscal year 2016 . however , dhs has also made limited progress in achieving these two performance targets . figure 1 provides a summary of hrit's progress towards achieving its service delivery performance targets . more recently , the hrit executive steering committee met in june and october 2015 , and officials from the offices of the chief human capital officer and chief information officer stated that the committee planned to meet quarterly going forward .