accurate . none of the four cost estimates met or substantially met the characteristic of being accurate . the estimates generally adjusted costs for inflation and contained few computation or mathematical mistakes , but they were not regularly updated to reflect schedule and requirement changes , did not provide evidence of documenting or reviewing differences between planned and actual costs , and were not based on historical cost data from comparable programs . for example , the ads - b , catmt , and swim cost estimates provided no evidence that they were updated to reflect program changes , such as schedule slippages or varying assumptions , and did not include the current actual costs of the program . although the waas estimate included evidence that it was updated to reflect major changes in technical and program requirements , such as the four rebaselinings the program has undergone since its 1998 inception , it did not include evidence that estimated costs were replaced with actual costs as the program advanced . cost estimates that are not regularly updated with current information cannot provide decision makers with accurate information that is necessary , for example , when new system requirements are called for under tight budget conditions . in addition , comparing planned and actual costs enables cost estimators to measure the accuracy of their estimates and refine their processes . in addition , none of the four programs more than minimally used historical data to develop their cost estimates . had historical data been used , the estimators would have had additional insight into actual costs on programs that used similar technologies , which could be used , for example , to challenge overly optimistic assumptions and bring more realism to the cost estimate . credible . none of the four cost estimates met or substantially met the characteristic of being credible , which includes obtaining an independent cost estimate from a group outside the acquiring organization , and cross - checking the major cost elements in that estimate against cost drivers identified through sensitivity and risk analyses . the ads - b , catmt , swim , and waas estimates lacked credibility largely because faa did not obtain an independent cost estimate for any of the programs . in addition the catmt , swim , and waas estimates provided little evidence that it conducted sensitivity or risk analyses . instead , each program received independent cost reviews as part of the investment decision process — even though such reviews are not required by faa policy . faa stated that the investment , planning and analysis ( ip&a ) office in the faa finance organization does not prepare independent estimates , but it is organizationally independent of the acquisition programs and conducts independent reviews of all cost estimates . however , an independent cost review is less rigorous than an independent cost estimate . according to our cost guide , an independent cost estimate is often more accurate because the estimating team is further removed from the program office and less prone to accept overly optimistic assumptions or be burdened by organizational bias . other federal agencies , including the department of defense , require independent cost estimates .