ii ) . the inappropriate use of antibiotics , or the additional use of antibiotics that could have been avoided , can occur when healthcare providers prescribe antibiotics when they are not beneficial , such as to treat a viral infection , or when antibiotic treatments are not targeted to the specific bacteria causing the infection . inappropriate antibiotic use also occurs when healthcare providers do not prescribe the correct antibiotic dose and duration of treatment . further , inappropriate use includes when patients do not complete a full course of prescribed antibiotics . individual consumers , health care facilities , pharmacies , and pharmaceutical manufacturers dispose of unused antibiotics using various methods . for the purposes of this report , the disposal of antibiotics refers to the discard of unused antibiotics by consumers , companies , and others . common disposal methods for individual consumers include throwing unused antibiotics in the trash , flushing them down the toilet , and pouring them down the drain . according to epa officials , healthcare facilities and pharmacies often return unused or expired drugs to contracted companies , known as reverse distributors , for manufacturer credit . antibiotics are drugs that are used to treat bacterial infections . antibiotics work by killing or slowing the growth of bacteria and they are not effective against nonbacterial infections , such as those caused by viruses . antibiotic resistance is the result of bacteria changing in ways that reduce or eliminate the effectiveness of antibiotics to cure infection . we converted the total volume from kilograms to pounds . to further describe the antibiotics that were sold in 2009 , we classified the total volume of antibiotics by antibiotic class , the route of administration ( eg , oral ) , and the types of pharmacies that purchased antibiotics ( eg , chain store pharmacy ) . to assess the reliability of ims health data , we reviewed existing information about the data and interviewed officials knowledgeable about the data to assess their completeness . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for their use in this report . to describe hhs efforts to monitor the use of antibiotics in humans , we reviewed hhs documents and interviewed hhs officials . we reviewed hhs documents describing the various surveys that hhs uses to routinely collect data about antibiotic use , including information about the survey samples , the types of data that are gathered , and how antibiotic use is measured . we also reviewed agency documents that summarize trends in antibiotic use , based on the surveys . we interviewed hhs officials with responsibility for the surveys about the strengths and limitations of each survey and how the agency uses the collected data to monitor antibiotic use . to evaluate hhs's efforts to monitor antibiotic use , we compared hhs's data collection and monitoring activities with broad guidelines for monitoring antibiotic use , which we identified by reviewing relevant hhs documents and expert organization ( eg , world health organization ) guidelines . to describe hhs efforts to promote the appropriate use of antibiotics , we reviewed documents from hhs about programs and activities focused specifically on decreasing inappropriate antibiotic use .