training . daejeon provides a variety of training services for companies , both for new employees and continuing education on cutting - edge technology . daedeok also provides training for start - up smes . in addition to these services , daedeok assists smes through grants and one - on - one consulting services , such as matching technology suppliers and customers , providing design services , and evaluating new technologies . daedeok's r&d expenditures comprise 15 percent of the country's total r&d expenditures , according to officials . what key distinctions exist between policy approaches to support manufacturing in other advanced economies and those in the united states ? to identify foreign countries and innovative manufacturing programs that may help inform u.s. manufacturing policy , we interviewed a range of manufacturing experts about key manufacturing issues and obtained their views about which foreign countries had innovative manufacturing programs . we selected four comparison countries to study — canada , germany , japan , and south korea — based on recommendations from experts , including u.s. officials from the departments of commerce ( commerce ) and labor ( labor ) , consideration of the countries' economic and political similarities to the united states , and information from our own research of foreign programs that support manufacturing . we then worked with officials from the u.s. department of state ( state ) stationed in the selected four countries and foreign embassy officials to select specific programs for our review . we did not attempt to perform a comprehensive review of manufacturing programs in the four selected foreign countries , nor did we seek information in all countries about programs in each of our three key policy categories — innovation , trade , and training . to learn about our selected foreign programs , we met with foreign officials administering these programs and reviewed documents they provided . to identify key distinctions between foreign and u.s. approaches to manufacturing , we researched comparable programs in the united states , selected in part based on suggestions from commerce and labor , and interviewed staff administering those programs . we did not attempt to do a comprehensive review of u.s. manufacturing programs , nor attempt to assess the effectiveness of any country's programs . this report uses data obtained from large u.s. and international agencies and from foreign manufacturing agencies . we assessed the reliability of data from the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , the bureau of economic analysis , the world bank , and the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) by reviewing literature provided by the organizations regarding their methodology for compiling data , including measures to ensure data quality and comparability across countries . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we did not independently attempt to confirm the reliability of data provided by foreign manufacturing agencies except where documentary evidence provided by those agencies allowed us to ; we did confirm the accuracy of the figures and our use of them by having foreign officials review relevant excerpts of the report . we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes .