this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this testimony , please contact david powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include barbara collier , john dale , ramnik dhaliwal , colleen phillips , and cynthia scott . our objectives were to provide an overview of our nation's current polar - orbiting weather satellite program and the planned national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system ( npoess ) program and to identify key risks to the successful and timely deployment of npoess . to provide an overview of the nation's current and future polar - orbiting weather satellite system programs , we relied on prior gao reviews of the satellite programs of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and the department of defense ( dod ) . we reviewed documents from noaa , dod , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) that describe the purpose and origin of the polar satellite program and the status of the npoess program . we also interviewed integrated program office and nasa officials to determine the program's background , status , and plans . to identify key risks to the successful and timely deployment of npoess , we assessed the npoess acquisition status and program risk reduction efforts to understand how the program office plans to manage the acquisition and mitigate the risks to successful npoess implementation . we reviewed descriptions of the npoess sensors and interviewed officials at the integrated program office , nasa , and dod to determine the status of key sensors , program segments , and risk reduction activities . we also reviewed documents and interviewed program office officials on plans to address npoess challenges . noaa , dod , and nasa officials generally agreed with the facts as presented in this statement and provided some technical corrections , which we have incorporated . we performed our work at the npoess integrated program office , nasa headquarters , and dod offices , all located in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area . our work was performed between april and july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . figure 12 depicts the schedule delay . we have reported on concerns about gaps in satellite coverage in the past . these contractors competed for the development and production contract . at the sensor level , the program office awarded contracts to develop five sensors . this phase ended when the development and production contract was awarded . at that point , the winning contractor was expected to assume overall responsibility for managing continued sensor development .