( see fig . twelve major tributaries , the longest of which is the snake river , feed the columbia river . the basin contains over 250 reservoirs and about 150 hydroelectric projects , including 18 dams on the columbia and snake rivers . the basin is home to many species of fish and wildlife , some of which are listed under the endangered species act ( esa ) as threatened or endangered , in part as a result of the extensive hydropower development of the basin rivers . endangered fish in the basin include certain species of salmon , steelhead , and white sturgeon ; bull trout are listed as threatened . threatened and endangered wildlife in the basin include birds such as the marbled murrelet and northern spotted owl , and other animals such as certain species of caribou , deer , lynx , and rabbit . the basin is also home to 13 indian tribes , which by treaty , executive order , or other authority , reside on reservation lands within the basin . as shown in table 1 , nearly 45,000 members are enrolled in the tribes with reservation lands in the basin . fish and wildlife are of critical importance to these tribes , as the tribes rely on them for sustenance as well as preservation of their cultural traditions . for example , salmon are part of the spiritual and cultural identity of most of the basin's tribes , and are frequently used in tribal religious services . numerous federal agencies , including the following , conduct activities within the basin that affect fish and wildlife , as well as the columbia river basin indian tribes . many of these agencies are responsible for managing water resources , the power generated by hydroelectric projects , or land resources , such as forests , grazing lands , and wildlife refuges . bonneville power administration ( bonneville ) provides power transmission services and markets the electricity generated by the 31 corps and reclamation dams comprising the federal columbia river power system ( fcrps ) . in doing so , it must provide treatment to fish and wildlife equitable to the other purposes for which the fcrps is operated . u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) designs , builds , and operates civil works projects to provide electric power , navigation , flood control , and environmental protection . bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) designs , constructs , and operates water projects for multiple purposes , including irrigation , hydropower production , municipal and industrial water supply , flood control , recreation , and fish and wildlife . u.s. forest service ( forest service ) manages national forests and grasslands under the principles of multiple use and sustained yield , and ensures that lands will be available for future generations . bureau of land management ( blm ) administers public lands and subsurface mineral resources , and sustains the health , diversity , and productivity of public lands for the use and enjoyment of future generations .