doj agreed with these recommendations . doj has taken steps to implement program improvements . by 2014 , we observed that the bureau of justice assistance had posted two psob performance measures and related data on its public website in consultation with public safety stakeholder groups: average time for the psob program to receive basic required documents , and average time for the psob program to determine a claim . the bureau subsequently posted additional performance measures on its public website , including average number of days to assign a psob outreach specialist and percentage of claims determined within 1 year . while posting data on these performance measures represents an improvement , as of april 2016 , the bureau of justice assistance has not taken the additional step of publishing performance goals — which specify the desired level of performance — for the psob program . we continue to believe that the bureau of justice assistance should publish performance goals to help the public gauge how well the program is working and enhance stakeholder awareness of the program . in addition , in its july 2015 report , doj's oig raised questions about claims processing times and performance measurement . specifically , the report identified three primary factors that contributed to significant delays in processing death and disability claims: ( 1 ) claimants filing incomplete claims applications due , in part , to inadequate program guidance , ( 2 ) claimants and agencies being unresponsive to the psob office's request for additional information , and ( 3 ) the psob office not adequately documenting the basis for its initial determination , which caused delays during the legal review phase . the oig also determined that the psob office had not reported annual and appropriate data on its performance measures and noted issues with the data's reliability . for example , the oig found the psob office's database was inconsistent and did not include data fields for important claims processing milestones , such as the date claimants submit applications and the psob submits claims for legal review . the lack of awareness also had an adverse effect on some claimants . for example , an official representing a local police officers' union mentioned that a local police department unfamiliar with the disability benefits did not seek benefits on behalf of a severely and permanently disabled officer until the officer happened to seek educational assistance for his child . officials from some public safety officer unions and the psob program said that they were more focused on promoting awareness of death benefits . officials from the five selected states we reviewed in 2009 also told us that submitting all the necessary paperwork to prove eligibility was difficult and could be time - consuming . for example , according to local officials we interviewed , the application process could be delayed by long wait periods to obtain accident reports , medical records , and birth records . in one case , an official from a firefighters' employee association in new york stated that an officer's family had to wait 6 months before they could submit a death claim . outdated beneficiary forms could have also delayed claims processing , and office of justice programs officials acknowledged that sometimes the psob office lost claim files .