planning . the first review is the planning review generally in the first quarter after the grant is awarded . the state must demonstrate preliminary progress towards establishing an exchange , and receives feedback . the review results in a list of tasks for the state to complete before the design review . design . the second review is the design review , which occurs after states have selected their key contractors for exchange establishment , typically about 6 to 9 months after the planning review . states are expected to have established business requirements and developed detailed plans and procedures for key activities for their exchange . operational . the final operational review occurs after exchange development and implementation is complete , to test the exchange and demonstrate that it is ready to begin operation . after each of these reviews , cciio's procedures require project officers to prepare a postestablishment report describing deliverables by both cciio and the grantee . these reports are designed to provide a summary of the progress the state has made in meeting the necessary requirements related to establishing an exchange . the report also serves as a guide in identifying action items and next steps to ensure adherence to mandatory timelines . according to cciio officials , in calendar year 2012 they completed planning reviews for 24 grantees and design reviews for 28 grantees , covering 31 of the 38 states with level 1 exchange establishment grants . as of march 2013 , they had not completed any operational reviews , but planned to complete them between august and september 2013 . finally , all recipients of these grants are required to obtain an a - 133 audit . according to cciio guidance , cciio reviews the audit for each grantee . according to cciio officials , they plan to use the a - 133 audit results as part of their operational establishment reviews for exchange grants and as part of future annual reviews for rate review grants . the guidance also calls for grantees to address any significant findings from the audit and to develop plans for mitigating future problems . cciio officials indicated that if cciio's regular oversight process identifies instances when a grantee may not be complying with requirements of the grant , cciio uses a five - tier response to address them , in which cciio advances its response to the next tier if its earlier responses did not address the issue ( see fig . in the first tier , cciio officials indicated they discuss compliance issues with the exchange or rate review grantee and request a mitigation strategy , which cciio documents in the project records . the second tier calls for production of management assessment items by the state , such as a documented business plan to address the compliance issue in a specific time frame . in the third tier , cciio imposes conditions on the grant award , which identifies the reason for the condition and limits the grantee's access to funds , until the grantee provides requested documentation . in the fourth tier , cciio restricts the grantee's access to funds until it reviews and approves the grantee's corrective action . cciio's final action in the fifth tier is to terminate the grant .