we disagree . we found amounts that were clearly questionable . our report also clearly states that in some cases , due to the facts and circumstances involved , we were unable to determine whether or to what extent the costs we questioned were allowable , reasonable , and allocable . as a result , some portion of the total amount of questionable payments we identified ultimately may be determined by cms to be allowable . however , we also state that given cms's poor control environment and the fact that our work was not designed to identify all questionable payments made by cms or to estimate their extent , other questionable payments may have been made . further , cms did not always ensure that contractors provided adequate detail supporting the invoices to allow responsible cms personnel to sufficiently review and approve invoices . regarding contract audits , cms had not demonstrated a willingness to allocate the necessary funding ; thus audits have not taken place in a timely manner . in addition , while we agree that an audit of contract costs can provide a detective control to help determine whether contractor costs were proper , cms's reliance on an after - the - fact audit is not an acceptable substitute for the real - time monitoring and oversight of contractor costs — preventative controls — that we recommend in this report . effective internal control calls for a sound , ongoing invoice review process as the first line of defense in preventing unallowable costs and improper payments . finally , many of the questionable payments we identified were based on our review of invoices and documentation received by cms at the time of payment and did not require additional detail from the contractors' books and records . for example , our findings regarding indirect costs , labor categories , and unallowable travel costs could have been identified by cms with an adequate review of the invoices and information they received from the contractors . in response to our recommendations to improve controls over its contracting process and related payments , cms stated in its comments that it has taken or will take the following actions: continue to evaluate and update its policies and procedures to make review its policies and criteria for the use of cost reimbursement contracts and the need for approved accounting systems , review and update policies and procedures as appropriate and provide training regarding subcontracting , develop appropriate procedures to support hhs in its cognizant federal update its invoice review and payment policies and procedures as develop comprehensive training on the invoice review and approval require the use of a governmentwide system to track the training taken by personnel assigned to contract oversight , continue to reduce its backlog of contracts awaiting closeout , and obtain contract audits related to our identified questionable payments and seek reimbursement for any costs found to be unallowable . in addition , our responses to a number of specific cms comments are annotated and included at the end of appendix iii . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date .