this increases the work intensity for individual nurses . according to one survey , of those rns responding who had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement , 56 percent indicated that they wanted a less stressful and physically demanding job and 22 percent said they were concerned about schedules and hours . the same survey found that 55 percent of current rns were either just somewhat or not satisfied by their facility's staffing levels , while 43 percent of current rns surveyed indicated that increased staffing would do the most to improve their job . another survey found that 36 percent of rns in their current job more than one year were very or somewhat dissatisfied with the intensity of their work . officials of unions representing nurses told us the issues of staffing and overtime have been important for their nursing members during recent negotiations . state legislators have also indicated concern — in the first half of 2001 alone , legislation designed to limit mandatory overtime or protect nurses who refuse to work additional hours has been introduced in 10 states . job dissatisfaction is reported to be high among nurses . nurses report unhappiness with a variety of issues , including staffing , respect and recognition , and wages , and this dissatisfaction is affecting their decision to work in nursing . furthermore , the nurse workforce is aging and fewer new nurses are entering the profession to replace those who are retiring or leaving . job dissatisfaction may play a significant role in both current and future recruitment and retention problems . a recent federation of nurses and health professionals ( fnhp ) survey found that half of the currently employed rns who were surveyed had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement over the past 2 years . over one - fourth ( 28 percent ) of rns in a 1999 study by the nursing executive center described themselves as somewhat or very dissatisfied with their job , and about half ( 51 percent ) were much less satisfied with their job than they were 2 years ago . in that same survey , 32 percent of general medical / surgical rns , who constitute the bulk of hospital rns , indicated that they were dissatisfied with their current job . according to a survey conducted by the american nurses association ( ana ) , 54.8 percent of rns and lpns responding would not recommend the nursing profession as a career for their children or friends , while 23 percent would actively discourage someone close to them from entering the profession . almost half ( 49 percent ) of current rns surveyed in another study said that if they were younger and just starting out , they would pursue a different career , rather than becoming a registered nurse . inadequate staffing , heavy workloads , and the use of overtime to address staffing shortages are frequently cited as key areas of job dissatisfaction among nurses . seventy - nine percent of nurses responding to the fhnp survey said they had seen a rise in acuity of patients .