pharmacies . one peer - reviewed study reported that using medication synchronization is time - and labor - intensive for pharmacies . specifically , the study reported that almost 60 percent of pharmacists surveyed indicated that implementing medication synchronization involves a significant change in a pharmacy's workflow . seven of 12 stakeholders representing pharmacy organizations and selected pharmacies said this was because of several challenges . for example , it may be complicated to set up the initial synchronization , determine the best anchor medication and synchronization date , or adjust patients' medication synchronization because of changes in their medical needs or therapy . cms does not have a formal medication synchronization program or policy for medicare ; however , a cms regulation related to prescription drug benefits may support medication synchronization by reducing beneficiary cost sharing for certain amounts dispensed , according to officials . specifically , cms issued a regulation that , starting in 2014 , required medicare part d plans to establish a daily cost - sharing rate ( for example , a prorated copayment ) when a beneficiary receives less than a month's supply of a prescription medication — generally referred to as a short fill . increased revenue . three peer - reviewed studies and five of the 12 stakeholders representing pharmacy organizations and selected pharmacies reported that , to the extent that medication synchronization can improve patients' medication adherence , it can also lead to increased pharmacy revenues generally because of an increase in filled prescriptions . for example , one of the three peer - reviewed studies reported that medication synchronization resulted in an average increase in medication adherence of almost 5 percent over the first 6 months of its use . similarly , an industry study found that medication synchronization leads to an additional 20 fills per patient per year , and may lead to an average of $1,120 of additional revenue per enrolled patient annually . the three peer - reviewed studies and the industry study did not examine the causes of the increase in prescription fills , but their authors generally attributed the increase to the improved adherence of patients using medication synchronization . two of the three studies reported that medication synchronization can increase pharmacy revenues generally because of an increase in filled prescriptions . in addition , officials from four stakeholders representing pharmacy organizations and selected pharmacies told us that pharmacies that use medication synchronization can leverage these opportunities to speak with patients and offer additional services , such as immunizations ; these services can further help increase pharmacy revenue . regarding health plans , some studies and stakeholders identified the following potential benefits of medication synchronization . higher medicare quality performance scores . three peer - reviewed studies reported that medication synchronization can potentially improve health plans' medicare quality performance scores . cms assesses the quality performance of part d plans using information on various measures , such as adherence to medications for diabetes , high cholesterol , or hypertension . specifically , cms rates the plans' performance using a star rating system , which gives each plan a score of between one and five stars , with five stars being the highest rating . medication adherence measures are triple weighted in the calculation of a plan's overall rating .