( see fig . the midwest census region had the most muas that lacked a health center site ( 62 percent ) , while the west census region had the fewest muas that lacked a health center site ( 32 percent ) . more than three - quarters of the muas in 4 states — nebraska ( 91 percent ) , iowa ( 82 percent ) , minnesota ( 77 percent ) , and montana ( 77 percent ) — lacked a health center site . ( see app . i for more detail on the percentage of muas in each state and the u.s. territories that lacked a health center site in 2006. ) in 2006 , among all muas , 32 percent contained more than one health center site ; among muas with at least one health center site , 60 percent contained multiple health center sites , with about half of those containing two or three sites . almost half of all muas in the west census region contained more than one health center site , while less than one - quarter of muas in the midwest contained more than one site . the states with three - quarters or more of their muas containing more than one health center site were alaska , connecticut , the district of columbia , hawaii , new hampshire , and rhode island . in contrast , nebraska , iowa , and north dakota were the states where less than 10 percent of muas contained more than one site . we could not determine the types of primary care services provided at individual health center sites because hrsa did not collect and maintain readily available data on the types of services provided at individual sites . while hrsa requests information from applicants in their grant applications on the services each site provides , in order for hrsa to access and analyze individual health center site information on the services provided , hrsa would have to retrieve this information from the grant applications manually . hrsa separately collects data through the uds from each grantee on the types of services it provides across all of its health center sites , but hrsa does not collect data on services provided at each site . although each grantee with community health center funding is required to provide the full range of comprehensive primary care services , hrsa does not require each grantee to provide all services at each health center site it operates . hrsa officials told us that some sites provide limited services — such as dental or mental health services . because hrsa lacks readily available data on the types of services provided at individual sites , it cannot determine the extent to which individuals residing in muas have access to the full range of comprehensive primary care services provided by health center grantees . this lack of basic information can limit hrsa's ability to assess the full range of primary care services available in needy areas when considering the placement of new access points and can also limit the agency's ability to evaluate service area overlap in muas .