( see app . i for a descriptive comparison of dod and military department policies. ) dod modeled its review process for acquiring services after the review process for acquiring major weapons systems ; the policy is intended to elevate high - dollar value services to the same level of importance and oversight . dod intends that the new program review structure provide oversight before it commits the government to a major acquisition to ensure that military departments and defense agencies' buying strategies are adequately planned , performance - based , and competed . the new policy similarly establishes a high - dollar threshold of $500 million or more for selecting which service acquisitions must move forward from lower - level field activities , commands , and program offices to the military department headquarters ( and possibly to dod ) for advance review and approval . we expect that this new policy will lead to very few service acquisition strategies and a small portion of overall service spending being subjected to central oversight at the military department headquarters level or at dod headquarters . dod officials acknowledge that most service acquisitions cost less than the $500 million threshold required for headquarters - level reviews , and the total value of the few contract actions likely to be forwarded under that threshold will amount to a small portion of dod's total spending on services , which is approaching $100 billion each year . dod's review criteria indicate that the central reviews that do take place will be focused on approving individual acquisitions rather than coordinating smaller , more fragmented requirements for service contracts to leverage buying power and assessing how spending could be more effective . our discussions with procurement policy officials in the various military departments confirmed that they expect no more than a few acquisitions to be reviewed at the dod or military department headquarters level each year . while the new process complies with the act's requirements to improve oversight of major service acquisitions , it has not led to centralized responsibility , visibility , or accountability over the majority of contracting for services . pursuing such a strategic approach clearly pays off . studies have reported some companies achieving savings of 10 to 20 percent of their total procurement costs , which include savings in the procurement of services . these leading companies reported achieving or expecting to achieve billions of dollars in savings as a result of taking a strategic approach to procurement . for example , table 1 summarizes the savings reported by the companies we studied most recently . the companies we studied did not follow exactly the same approach in the manner and degree to which they employed specific best practices , but the bottom line results were the same — substantial savings and , in many cases , service improvements . figure 2 elaborates on the four broad principles and practices of leading companies that are critical to successfully carrying out the strategic approach . these principles and practices largely reflect a common sense approach , yet they also represent significant changes in the management approach companies use to acquire services .