i for more information about these experts ) . finally , we obtained information from the 50 states and the district of columbia on their use of native language assessments using a short e - mail survey . we conducted our review between june 2005 and june 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . students with limited english proficiency are a diverse and complex group . they speak many languages and have a tremendous range of educational needs and include refugees with little formal schooling and students who are literate in their native languages . education has issued some general regulations regarding state - level adequate yearly progress . however , education has not yet collected any such state - level adequate yearly progress results and has not issued any guidance on how states should determine whether a student group has made adequate yearly progress . as a result , some states have not yet made adequate yearly progress determinations for student groups at the state level . in order for a student group , such as students with limited english proficiency , to make adequate yearly progress , it must make a number of different goals . specifically: at least 95 percent of students in the group must take the state's language arts and mathematics assessments , and the student group must meet the progress goals established by the state for both language arts and mathematics proficiency or the percentage of students who did not achieve proficient scores must have decreased by at least 10 percent from the previous year , and the student group must also meet the progress goals established by the state for its other academic indicator ( graduation rate for high schools and usually attendance rate for other schools ) . figure 7 illustrates the basic decision process for determining adequate yearly progress for a student group . because states have different assessment systems , they use different methods for determining adequate yearly progress . a state can have an assessment system that allows it to create the same progress goal for mathematics and language arts for all grades , despite using different tests in each grade . in this case , the state could review data for all students in a student group across the state to determine if the group met its annual progress goals . a state can also establish different progress goals for different grades or groups of grades , depending on the particular test being used . in this case , according to an education official , a state would have to meet all the proficiency and participation goals for all the different grades or groups of grades in order to make adequate yearly progress . we requested district - level achievement data from 20 states , and 18 states responded to our request . when districts reported proficiency data for different grades or groups of grades , we determined that the percentage of students with limited english proficiency met a state's mathematics progress goal if the student group met the goal for all grades reported . results from charter schools are included when a charter school is its own school district or part of a larger school district . hawaii only has one school district .