this concludes my testimony . i will be happy to respond to any questions that you may have . these agreements are typically between doe and states . the remaining agreements are based on either federal or state environmental laws and address a variety of purposes , such as cleaning up spills of hazardous waste or remediating groundwater contamination , and have a wide - ranging number of milestones . most of the milestones doe must meet are contained in the compliance agreements at its six largest sites — hanford , savannah river , idaho falls , rocky flats , oak ridge , and fernald . these six doe sites are important because they receive about two - thirds of doe's cleanup funding . in all , these sites account for 40 of the agreements and more than 4,200 milestones . doe reported completing about two - thirds of the 7,186 milestones contained in its compliance agreements as of december 2001 . of the 4,558 milestones completed , about 80 percent were finished by the original due date for the milestone . regulators have generally been flexible in agreeing with doe to change milestone dates when the original milestone could not be met . doe received approval to change milestone deadlines in over 93 percent of the 1,413 requests made to regulators . only 3 percent of doe's requests were denied . regulators at the four sites we visited told us they prefer to be flexible with doe on accomplishing an agreement's cleanup goals . for example , they generally expressed willingness to work with doe to extend milestone deadlines when a problem arises due to technology limitations or engineering problems . because regulators have been so willing to adjust milestones , doe officials reported missing a total of only 48 milestones , or about 1 percent of milestones that have been completed . even in those few instances where doe missed milestone deadlines and regulators were unwilling to negotiate revised dates , regulators have infrequently applied penalties available under the compliance agreements . doe reported that regulators have taken enforcement actions only 13 times since 1988 when doe failed to meet milestone deadlines . these enforcement actions resulted in doe paying about $1.8 million in monetary penalties , as shown in table 3 . in addition to or instead of regulators assessing monetary penalties , several doe sites agreed to other arrangements valued at about $4 million . for example , for missing a milestone to open a transuranic waste storage facility at the rocky flats site , the site agreed to provide a $40,000 grant to a local emergency planning committee to support a chemical - safety - in - schools program . at the oak ridge site , because of delays in operating a mixed waste incinerator , site officials agreed to move up the completion date for $1.4 million worth of cleanup work already scheduled . also , at three sites — paducah , kentucky ; lawrence livermore main site , california ; and nevada test site , nevada — the regulators either did not impose penalties for missed milestones or the issue was still under discussion with doe at the time of our review .