each year , the u.s . washington , d.c.: august 9 , 2011 . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , processes millions of applications and petitions for more than 50 types of immigrant and nonimmigrant - related benefits for persons seeking to study , work , visit , or live in the united states , and for persons seeking to become u.s. citizens . having a system that allows uscis to accurately grant immigration and citizenship benefits in a timely manner to eligible applicants and deny benefits to those who are ineligible , as well as one that can quickly and accurately identify fraudulent and criminal activity , is essential for ensuring the integrity of the immigration process . tpo is responsible for managing key acquisition functions associated with the transformation program ; thus , uscis is responsible for tracking and oversight of the oit and solutions architect's activities and associated schedules . appendix i includes a detailed discussion of our analysis . as shown above , the two transformation program schedules , for the most part , did not substantially or fully meet the nine best practices . for example , neither the oit nor the uscis - approved solutions architect schedule contained detailed information for release a activities beyond march 2011 . in addition , both schedules were missing a significant number of logic links between activities which indicate activities that must finish before others and which activities may not begin until others have been completed . while we cannot generalize these findings to all 18 schedules , our review raises questions about the reliability of the program's schedules . based on our discussions with the transformation program's lead program scheduler , this condition stems , in part , from the “aggressiveness of the transformation program to implement most of the capabilities within the first 3 years of the program,” and a lack of program management resources for developing knowledge to create and maintain schedules . moreover , and regardless of the aggressiveness of the solution , our best practices call for schedules to reflect all activities — government , contractors , and any other necessary external parties — essential for successful program completion . as such , neither of the transformation program schedules we reviewed substantially met this practice . furthermore , as demonstrated in the challenges uscis has encountered in carrying out the schedule as originally planned , not including all work for all deliverables , regardless of whether the deliverables are the responsibility of the government or contractor , may result in confusion among team members and lead to management difficulties because of an incomplete understanding of the plan and of the progress being made . collectively , and moving forward , not meeting the nine key practices increases the risk of schedule slippages and related cost overruns and makes meaningful measurement and oversight of program status and progress , as well as accountability for results , difficult to achieve . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in prior work , we have identified nine best practices associated with effective schedule estimating .