we also reviewed guidance related to those programs . we performed our work in boston , massachusetts ; chicago , illinois ; new york , new york ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and washington , d.c. we conducted our work between february 2004 and july 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . collectively , the 13 areas reviewed with the set of individual scorecards provides the basis for determining a mutual fund's overall risk rating , which ocie uses to determine how frequently the fund will be examined . while the risk scorecards currently cover 13 areas , sec officials stated that each scorecard serves , in concept , as a model for assessing controls in a particular area of a firm's activities . as such , sec staff could create additional scorecards to assist them in their review of areas not covered by existing scorecards or modify existing scorecards not suitable for reviewing the controls used by a firm in a critical area . ocie and field office officials told us that all applicable risk scorecards generally should be completed during routine examinations , but if there are time constraints due to extenuating factors , all scorecards may not be completed . even though risk scorecards are important work papers for documenting and assessing fund compliance controls , sec standards do not expressly require that they receive supervisory review . current ocie standards for preparing examination work papers , including scorecards , specify that they should be prepared in an organized manner facilitating supervisory review and examination reporting . the standards do not provide further supervisory review requirements such as who should do the review , how , or when . while the review of scorecards is not expressly required , ocie headquarters and sec field office officials stated that supervisors do review scorecards and other examination work papers but typically do not sign or initial them to document that they have been reviewed . in addition , we were told that lead examiners and branch chiefs review work papers throughout the examination process . these officials also review risk scorecards and other work papers when reviewing final examination reports , making sure that all findings are adequately supported and summaries of the scorecard findings included in the examination reports are accurate . after completing their review of examination reports , branch chiefs sign a form to document their review . in contrast to ocie , federal bank and other regulators have standards requiring supervisors to document that they have reviewed examination work papers . examples of the work paper standards include: federal reserve guidance requires examiners - in - charge or other experienced examiners to review all work papers as soon as practicable and to sign or initial the applicable documents to evidence their review . occ guidance requires examiners - in - charge or other experienced examiners to sign or initial work paper cover sheets to evidence their review . the guidance allows reviewers to tailor the thoroughness of their review based on the experience of the examiner preparing the work paper . according to nyse and nfa officials , the organizations require senior staff to review and sign work papers .