more specifically , they call for the following . because of the fbi's stated approach to building sentinel , it will be particularly important for the bureau to ensure that it follows the kind of acquisition management practices that our work has shown to be critical for commercial component - based systems to be successful . if it does not , the fbi increases the likelihood that sentinel will encounter the same cost , schedule , and performance shortfalls as its predecessor , the virtual case file . mr. chairman , this concludes our statement . we would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you should have any questions about this testimony , please contact randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . other major contributors to this testimony included gary mountjoy , assistant director ; justin booth ; barbara collier ; kush malhotra ; lori martinez ; teresa neven ; warren smith ; and teresa tucker . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . these it policies and procedures are in alignment with the key practices discussed above . ● top management stakeholders ( eg , the cio , the head of the office of strategic planning , and the head of administration ) and other stakeholders ( eg , section and unit chiefs ) are to be involved with the development , communication , and implementation of the policies and procedures . ● a detailed data bank is to be developed to store critical skills needed in the development and selection of personnel , including it staff . ● strategies are to be defined to address workforce gaps , including recruiting programs that provide for tuition assistance and cooperative education . we further reported that the development of an architecture was not being given the priority that it deserved . accordingly , we recommended that the director make it an institutional priority , and provided a series of recommendations for building an architecture management foundation , developing and completing the architecture , and using it to inform it investment decision making . in the last 12 months , the bureau has made important progress in developing its architecture . last week we issued a congressionally mandated report on the state of the fbi's enterprise architecture efforts . in summary , we found that the fbi is now managing its enterprise architecture program in accordance with many best practices , but it has yet to adopt others . examples of best practices that the bureau has implemented include the following: ● the bureau has established a program office that is responsible for the development of the architecture ; it has issued a written and approved policy governing architecture development ; and it has ongoing efforts to complete a target architecture . we ascribed this important progress , in part , to the demonstrated commitment of the fbi's top management to the enterprise architecture program . nonetheless , we recognized that much remains to be accomplished before the fbi's enterprise architecture program will be mature .