see appendix i for a standard letter . the “other factors” include: “comments of reviewers and government officials,” “staff evaluation and input,” “geographic distribution,” and “audit reports and previous program performance.” some unsuccessful applicants told us the letter did not contain enough information for them to understand why their application was denied . in particular , some applicants told us that they did not understand what the agency meant by geographic distribution , which was the basis for denying grants to at least eight applicants during fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . officials told us that “geographic distribution” means that an applicant was denied because the geographical area their program would serve is already served by another runaway and homeless youth service provider . the agency does not keep a record to document detailed information that would support or justify a denial for geographic reasons , such as the number or names of programs that exist in the same locale , the services these programs provide , or the numbers of youth they serve . ( 3 ) how are grant award decisions made and to what extent does this process comply with federal requirements ? ( 4 ) to what extent are grant award decisions communicated to applicants in a timely and clear manner in accordance with federal requirements ? to determine applicants' views on the usefulness of technical assistance , we randomly selected and interviewed 24 out of the 590 applicants that competed for fiscal year 2008 grants . this sample included applicants who were awarded grants and applicants who were not . we also randomly selected and interviewed 6 peer reviewers out of approximately 170 who evaluated applications for at least one of the three grant programs for fiscal year 2008 . additionally , we interviewed representatives from the national network for youth , an organization that represents providers of services to youth and families . to determine how grant award decisions are made , we analyzed agency data and documents related to peer review evaluations and final award decisions for the three programs for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . we also observed the peer review process for the street outreach program in june 2009 . to determine the extent to which the grant award process complies with federal requirements , we compared the grant award process to relevant requirements in the law , hhs regulations and written guidance , and internal control standards for the federal government . to determine the extent to which grant award decisions are communicated in a timely and clear manner in accordance with federal requirements , we reviewed a random sample of 69 notifications that were sent to applicants for at least one of the three programs for fiscal year 2008 grants . ( 2 ) how useful do applicants find the technical assistance they receive to assist them with applying for grants ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , grant announcements , applications and other agency documents , and we interviewed key agency officials and contractors . additionally , we established a timeline for each grant program's award process for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 .