ii. ) in addition , nrc provided comments to improve the report's technical accuracy , which we have incorporated as appropriate . to examine the steps nrc has taken to prepare its workforce to review new reactor license applications and manage its workload , we obtained information about its workforce preparation by reviewing nrc documents , conducting semi - structured interviews with several managers directly responsible for the planning and implementation of new reactor licensing activities , and observing internal nrc meetings . more specifically , we reviewed strategy and commission papers , licensing program planning documents and briefings , and a range of documents regarding reorganization , staffing , training , hiring , contracting , and project scheduling . we supplemented this information through interviews with nrc managers in nro ; the offices of nuclear security and incident response , nuclear regulatory research , general counsel , and human resources ; the advisory committee on reactor safeguards ; and the atomic safety and licensing board panel . we also observed several nro - specific internal management meetings and employee training sessions , and nro staff demonstrated their microsoft project tool and associated scheduling models and templates . we updated nrc workforce data presented in our january 2007 report entitled human capital: retirements and anticipated new reactor applications will challenge nrc's workforce . we also obtained budget data from nrc's office of the chief financial officer and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to examine the steps nrc has taken to develop its regulatory framework and key processes , we reviewed various nrc reports , meeting transcripts and minutes , and strategy and commission papers and supplemented this information with interviews with cognizant nrc managers . we conducted semi - structured interviews with representatives from 2 nuclear power consortia and 16 of the 17 electric power companies that have announced plans to file a col application , as well as 2 reactor design companies . we also interviewed officials of the nuclear energy institute ; the union of concerned scientists ; the institute of nuclear power operations ; winston and strawn , llp ; and the georgia public service commission . in addition , we observed several of nrc's design - centered working group and public meetings focused on new reactor licensing activities , and attended conferences held on new reactor licensing . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees , the chairman of nrc , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .