marketing . card providers and schools market college cards directly to students through various methods , including mailings , on - campus presentations , and co - branded websites . some card providers offer marketing assistance or materials to schools . for example , one provider told us it prefers assisting the school in developing messages , because students pay more attention to the information if it comes from the schools . some contracts also call for schools to use “best efforts” to promote and encourage use of the provider's account . our review of marketing materials and other information offered to students found variations in the type of information provided to students about their financial options . at some schools , students were presented with an unbiased presentation of these options . fdic staff told us that given current practices , it may seem to some students that they must select the school's college card to receive their funds . for example , one school emphasized that “you have the ability to select the option that is best for you,” followed by a factual description of payment options . in addition , in its best practices recommendations for college cards , nacubo called for “a fair explanation of services misleading , biased , or aggressive marketing schemes. revenue - sharing agreements appear to be declining , but concerns remain that the payments and other benefits schools receive from card providers may motivate schools to encourage the use of college cards or potentially choose the arrangement that provides the schools the most revenue rather than one that provides students the best terms , according to federal officials and consumer advocates . these payments from providers to schools are generally either a fixed sum or tied to the number of card accounts or the number of card transactions students make . in addition to direct payments , schools can receive other financial benefits from college card providers , such as rent for atms located on campus , general marketing assistance for the school id card program , or savings on the administrative costs of disbursing financial aid . we did not identify comprehensive information on the number of schools with college cards that receive such payments . three card providers with which we spoke did not have revenue - sharing agreements with any of their schools . in our review of nine schools , three had agreements with card providers that included revenue - sharing based in part on transaction activity or the number of students who open card accounts . one school told us that it received $13,000 in 2012 , based on $10 for each student who activated the college debit card . another school received $137,000 in payments from the card provider in 2012 , based on a formula that included the total balance of student card accounts and the volume of card transactions with vendors . ( partially offsetting that , however , was $30,000 the school paid the provider for services. ) a third school told us it has received an average of about $400,000 annually over the life of its contract , which is based in part on the number of students who opened card accounts .