ions . army combat support units and smaller units , as well as marine corps units not deploying to afghanistan , conduct their culminating training event at home station or other locations . positioned to plan and manage training as forces resume training for a fuller range of missions . to determine the extent to which active component army and marine corps combat arms and combat support forces are completing training prior to the culminating training event , we reviewed office of the secretary of defense , joint staff , combatant command , army , and marine corps training guidance , to determine the nature of training requirements , and interviewed officials from these offices to discuss these documents . in addition , we reviewed service guidance to identify the extent to which specific training had to be completed prior to the culminating training events and interviewed service officials to discuss this guidance . we also interviewed service training officials to discuss any differences between training requirements for combat arms and combat support forces . we selected eight army and marine corps locations for site visits based on deployment and training dates to allow a review of multiple units trained at the location . for the army , we used readiness information from the defense readiness reporting system - army to identify the universe of units for site selection purposes , and we selected the installations with the largest number of combat arms and combat support brigades present during our site visit time frames . we found this data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of site selection . for the marine corps , we focused on battalion - sized combat arms and combat support units ; these units conduct their culminating training events at the service's combat training center at twentynine palms , california . findings from the site visits with the army and marine corps are not generalizable to all units . specifically , we reviewed unit training documents and interviewed officials from 19 army and 10 marine corps units to discuss training information such as: ( 1 ) the training that units were completing , ( 2 ) any training that units were unable to complete prior to the culminating training event , ( 3 ) any factors that impacted units' abilities to complete training prior to the culminating training event , and ( 4 ) the impact that not completing training prior to the final culminating training event might have on those events . to assess the extent to which leaders are positioned to plan and manage training as the forces resume training for a fuller range of missions , we reviewed service policy and guidance that provided information on the return to training for a fuller range of missions , such as the u.s. army forces command training and leader development guidance for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the marine corps posture statement for 2011 . we interviewed service and unit officials to discuss these documents and changing conditions , such as the drawdown of forces from iraq , and the impact of these conditions on training for a fuller range of missions .