gao - 03-1133 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2003 . this assessment was completed in november 2003 . we selected five states based on their large population — florida , massachusetts , michigan , new york , and wisconsin — and randomly chose five additional states — arizona , arkansas , colorado , louisiana , and maine . to identify the largest health insurers in these states , we contacted insurance regulators in each state and asked them to identify the two largest small employer health insurers and the two largest individual health insurers in terms of covered lives , premiums collected , or — in the absence of quantitative data — their best judgment . we contacted the insurers identified to obtain information about the extent to which their health plan with the most members covered colorectal cancer screening tests . we posed a series of questions related to insurers' coverage of four colorectal cancer tests — fobt , flexible sigmoidoscopy , dcbe , and colonoscopy — for screening purposes.further , we asked insurers about their health plans' coverage restrictions , including those related to age , frequency , family history , personal history , and plan authorization . we received responses to our questions from 18 of the 19 small employer insurers we contacted ( 95 percent ) , and 14 of the 17 individual insurers we contacted ( 82 percent ) . to examine coverage of colorectal cancer screening tests in large employer health plans , we randomly selected 50 companies from the 2002 fortune 500 list.one company was subsequently removed from the sample because it filed for bankruptcy protection after the list was published and no longer had any u.s. employees . thus , the final sample included 49 companies . ( see table 4. ) about 70 percent of the over 8 million fehbp enrollees and their dependents were covered through the national plans in 2003 . among the 126 local fehbp plans , 65 plans either provided coverage for the four colorectal cancer screening tests as confirmed through a review of their brochures or follow - up with selected plan officials , or were located in states that required this coverage . the brochures for the remaining 61 plans indicated coverage of at least fobt and flexible sigmoidoscopy , but did not explicitly identify whether the additional tests were covered for screening purposes . according to an opm official , plans may cover tests that are not explicitly referenced in the brochures . we contacted 8 local plans and confirmed that brochure language was not definitive . according to the plan representatives , each of the 8 plans covered at least one test in addition to the two specified in the brochure . representatives of acs and ahip provided comments on a draft of this report . acs commented that the report overstates coverage , for example by stating that coverage is common or by not placing greater emphasis on plans that covered few or none of the colorectal cancer tests for screening purposes . gao - 02-777t . washington , d.c.: may 23 , 2002 . medicare: beneficiary use of clinical preventive services . gao - 02-422 . washington , d.c.: april 12 , 2002 . ( see table 3. )