this provision in h.r . 3947 , if effectively implemented , can help gsa make the worldwide inventory a valuable resource . however , it is important to recognize that even if this provision is enacted , gsa will face formidable challenges in compiling reliable , timely , and useful data on federal real property . gsa will be challenged to identify and compile this data in a manner that the many real property - holding agencies , congress , the treasury , and omb , agree is cost effective . another challenge for gsa would be to work with participating agencies to make their real property databases capable of producing the common data that are needed to make the worldwide inventory an effective and valued resource . 3947 would also provide agencies with enhanced asset management tools and incentives for better property management . these proposed changes would give agencies the flexibility to establish real property portfolios that most appropriately , effectively , and efficiently meet the agencies' mission requirements . the bill provides four new enhanced asset management tools for effective management of federal property: ( 1 ) interagency transfers or exchanges , ( 2 ) sales to or exchanges with nonfederal sources , ( 3 ) subleases , and ( 4 ) outleases and public - private partnerships . in addition , h.r . 3947 provides incentives for agencies to use these enhanced asset management tools and dispose of excess property by allowing them to retain proceeds generated to pay expenses associated with the property and fund other capital needs . currently , the law for most federal agencies requires that proceeds from the sale of federal land and buildings go either to the general treasury or the land and water conservation fund . within the last year we have issued two reports that addressed issues related to one of the enhanced management tools proposed in h.r . postal service . as we and others have previously reported , federal property managers find themselves confronted with numerous challenges in managing this multibillion - dollar real estate portfolio , including a large deferred maintenance backlog , obsolete and underutilized properties , and changing facility needs due to rapid advances in technology . these challenges must be addressed in an environment marked by budgetary constraints and growing demands to improve service . although time constraints did not enable us to do a detailed analysis of each provision in this bill , we believe that a number of provisions in h.r . 3947 would go a long way toward helping agencies to recognize real property as a major component in carrying out their missions and improving the federal government's management of its multibillion - dollar real property holdings . we generally support the provisions of this bill relating to improving real property management leadership and information and using enhanced asset management tools and incentives . however , the impact of this bill on property management will largely depend on how well its provisions are implemented . given this , i would like to highlight some specific issues the subcommittee may wish to consider in its deliberation of h.r .