congress . telephone: ( 202 ) 512-3608 email: pannorm@gao.gov thank you for participating in this survey . approximately what percentage of your company's total revenues are derived from operations within and outside of the united states ? of the 159 respondents that responded to the survey , 149 volunteered written answers to at least one of the eight key open - ended comment questions in our survey: change in audit quality , the number of auditor options , the sufficiency of such options , willingness to use the auditor of a competitor , minimum number of audit firms necessary , optimal number of firms , suggested actions for increasing competition , and any additional comments on the survey . the following tables display selected comments from some respondents to these eight questions . some of the quotes illustrate typical comments made by several other companies , while others represent a unique viewpoint of only that company . while these specific comments provide valuable insights , the number of comments of a particular type reproduced here is not necessarily proportional to the number of other similar responses , and , therefore , the comments do not represent the variety of opinion that might be found in the population of large public companies as a whole . more respondents said that overall audit quality had gotten better over the past decade than worse ( 44 percent compared to 18 percent ) . the reasons behind these ratings are presented in table 2 , grouped into summary categories . almost all respondents — 94 percent — indicated that they had three or fewer options from which to choose if they had to change auditors , and 61 percent said exactly three . the explanatory comments we received to that question , shown in table 3 , confirm that respondents are almost always referring to the big 4 firms other than the one they currently employ . as only 8 percent of respondents said they currently use or would consider using a non - big 4 firm , there were few written explanations for why they thought they had more than three or four options . those who did explain mentioned the national prominence of the larger second - tier firms and smaller firms with special industry expertise as reasons . almost half of the respondents ( 43 percent ) said they did not have enough options and desired more . respondents who said they had enough options said the big 4 firms were able to meet their needs . however , several of these respondents cautioned that further reductions could be problematic . those saying the number of firms was not sufficient often took the position that “more competition is always better.” other comments included that differentiation between the firms' services was declining , special expertise was not longer readily available , and monopolistic tendencies in setting fees . see table 4 . more than 90 percent of our respondents said that their company would choose the auditor of a competitor . a few of those respondents provided explanations as to why they would or would not , as shown in table 5 .