increasing costs . the transfer of spent fuel from wet to dry storage is costly in several ways . we estimated in a november 2009 report that the transfer cost for about five canisters is about $5.1 million to $8.8 million . one industry representative told us that if the transfer of spent fuel to dry storage were accelerated , the associated high up - front costs could strain some nuclear power plants' budgets . these up - front costs , which would be incurred over a longer period without acceleration , include the construction of a storage pad with accompanying safety and security features , which , we reported , could cost about $19 million to $44 million . these costs are initially borne by ratepayers or plant owners but may be passed on to taxpayers as a result of industry lawsuits against doe for failure to take custody of the spent fuel . moreover , epri reported that as older , cooler spent fuel is loaded into canisters , reactor operators eventually will be left with younger , hotter spent fuel to transfer from wet to dry storage . spent fuel stored in canisters generally should not exceed about 752 degrees fahrenheit ( 400 degrees celsius ) , and , as we reported earlier , spent fuel being discharged from reactors today may have to cool at least 7 years before it can be placed in dry storage . given the heat load requirements for storing spent fuel , epri noted that it may not be possible to fill some canisters to capacity . specifically , a canister with a capacity for 60 boiling water reactor assemblies that would store 60 older , cooler assemblies may be able to contain only 38 younger , hotter assemblies . reactor operators had never intended to leave spent fuel on their sites for extended periods , but even if the united states began to develop an off - site centralized storage or disposal facility today , spent fuel — which has already been stored on - site for several decades — would be stored on - site for several decades more . as a result , the following challenges could affect decisions on managing spent fuel . a license is required for delivery of licensed material to a carrier for transport or for the transport of licensed material . after transportation because of uncertainties over the condition of large amounts of high - burn - up fuel that might have to be repackaged for disposal . as a result , nrc stated that until further guidance is developed , the transportation of high - burn - up fuel will be handled on a case - by - case basis using the criteria given in current regulations . to help facilitate decisions on storing and disposing of spent nuclear fuel over the coming decades , we recommend that the chairman of the nuclear regulatory commission direct agency staff to develop a mechanism that allows individuals with appropriate clearances and the need to know to easily identify and access classified studies so as to help ensure that institutional knowledge is not lost . we provided nrc with a draft of this report for review and comment .