le . legacy records ( mqseries ) ( mqseries ) ( mqseries ) single common record file ( xml ) 18 legacy files ( secured ftp ) ftp file transfer protocol loweb loan origination web nslds national student loan data system peps postsecondary education participants system xml extensible markup language this is a temporary interface . dlos is targeted to be retired in fiscal year 2003 . mqseries is ibm's proprietary message format . cthis is an information technology infrastructure that enables data exchange among disparate systems . the following are gao's comments on the department of education's office of federal student aid's letter dated december 18 , 2002 . we revised the draft report title to clarify that our follow - up review was focused on assessing fsa's progress in implementing the cod process . information related to operational problems was contained in the draft report . we asked the cod contracting officer's representative to characterize these problems , and he stated that they were very serious . in addition , we confirmed the seriousness of these problems at the conclusion of our review with fsa it and program officials . we modified this report to include data on the number of transactions processed . we also modified our report to clarify that all schools participating in the pell grant and / or direct loan programs currently use the cod system . we do not agree that the report implies that fsa's use of a phased - in approach in implementing the common record increases risks . instead , this report notes that the implementation is not yet complete . we believe that we have accurately portrayed fsa's progress in implementing the cod process . first , since fsa's analysis was “informal,” and fsa's supporting documentation had limited detail that we could not validate , we do not agree that the cod development manager's functionality estimate should be the primary basis for an analysis of cod's progress . second , we included both the percentage of cod's requirements that had been implemented and fsa's estimate in our report . we modified our report to reflect this updated information as appropriate . we do not agree that fsa's informal process for capturing and disseminating lessons learned was adequate because ( 1 ) it may lead to important lessons being overlooked and ( 2 ) all schools may not be aware of potential problems associated with implementing the common record . we modified this report to reflect that fsa plans to include lessons learned in a planned update to its school testing guide . while this is a positive step , it does not replace the need for mechanisms to continuously capture and disseminate acquired knowledge as schools implement the common record . implementation of middleware in selected systems . as of mid - november 2002 , fsa had built middleware into seven systems so that these systems can interact with the cod system through the eai bus . these systems include ( 1 ) the central processing system , which determines students' eligibility and award levels , and ( 2 ) the national student loan data system , which contains loan - and grant - level information and is used by schools to screen student aid applicants to identify ineligible borrowers .