the navy recently has taken some action to address this area . in february 2005 , the navy directed the center for naval analyses to conduct a study to develop formal definitions and guidance as well as identify goals and performance measures for the plan . however , it remains to be seen whether this study will be completed as planned by november 2005 ; if it will recommend developing and implementing sound management practices , such as goals , measures , milestones , and timelines ; and whether any management improvement recommendations made in the study will be implemented by the fleet forces command , the navy command responsible for implementing the fleet response plan . this is commonly referred to as the 6 + 2 goal . under the fleet response plan , the navy has developed a surge capability schedule that it uses to manage and identify the level of training a ship has completed and its readiness to deploy . the schedule contains three progressive readiness goals: emergency surge , surge - ready , and routine deployable status . each readiness goal specifies phases of training that must be completed to achieve the goal . to be placed in emergency surge status , a ship or an air squadron needs to have completed its unit - level phase training . achieving surge - ready status requires the completion of integrated phase training . attaining routine deployable status requires achievement of all necessary capabilities , completion of underway sustainment phase training , and certification of the unit for forward deployed operations . the surge capabilities schedule provides a readiness snapshot for each ship , allowing decision makers to quickly determine which ships are available to meet the needs of the mission . figure 2 illustrates how the navy notionally identifies the eight aircraft carriers available for surge deployments . the carriers numbered 1 through 6 are expected to be ready to deploy within 30 days notice . the carriers labeled “+1” and “+2” are expected to able to surge within 90 days notice . the six surge - ready carriers include two carriers on deployment ( numbered 3 and 4 ) , one carrier that is part of the forward deployed naval force based in japan ( number 6 ) , and three carriers in the sustainment phase ( numbered 1 , 2 , and 5 ) . ( 2 ) to what extent has the navy tested and evaluated the effectiveness of its fleet response plan and shared results to improve its implementation ? to assess the navy's management approach in implementing the fleet response plan , we obtained and analyzed key messages , briefings , and instructions on the fleet response plan and interviewed department of defense ( dod ) and navy headquarters and fleet officials , and compared the navy's approach with best practices for transformations of large organizations . to assess the extent to which the navy has tested the effectiveness of the fleet response plan and shared results to improve its implementation , we obtained briefings from and interviewed navy officials , reviewed and queried the navy lessons learned system to determine relevant lessons recorded , and examined navy guidance on test and evaluation efforts .