i ) and apwu . both generally concurred with our findings . opm said that consumer - directed health plans have the potential to lower health insurance costs by allowing health plan members greater choice over their health care spending . regarding the potential for cdhps to disproportionately attract healthier enrollees , opm said that while enrollment in the apwu cdhp is growing , the plan accounted for a small fraction of total fehbp enrollment and that opm did not anticipate any harm accruing to other fehbp enrollees as a result of its enrollment trends . nevertheless , opm said it would continue to monitor enrollment trends and take appropriate action to eliminate or minimize any adverse effects . opm also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . apwu acknowledged that the language concerning dental and vision coverage in its plan brochure could have contained greater clarity , and said that in consultation with opm it has revised the language for the 2006 plan brochure . apwu also stated that in spite of the potentially confusing language , the plan credited enrollees' dental and vision services incurred in 2005 toward the enrollees' deductible . we made reference to their comment in our report . we notified apwu officials that we obtained the appeals data from opm . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to opm and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or at dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . randy dirosa , assistant director , and iola d'souza also made key contributions to this report . ( see fig . for four of five specific plan performance measures — access to health care , timeliness of health care , provider communications , and claims processing — apwu cdhp enrollee satisfaction was generally comparable to that of other enrollees . decision - support tools . cdhps may provide enrollees information to help them become actively engaged in making health care purchase decisions , such as the typical fees charged for specific health procedures at participating hospitals , and quality measures for participating health care providers . in addition , plans may provide enrollees online access to their savings account to help them manage their spending . proponents of cdhps assert that the savings account and higher deductibles encourage consumers to become more price conscious , and use only necessary health care services to maintain and accumulate balances in their savings accounts . the availability of information on provider fees and quality is also expected to enable consumers to select providers on the basis of price and quality .