we are not making recommendations in this report . dod concurred with the recommendations . we sent a draft of this report to dod for advance review and comment . in response , dod informed us that it had no comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; the 15 companies we selected to prepare this report ; and other interested parties . this slowed down the process even more . company officials said that in the commercial market they are used to communicating directly with people who have the authority to ( 1 ) discuss their needs , ( 2 ) gauge whether the company's product could satisfy those needs , and ( 3 ) award a contract within months . non - traditional companies we spoke to also raised concerns about the lengthy process for obtaining security clearances . some company officials told us that dod required their company representatives to obtain security clearances prior to dod discussions on technology needs . company officials also noted that the process for attaining personnel security clearances , which is shared between dod and the office of personnel management , can take over a year to complete . one company even said it took 5 years to obtain a facility clearance from dod . software companies identified the time and cost associated with obtaining multiple software certifications , which they said are required by dod prior to competing for business , as an additional challenge they face when entering the defense market . this includes providing documentation to obtain the federal risk and authorization management program ( fedramp ) certification , which is managed by the general services administration , and the fedramp plus certification , which is managed by the defense information systems agency . these certifications provide a government - wide and dod - specific standardized approach for cloud products and services , respectively . officials from one large non - traditional software company said it has spent at least $40 million so far to obtain fedramp certifications for 50 products and it has taken on average 18 months to obtain the certifications . the company has also been working for almost 2 years to obtain dod's fedramp plus certification for these products . a company official stated that dod continues to add more requirements that sometimes conflict with the fedramp requirements or , at a minimum , add additional controls and create ambiguity . the official also said that , “as a company that provides services to numerous customers , it is unmanageable to comply with different rules and requirements for different agencies.” an official from one small non - traditional company we spoke to stated that they have invested over $100,000 and well over a year in pursuing fedramp certification even though there is no guarantee that they will win a contract . in addition , he estimated that once certified , monthly costs to maintain the certification would range from $10,000 to $20,000 .