our work leads to real results . each year , we present our findings , conclusions , and recommendations in reports and testimony before congress . for example , in fiscal year 2012 , we issued more than 650 reports and testified 159 times before various congressional committees . we meet regularly with members of congress and their staff . these outreach efforts ensure that gao stays at the forefront of high - priority issues facing congress and the nation . this is especially important since we do our work for all standing committees of the congress and about 70 percent of its subcommittees . gao was established just over 90 years ago . after world war i , the u.s. congress wanted better information on , and control over , government spending . performance audits make up the vast majority of our audits . in the 2008 international peer review of the performance audit practice of the united states government accountability office , the international peer review team pointed out several features that distinguish our working environment from that of many of our international peers . the peer review noted that we carry out a larger volume of performance audit engagements each year and that the majority of the engagements we carry out are requested by congress and not self - initiated . this follow - up provides an additional opportunity for congress to consider our work during oversight activities , for agencies to respond to our recommendations , and for the work needed to successfully address the issues to be completed . clearly , national audit offices can play a key role in providing public officials with vital information and analyses needed to address country - specific challenges . the peer review also noted that in responding to congressional requests , we determine the scope and methodology for the work , the timing and staffing , product content , and the management structure . in addition , we have adopted a number of practices to balance our objective of being responsive to congress while remaining nonpartisan and independent in serving the long - term interests of the american people . the peer review identified the following two practices as being particularly notable: our strategic planning process involves congress and other stakeholders in establishing key themes and high - risk areas that the government needs to manage well . our high - risk series of reports , which i shall discuss shortly , focuses attention on government programs that pose significant risks of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . our engagement acceptance process focuses management's attention on the risks associated with each request , including risks to independence , and how the risks will be managed . in addition , nearly every one of our reports and testimonies is available on our website the day it is made public . we make it a point to regularly measure and report on our performance . last fiscal year , financial benefits from our work totaled $55.8 billion u.s. dollars . that is a $105 return on every dollar invested in gao . we also documented 1,440 other benefits that shaped legislation , improved services to the public , and strengthened government operations .