completed . six - month trial ran from january 31 , 2002 , to july 31 , 2002 . ip@ss ( integrated passenger security system ) newark international airport , newark , new jersey ( continental airlines ) ; gatwick airport , london , england ( delta airlines ) to expedite and simplify the processes of passenger identification and security screening . in june 2002 , 6,909 passengers were processed through ip@ss . officials report that about 99 percent of passengers volunteered for the program . continental airlines has two kiosks for tourist class , one for business and first classes , and one at the continental gate for flights between newark and tel aviv . each station is staffed with a trained security agent who asks passengers for travel documents , including the individual's passport , which is scanned by an automated reader . after being cleared , the passenger can enroll in a biometric program in which biometric information is transferred to a smart card . the passenger then takes the card to the boarding gate and inserts it into the card reader and inserts fingers into the reader . if the information corresponds with the information contained on the smart card , the passenger is cleared to board the plane . cards are surrendered to program officials after each use , and the information is scrambled to prevent misuse . there were no user fees associated with the pilot programs . ongoing . icts international plans to launch pilot programs at other u.s. and european airports . the pilot programs at newark and gatwick are technology demonstrations and are used only to aid in the departure process . icts may test a “sister city” concept , in which the participant can take the card to his or her destination to aid in the deplaning / arrival process there . to expedite border crossings for low - risk frequent commuters . there are no fees associated with the canpass system . the canpass highway program was closed as a result of the events of september 11 , 2001 ; however , the program is still currently available at the whirlpool bridge in niagara falls , ontario . the canpass program operates in conjunction with the sentri / portpass program . sentri / portpass ( secure electronic network for travelers' rapid inspection / port passenger accelerated service system ) detroit , michigan ; buffalo , new york ; el paso and hidalgo , texas ; otay mesa and san ysidro , california citizens and permanent residents of the united states and canada and certain citizens and non - immigrants of mexico are eligible to apply for program participation . applicants must undergo an fbi background check , an interagency border inspection system ( ibis ) check , vehicle search , and personal interview prior to participation . applicants must provide evidence of citizenship , residence , and employment or financial support . fingerprints and a digital photograph are taken at the time of application . if cleared for enrollment , the passenger receives an identification card and a transponder , which must be installed in the registered vehicle . during 2000 , approximately 792 participants were registered for the detroit program , and 11,700 were registered for the otay mesa program .