federal land and resources . we identified 57 data elements in this category that relate to ( 1 ) information on the total surface and subsurface acres of federal land managed by each of the five land management agencies and the total acres managed for specific purposes , such as hardrock mining or grazing , and ( 2 ) the volume of various resources , such as oil and gas and timber extracted or harvested from federal land . revenues generated from activities on federal land . we identified 35 data elements in this category that relate to information on revenues generated from activities on federal land , which are derived from the use or sale of land and resources . sources of revenue include revenues generated from oil and gas activities , hardrock mining , and special use or right - of - way permits issued for transmission lines , filming activities , and concession activities . we also included cost recovery fees — which are intended to recover agency costs for processing certain plans , applications , or permits associated with various activities on federal land — in this category of data elements . federal land use designations . data elements in this category relate to information on the number of acres each agency manages that are associated with various special designations of federal land , such as wilderness areas , wild and scenic rivers , paleontological sites , and critical habitat set aside for endangered species . some of these land use designations apply to all five federal land management agencies , but some are unique to a specific agency , and the number of land use designations applicable to each agency varies . the three data element categories are described below . specifically , all five agencies collected only 4 of the same data elements of the over 100 data elements that we asked them about . these 4 elements related to total surface acres managed , total acres managed within each state , the number of special use permits generated for filming activities on federal land , and the number of cultural and historic sites listed on the national register of historic places . in contrast , none of the agencies collected information for 33 data elements that we asked them about , such as the percent of total acres under oil , gas , or coal leases that have surface disturbance or where the surface disturbance has been reclaimed , or information on the potential quantities of oil , gas , and coal resources on federal land . specifically , of the 57 federal land and resource data elements we asked each of the five agencies about , blm and the forest service collected the most — 22 and 20 data elements respectively — and bor collected the least — 3 data elements . table 1 lists the 57 federal land and resources data elements we asked about and indicates which of the five agencies collected them . of the 35 revenue data elements we asked each of the five federal agencies about , blm collected the most and nps collected the least , 22 and 6 , respectively .