we did not attempt to verify this information . the length of these wait lists varied considerably ; however , several of the centers we contacted had lengthy wait lists . for example , one grantee we contacted in texas , which serves approximately 4,260 children in 36 centers , had over 1,150 children on its wait list . second , they were located either in states with a significant proportion of head start funding , in the same geographic area as a gao office , or in the same geographic area as the two programs accused of committing fraud . we created 15 fictitious scenarios and used fabricated documentation during our in - person applications . we reviewed attendance records that we obtained from the grantees . for the midwest migrant and seasonal head start grantee , we also compared funded enrollment , reported enrollment , and classroom attendance . in the 5 months we reviewed , reported enrollment ranged from a low of 41 percent of funded enrollment in june 2009 , to a high of 100 percent in october 2009 . according to ohs officials we spoke with , migrant and seasonal head start grantees are only required to meet the funded enrollment targets for any month of the grant period — unlike head start grantees who are required to maintain funded enrollment levels throughout their program year . we reviewed attendance records and found that attendance was significantly less than reported enrollment . average attendance per month ranged from 22 percent to 69 percent of reported enrollment . for example , in october 2009 an average of 57 students attended class , which was 22 percent of the reported enrollment of 256 students . in august 2009 an average of 170 students attended class , which was 69 percent of the reported enrollment of 247 students . we also found that attendance on a single day ranged from 3 percent to 94 percent of reported enrollment . ( see table 3. ) as we have previously reported , the number of children and families served by head start is an essential measure of the program's impact . yet ohs lacks assurance that grantees actually serve the numbers of children they report having enrolled and for which they are receiving funds . under the current definition of enrollment in head start regulations , grantees could reasonably report full enrollment without providing services to the number of children they were funded to serve . reporting figures to the congress and the american public that do not represent children and families to whom services have been provided fails to provide a transparent measure of the important work undertaken by these programs . in addition , without monitoring information on services actually provided , ohs could miss opportunities to assist grantees that are experiencing significant difficulties in their ability to serve the children they have enrolled . calculating attendance , which fluctuates , may be challenging , but ohs already offers guidance on calculating average daily attendance on its web site .