however , the approach did not work . absent this leadership , authority , and control of funding , the current transformation efforts are likely to fail . i commend the subcommittee for holding this hearing and i encourage you to use this vehicle , on an annual basis , as a catalyst for long overdue business transformation at dod . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or kutzg@gao.gov . the following individuals contributed to the various reports and testimonies that were the basis for the testimony: beatrice alff , renee brown , donna byers , molly boyle , mary ellen chervenic , francine delvecchio , francis dymond , geoff frank , gina flacco , diane handley , cynthia jackson , evelyn logue , john martin , elizabeth mead , dave moser , mai nguyen , sharon pickup , david plocher , john ryan , and darby smith . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . the nomenclature describing these different initiatives was the same . therefore , it was difficult to ascertain why certain initiatives were classified as national security systems while others , with the same name , were classified as business systems . in another example , this is the first year in which the navy enterprise resource planning ( erp ) effort was listed in the budget and incorrectly classified as a national security system . its forerunners , four pilot erp projects , have been classified as business systems since their inception . dod officials were not able to provide a valid explanation as to why the program was classified as a national security program . for the fiscal year 2006 budget request , the navy has requested that the dod cio reclassify the program from a national security system to a business system . improper classification diminishes congress's ability to effectively monitor and oversee the billions of dollars spent annually to maintain , operate , and modernize the department's business systems environment . the department's reported number of business systems continues to rise , and dod does not yet have reasonable assurance that the currently reported number of business systems is complete . as of february 2005 , dod reported that its business systems inventory consisted of 4,150 systems , which is an increase of approximately 1,900 reported business systems since april 2003 . table 2 presents a comparison of the april 2003 and february 2005 reported business systems inventories by domain . the largest increase is due to the logistics domain increasing its reported inventory of business systems from 565 in april 2003 to the current 2,005 . we reported in may 2004 that the logistics domain had validated about 1,900 business systems but had not yet entered most of them into the bmmp systems inventory . logistics domain officials informed us that they completed that process and this increase was the result . table 3 shows the distribution of the 4,150 business systems among the components and domains .