ii ) . we are encouraged by gsa's actions on our recommendations but have not evaluated their impact . quality governmentwide and agency - specific data are critical for addressing the wide range of problems facing the government in the real property area , including excess and unneeded property , deterioration , and security concerns . in april 2007 , we reported that although some agencies have made progress in collecting and reporting standardized real property data for frpp , data reliability is still a challenge at some of the agencies , and agencies lacked a standard framework for data validation . we are pleased that omb has implemented our recommendation to develop a framework that agencies can use to better ensure the validity and usefulness of key real property data in the frpp , as noted earlier . however , in the past 2 years , we have found the following problems with frpp data: in our january 2008 report on agencies' leasing , we found that , while frpp data were generally reliable for describing the leased inventory , data quality concerns , such as missing data , would limit the usefulness of frpp for other purposes , such as strategic decision making . to close a post office , usps is required to , among other things , formally announce its intention to close the facility , analyze the impact of the closure on the community , and solicit comments from the community . similarly , va officials reported that disposal is often not an option for most properties because of political stakeholders and constituencies , including historic building advocates or local communities that want to maintain their relationship with va . in addition , interior officials reported that the department faces significant challenges in balancing the needs and concerns of local and state governments , historical preservation offices , political interests , and others , particularly when coupled with budget constraints . if the interests of competing stakeholders are not appropriately addressed early in the planning stage , they can adversely affect the cost , schedule and scope of a project . despite its significance , the obstacle of competing stakeholder interests has gone unaddressed in the real property initiative . it is important to note that there is precedent for lessening the impact of competing stakeholder interests . base realignment and closure act ( brac ) decisions , by design , are intended to be removed from the political process , and congress approves all brac decisions as a whole . omb staff said they recognize the significance of the obstacle and told us that frpc would begin to address the issue after the inventory is established and other reforms are initiated . but until this issue is addressed , less than optimal decisions based on factors other than what is best for the government as a whole may continue . as discussed earlier , budgetary limitations that hinder agencies' ability to fund ownership leads agencies to rely on costly leased space to meet new space needs . furthermore , the administrative complexity and costs of disposing of federal property continue to hamper efforts by some agencies to address their excess and underutilized real property problems .