gao - 03-710t . to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact barbara d. bovbjerg at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bovbjergbj@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss social security provisions affecting public employees . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? social security covers about 96 percent of all u.s. workers ; the vast majority of the rest are state , local , and federal government employees . while these noncovered workers do not pay social security taxes on their government earnings , they may still be eligible for social security benefits . this poses difficult issues of fairness , and social security has provisions that attempt to address those issues . however , these provisions have been difficult to administer . they have also been a source of confusion and frustration for the workers they affect . i hope i can help clarify and provide some perspective on the complex relationship between social security and public employees . today , i will discuss social security's coverage of public employees , social security's provisions affecting noncovered public employees , and the potential implications of mandatory coverage of public employees . my testimony is based on a body of work we have published over the past several years . in summary , social security's provisions regarding public employees are rooted in the fact that about one - fourth of them do not pay social security taxes on the earnings from their government jobs , for various historical reasons . even though noncovered employees may have many years of earnings on which they do not pay social security taxes , they can still be eligible for social security benefits based on their spouses' or their own earnings in covered employment . to address the fairness issues that arise with noncovered public employees , social security has two provisions — the government pension offset ( gpo ) , which affects spouse and survivor benefits , and the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) , which affects retired worker benefits . both provisions reduce social security benefits for those who receive noncovered pension benefits , and both provisions also depend on having complete and accurate information on receipt of such noncovered pension benefits . however , such information is not available for many state and local pension plans , even though it is for federal pension benefits . as a result , gpo and wep are not applied consistently for all noncovered pension recipients . we have made recommendations to improve the availability and tracking of key information , and in the federal case , the implementation of our recommendations has saved hundreds of millions of dollars . however , congressional action appears to be needed in this area with respect to state and local government pensions . at the same time , a number of proposals have been offered to either revise or eliminate gpo and wep . while we have not analyzed such proposals , we believe it is important to consider both the costs and fairness issues they raise .