asset review . a date used to document any type of review of an asset . dod requires that each facility be physically inventoried on a cycle — every 5 years for non - historic facilities and every 3 years for historic facilities . plant replacement value . a calculation of the cost to replace the current physical plant ( facilities and supporting infrastructure ) using today's construction costs ( labor and materials ) and standards ( methodologies and codes ) . utilization rate . a percentage ( on a scale 0 to 150 ) used to represent the extent to which a real property asset is used by the primary user for the current program based on its design purpose . dod has not established cutoff points to determine unutilized , underutilized , and utilized real property . however , according to osd officials , dod considers a utilization rate of 101 to 150 as over utilized , meaning an asset's available space is not sufficient to meet the primary user's space requirement . facility condition . a measure of a facility's physical condition that is expressed as a percentage ( on a scale of 0 to 100 ) . factors used to calculate the facility condition include the facility's estimated deferred maintenance and repair costs and the facility's plant replacement value . dod guidance states a condition of 0 to 59 is failing ; 60 to 79 is poor ; 80 to 89 is fair ; and 90 to 100 is good . figure 2 displays these real property data elements . dod has undertaken several financial management improvement initiatives over the years to address deficiencies in business systems , processes , and controls through its financial improvement and audit readiness ( fiar ) plan . the fiar plan guidance includes 40 of the data elements required to be reported to osd and maintained in rpad within the scope of the effort . as part of the department's fiar effort , each of the military services developed individual plans to prepare their management processes , such as their accountability systems and procedures for real property , which would be tested during financial audit . the military services' real property efforts to prepare for financial audit have included developing manuals , monitoring activities such as testing of the implementation of real property procedures , and implementation of corrective actions to address identified deficiencies in the processes and procedures . dod's rpad has data quality issues specific to accuracy of certain data elements and completeness of the dataset , although certain data we reviewed improved since fiscal year 2014 . accuracy of data elements and completeness of rpad are important to osd , other federal agencies , and congress because they use this information to determine facility sustainment funding and to understand dod's utilization of its real property as a means to identify potential excess property for disposal , among other things . we found that accuracy of certain data in the selected set of key data elements we reviewed improved while other data contained discrepancies that resulted in inaccuracies in rpad for fiscal years 2014 through 2016 . for some data we reviewed , the magnitude of such discrepancies decreased while others increased from fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2016 .