for one entry , it was not clear which method was used . va has negotiated master cbas with five national unions . these agreements negotiated between va and the unions contain provisions by which va manages official time . as we previously reported , one approach used by va to manage official time is to specify the percentage or number of hours authorized for a designated union position , such as the president , vice - president , secretary , or treasurer . time specified for designated positions in cbas is typically characterized as a percentage of an employee's total time , such as 50 or 100 . certain cbas negotiated between va and unions provide for at least one union official to charge up to 100 percent of their duty hours to official time . in addition to official time , unions may negotiate to receive other support from agencies , such as office space , supplies , and equipment . cbas negotiated between va and unions typically include information on accessibility , privacy , and size of unions' designated space at va facilities . since fiscal year 2002 , opm has annually produced reports on the government - wide use of official time , with its most recent report covering fiscal year 2012 . opm officials stated that it is not required to report official time , and has no statutory or regulatory role for monitoring or enforcing agencies' use of official time . we selected these years for review because they were the most recent years for which data were available . we assessed the reliability of the data by reviewing relevant agency documentation about the data and the systems that produced them , interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and comparing the fiscal year 2014 data provided to us with the information va submitted to opm . based on this assessment , we determined that the data va provided were not sufficiently reliable to determine the amount of official time used by va employees and the purposes for which it was used for the period of our review . we discuss issues related to the reliability of the data further in our report and present certain fiscal year 2015 data for illustrative purposes only . to address all of our objectives , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of five va facilities in four states . vatas could help standardize the way individual facilities record information on official time and provide better information on the different purposes for which official time is used ; however , we found that va has not provided consistent training to employees on how to record official time in the new system . the lack of consistent training on how to record official time in vatas is due in part to the fact that vatas is being implemented in phases and training is being updated throughout the course of implementation . we selected facilities based on the number of bargaining unit employees at the facility and to ensure representation from the three va administrations .