wise . “do 401 ( k ) contributions crowd out other personal saving ? ” journal of public economics , vol . poterba , james m. , steven f. venti , and david a . wise . “do saving incentives work ? ” brookings papers on economic activity , vol. engen , eric m. , william g. gale , and john karl scholz . “the illusory effects of saving incentives on saving.” journal of economic perspectives , vol . hubbard , r. glenn , and jonathan s. skinner . “assessing the effectiveness of saving incentives.” journal of economic perspectives , vol . pence , karen m. “401 ( k ) s and household saving: new evidence from the survey of consumer finances.” finance and economics discussion series 2002-6 . washington , d.c.: board of governors of the federal reserve system , 2002 . poterba , james m. , steven f. venti , and david a . “how retirement saving programs increase saving.” journal of economic perspectives , vol . poterba , james m. , steven f. venti , and david a . fully examining the effectiveness of the nmtc requires addressing at least two main issues: where do nmtc investment funds come from and do nmtc investments generate economic benefits in low - income communities ? because of data limitations , the relative youth of the nmtc program , and the inherent difficulties of measuring program costs and benefits , a full evaluation is beyond the scope of this report . however , our finding that the nmtc program causes claimants to shift their investment portfolios suggests that the program might generate some additional economic costs , such as the opportunity cost of redirecting investment resources from other , potentially valuable uses . whether these economic costs are justified depends on the economic benefits that are generated in the low - income communities and the extent to which these benefits accrue to the targeted population . this highlights the importance of assessing the benefits of the program in eligible communities so that one can assess whether the costs are justified by the benefits of the program . the cdfi fund has hired a contractor to design a comprehensive study to evaluate the nmtc program . the study design will be completed by mid - 2007 , and the study will begin after the design is complete . during the design phase , the contractor will complete five case studies of nmtc investments . the study could potentially evaluate the effect that the nmtc is having on factors such as job creation and economic growth in areas that receive the credit . these issues fell outside the scope of this report . irs monitors cdes' compliance with nmtc laws and regulations , and irs is conducting a compliance study but is not yet selecting cdes to audit in a manner that represents all types of cdes . the cdfi fund monitors cdes' compliance with their allocation agreements through its data collection systems and , on a more limited basis , by making site visits . the cdfi fund has tested its data systems and developed policies and procedures for site visits .