the region . gao - 08-443 . round negotiators . in effect , this provision would undercut the exclusive benefits currently enjoyed by agoa beneficiaries . a private - sector representative on the panel said many companies believe that duty - free , quota - free access will go into effect if the doha round is successfully concluded , and the belief is already affecting their decisions on where to invest . on the other hand , other experts on the panel pointed out that duty - free , quota - free access , as currently under consideration in doha round negotiations , would cover only 97 percent of tariff lines . the provision to exclude 3 percent of tariff lines could be used to protect trade preferences for countries that are less competitive in key sectors , such as textile and apparel production . a panelist representing international textile and apparel producers in africa said that some of the major manufacturers doing business in agoa countries have stated that they would move production to bangladesh or cambodia if these countries are granted duty - free access for textile and apparel . given the potentially critical impact of extending agoa benefits to ldcs outside africa , panelists gave the option to refrain from extending preferences to non - ssa ldcs a very high level of priority for congressional consideration . options to modify rules of origin provisions under agoa and other u.s. trade preference programs or free trade agreements are intended to benefit ssa textile and apparel input production by providing opportunities to combine production with u.s. trade partners in other regions . panelists suggested an option for simplifying rules of origin provisions in agoa to grant duty - free access for partially assembled garments that are jointly produced in other countries that are u.s. free trade partners or benefit from u.s. trade preferences . for example , a consultant doing business with companies producing in agoa countries explained that one of his clients had expressed interest in assembling high - value shirts in one agoa beneficiary with collars and cuffs produced in a non - agoa country , but was unable to because of rules of origin restrictions . according to itc officials and the harmonized tariff schedule , such partial assembly of garments is currently allowed under agoa , but confusion persists among ssa manufacturers and outside experts . furthermore , one expert expressed concern that placing an increased emphasis on partially assembled garments might relegate ssa manufacturers to lower value - added production . the itc study also refers to african government and industry sources' recommendations for changing the rules of origin under non - agoa trade preference programs and free trade agreements to allow apparel made with ssa fabric to qualify for duty - free treatment in the united states . similarly , one panelist representing companies that produce in africa noted that the u.s. - morocco free trade agreement could theoretically be modified to provide duty - free benefits for textile and apparel items produced with inputs agoa countries . however , other panelists indicated such changes to m existing free trade agreements would have minimal impact on the competitiveness of agoa producers .