while omb circular no . a - 11 and sffas no . 2 provide general guidance for agencies to develop subsidy cost estimates , detailed guidance on the preparation of subsidy cost estimates is contained in fasab's accounting and auditing policy committee's technical release 6 preparing estimates for direct loan and loan guarantee subsidies under the federal credit reform act . this technical release provides detailed guidance and specific practices that if fully implemented by federal agencies , should enhance their ability to reasonably estimate credit program costs . in addition , gao's cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs provides detailed guidance on developing cost estimates . we identified the following practices discussed in technical release 6 and the cost estimating guide as the key elements of the subsidy cost estimation process based on relevance to creating credible cost estimates: historical data validation: management should accumulate sufficient , relevant , and reliable supporting data on which to base cash flow projections , such as data on prepayments , defaults , and recoveries . subsidy cost estimates should be based on the best available data at the time the estimates are made . informed opinion documentation: in certain limited instances , when relevant historical data , modeling capabilities , or both are not available , informed opinion may be used to support cash flow projections . when informed opinion is used , management should document the expert's qualifications . in addition , the basis for the stated opinion must be articulated and documented in detail , including an explanation for why the particular projection is appropriate for the program . cash flow assumption documentation: documentation must be developed to support the assumptions used by agencies in the subsidy cost calculations , including the data sources and calculation methods . assumptions should also be coordinated between program and accounting offices . cash flow model documentation: management should ensure that its cash flow models used to estimate subsidy cost estimates are well organized ; documented ; and , to reduce the chance of errors , require minimal manual data entry . documentation should include the rationale for using the specific model ; the mechanics of the model , including how to use and update the model and formulas and other mathematical functions within the model ; and sources of supporting data . management should also document the controls over the model , including management review and approval of the model . often , because of the complexity of cash flow models , management will hire a private firm to conduct an independent verification and validation of the model , which entails ensuring that the model's calculations are accurate and consistent with the model documentation . program design comparison: based on the laws and regulations that govern the credit program , management should document a comparison of the cash flow model and assumptions to relevant program design factors , such as fees , grace periods , and maximum loan amounts . this documentation will help management ensure that credit subsidy estimates are prepared consistent with the terms and conditions of the program . analysis of estimated cash flows: management should conduct periodic comparisons of estimated loan performance to actual cash flows in the accounting system .