there are some differences between the u.s. and foreign laws . for example , part v , division iii of canada's air transportation regulations requires advertisements of air services to specify all optional services offered , as well as their price or range of prices , including applicable taxes and fees charged by government or public authority . in addition , the regulations prohibit information being provided in an advertisement in a manner that would interfere with the ability of anyone to readily determine the price for the air service , including for any optional incidental service . the canadian law does not otherwise impose specific requirements as to how this information is to be made available to consumers . according to officials from canadian transportation agency , airlines can decide how they want to communicate this information to the consumer . also , according to officials from the european commission , a 2014 european court of justice decision determined that airlines cannot charge for bringing hand bags or carry - on luggage into the plane's cabin . the results of these three studies are summarized below . the authors of a 2012 study measured the impact of baggage fees on airline fares using dot data from 2006 to 2009 . they noted that airlines introduced bag fees to generate additional revenues without increasing fares , which would adversely affect demand . they found that for an airline charging a bag fee , a one - dollar increase in those fees resulted in a $0.24 decrease in fares , which means that a passenger checking one bag , would pay $0.76 more on these airlines . according to the authors , these results imply that airlines with bag fees lower fares to appear more competitive and then make up the lost revenue when passengers pay to check bags . in a 2015 study , the authors analyzed dot quarterly data from 2008 to 2009 and found that adoption of a bag fee resulted in about a 3 percent reduction in average airfares . analyzing non - stop flights and those with connections separately , they found that a bag fee led to a 2.7 percent and a 2.4 percent average - fare reduction for non - stop and connecting flights , respectively . the authors pointed out that , since these declines translated into an amount that was less than the bag fee , on average the combined total of the fare and bag fee increased . however , according to the authors , the decline could be greater than the bag fee for some passengers because the decline in average fare varies with route characteristics . in another 2015 study , the authors studied a sample of u.s. domestic routes over the period 2007 – 2010 , which covers the period when bag fees were first introduced ( in 2008 ) and when many carriers increased bag fees ( in 2010 ) . in at least one case , an airline official told us that this airline sets the price of one type of fee to prevent too many people from purchasing the service .