the wo is not an exception . while the office has been able to grow its staff since 2007 , this growth has not kept pace with the workload . the wo has studied its workflow to identify opportunities to more efficiently use staff through a consolidation of processes . while a number of these proposals show promise , irs has put implementation on hold while it reconsiders staffing allocations in light of its budget . because the current process is dispersed across three different units ( each with their own staff allocations ) , any consolidation might save staff days across the agency , but would likely require staff increases wherever the functions were consolidated . as such , decisions on this consolidation need to be made while considering irs's overall budget and agency - wide resource allocation . not implementing these changes has at least partially contributed to workload backlogs — more than 11,000 cases — in three areas: sb / se's initial review , the award determination process , and processing rejection and denial letters . first , the wo cancelled plans late in 2014 to bring on additional staff and take over the initial review and routing duties that were being done by sb / se staff ; this contributed to a backlog of approximately 5,000 claims . according to sb / se officials , the inventory of claims being sent to them for initial review slowed as the wo prepared to take over the work . however , those plans were contingent on irs's proposed fiscal year 2015 budget , which irs did not receive . as the initial review process returned to its original functioning , sb / se received an influx of more than two times the normal workload of initial review work in both the first and second quarters of fiscal year 2015 . according to sb / se officials , they received over 8,700 claims for initial review , which was more than the typical amount of approximately 2,100 claims per quarter , and this resulted in a backlog . the backlog was further exacerbated by staffing shortfalls . the 90-day target is just that — a target . wo and od officials understand there are several reasons why a sme review may take longer than 90 days . an official from one od said that if a sme review does surpass 90 days , the wo and od management may follow up to ensure a claim is not sitting idle and to provide additional resources to the sme if necessary and available . as of august 5 , 2015 , the wo reports that 67 percent of 7623 ( b ) claims have met this time target since october 1 , 2012 . as part of their review , smes may contact ( or debrief ) whistleblowers to clarify information submitted with the form 211 . debriefings also provide an opportunity to set expectations about communication between irs and the whistleblower and the length of the process . in 2012 and again in 2014 , the deputy commissioner for services and enforcement called for smes to debrief whistleblowers unless there is a clear reason not to do so .