examples of remedial actions to improve service readiness . a section highlighting significant changes from the previous quarter . office of the secretary of defense officials told us that they plan to sustain these changes in future quarterly readiness reports to congress . we found several areas where adding contextual information to the quarterly readiness reports , such as benchmarks or goals , and clearer linkages between reported information and readiness ratings , would provide congress with a more comprehensive and understandable report . federal internal control standards state that decision makers need complete and relevant information to manage risks . this includes providing pertinent information that is identified and distributed in an understandable form . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix 1 . section 482 of title 10 of the united states code requires dod to report quarterly to congress on military readiness . the report is due to congress not later than 45 days after the end of each calendar - year quarter ( i.e . by may 15th , august 14th , november 14th , and february 14th of each year ) . congress first mandated the report in 1996 to enhance its oversight of military readiness , requiring that dod describe each readiness problem and deficiency , the key indicators and other relevant information related to these problems and deficiencies , and planned remedial actions . dod submitted its first quarterly report in may 1996 . since that time , congress has added additional reporting requirements . specifically , in 1997 , the initial reporting requirement was expanded to require dod to include additional reporting elements in the quarterly reports . examples of these additional reporting elements include historical and projected personnel trends , training operations tempo , and equipment availability . in 2008 , an additional reporting element was added to require the inclusion of an assessment of the readiness of the national guard . for a listing of the 26 reporting elements currently required by section 482 , see table 1 . since dod provided its first quarterly readiness report in may 1996 , dod and the services have invested significant resources in upgrading the systems they use to collect and report readiness information . as a result , the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , the combatant commands , and the services have added numerous new readiness reporting capabilities such as the capacity to assess the ability of u.s. forces to meet mission requirements in specific operational plans . in addition , the services have also refined their respective service - specific metrics to enhance their ability to measure the readiness of their forces . the quarterly readiness report to congress is a classified report that includes a summary of the contents of the report and multiple classified annexes that provide the required information . the report is typically hundreds of pages long . for example , the july through september 2012 quarterly readiness report to congress totaled 443 pages and the january through march 2013 report is 497 pages long . the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness assembles and produces the quarterly report to congress .