however , we found an inconsistent review process at rrb . inquiries can be made about specific individuals or through automated data matches . the work number is used by several other federal agencies on a fee basis and is already available to rrb . in 2014 , we recommended that rrb explore options to obtain more timely earnings data to ensure that claimants are working within allowable program limits prior to being awarded benefits . rrb officials agreed with our recommendation and have told us that they will work with the office of management and budget to further define and determine rrb's needs in this area . insufficient supervisory review process: our examination of rrb's total and permanent disability claims review process uncovered gaps in internal controls such as allowing a single claims examiner to review claims and award disability benefits — in many cases without an independent review by a second party . gao's standards for internal control in the federal government states that agencies should ensure that key duties and responsibilities are divided or segregated among different people to reduce the risk of error , waste , or fraud . specifically , at the time of our review , rrb's policies and procedures allowed for discretion at the field office level regarding how complete a case file must be before forwarding it to headquarters for a determination , and these files were subject to different levels of review . for example , at the headquarters examination and determination level , rrb policy allowed for some claims to be approved without any subsequent independent review and generally allowed examiners to use their judgment to decide which cases did not require additional scrutiny . in other words , at their discretion , a single rrb claims examiner could “self - authorize” the claim . in recent years , about one - quarter to one - third of all total and permanent initial claims were approved by the same claims examiner who reviewed the application . without a second review , such claims can be problematic , such as when there is an error in judgment on the part of the claims examiner , or a failure to obtain key medical and vocational evidence . as a result of our review , we recommended that rrb revise its policy to require supervisory review and approval of all total and permanent disability cases . in response , rrb has subsequently changed its policy and officials stated that nearly all claim files are now reviewed by a second party . program quality and integrity: our 2014 review also found an insufficient commitment to quality and program integrity . we found that rrb's primary focus on quality was to ensure that claims were paid quickly and that the approved benefit amount was paid . however , rrb did not have sufficient controls to ensure that the claimant was actually eligible for benefits or that the benefit was awarded correctly — prior to the benefit being paid . in certain circumstances , rrb was able to identify improper payments after the benefit had already been paid , but this put rrb into a “pay and chase” mode where it must try and recover benefits paid to ineligible claimants .