these included the u.s . departments of education , labor , housing and urban development , and justice ; the social security administration ; and the substance abuse and mental health services administration . to determine how states and hhs fulfilled the accountability provisions of fcia , we analyzed chafee foster care independence program state plans for 49 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico for fiscal years 2001-2004 to determine each state's program goals and strategies . ( 3 ) how are these services implemented ? ( 4 ) to what extent might these programs be adapted to other locales ? ( 5 ) what are the barriers to implementation ? each program will be evaluated using similar techniques: in - person structured interviews to establish a baseline and to follow up with youth in the treatment and control groups ; a web - based survey of caseworkers ; and program site visits including semistructured interviews with administrators , staff , and youth . all youth will be interviewed shortly following referral and random assignment , and 1 year and 2 years later . as of august 2004 , all evaluation studies were in the early stages . baseline interviews with the youth had begun or were completed in three sites and the process was starting in the fourth site . many youth in the foster care system need additional services and support throughout and beyond their adolescence to make the transition to self - sufficiency . states have generally expanded their independent living programs to provide new and enhanced services to a wider age range of youth , but some states have been slower to implement the program , and foster youth across the nation may not have access to the full array of services they may need to lead independent and successful lives . while many other federal , state , and private resources exist to cover some shortfalls in service , the absence of information on resources available in local areas may continue to hinder efforts to establish needed linkages among programs . similarly , while acf provides some assistance to states , there is still a lack of awareness about available resources among caseworkers , foster parents , and youth that may further limit youths' ability to access needed services once emancipated from the foster care system . while the chafee program funding is small compared with that of other child welfare programs , effective federal oversight requires reliable information on states' implementation efforts and results . oversight is similarly hindered by a lack of standard monitoring practices across acf regional offices . while acf is developing an information system that may address some of these limitations , it may be unavailable for several years . in the meantime , additional actions to strengthen federal monitoring of state programs may serve to provide greater assurance of program accountability at the state and federal level .