b . at their own initiative , or at the request and good cause shown by another state , to take action to board and search any vessel flying their flag in their internal waters or territorial seas , or areas beyond the territorial seas of any other state , that is reasonably suspected of transporting such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern , and to seize such cargoes that are identified . c. to seriously consider providing consent under the appropriate circumstances to the boarding and searching of its own flag vessels by other states , and to the seizure of such wmd - related cargoes in such vessels that may be identified by such states . d. to take appropriate actions to ( 1 ) stop and / or search in their internal waters , territorial seas , or contiguous zones ( when declared ) vessels that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern and to seize such cargoes that are identified and ( 2 ) to enforce conditions on vessels entering or leaving their ports , internal waters , or territorial seas that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes , such as requiring that such vessels be subject to boarding , search , and seizure of such cargoes prior to entry . e. at their own initiative or upon the request and good cause shown by another state , to ( a ) require aircraft that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern and that are transiting their airspace to land for inspection and seize any such cargoes that are identified and / or ( b ) deny aircraft reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes transit rights through their airspace in advance of such flights . f. if their ports , airfields , or other facilities are used as transshipment points for shipment of such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern , to inspect vessels , aircraft , or other modes of transport reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes , and to seize such cargoes that are identified . source - gao analysis based on dod and state data . our recommendation focuses on developing a framework that links psi activities to the initiative's objective , and not just on indicators , which alone do not link the activities to the desired outcomes . although we made a written request for documentation of state's psi performance indicators in july 2011 , state did not provide documentation of its psi indicator and targets until march 2012 , after it provided its response to our draft report . we have revised our report findings to include this documentation and our assessment . upon reviewing the documentation provided , we found that the metrics state identified were not consistently listed in its bureau strategic plan as annual metrics . for example , neither the number of endorsing states nor the conclusion of shipboarding agreements were listed as metrics for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 . in addition , state set no numeric targets for its participation in psi activities for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 .