number of indications . of the 351 orphan drug marketing approvals from 2008 to 2017 , there were 252 unique drugs , because drugs can be approved for more than one orphan indication . for example , the oncology drug velcade received fda approval in 2008 as a first - line therapy for multiple myeloma , and received approval for a second indication in 2014 for treatment of mantle cell lymphoma if the patient has not received at least one prior therapy . therapeutic area . from 2008 to 2017 , 53.3 percent of orphan drug marketing approvals were in one of two therapeutic areas that were also common for granted designations: oncology ( 42.5 percent ) and hematology ( 10.8 percent ) . there were 27 different therapeutic areas overall , with 7 of those areas having 10 or more approved orphan drugs . fda's guidance and training on rare diseases includes topics related to more general drug development issues , as well as the agency's marketing approval process as it applies to orphan drugs . in general , fda's review centers — cber and cder — are responsible for establishing guidance on general rare disease drug development issues . for example , fda published draft guidance for industry in august 2015 on common issues in rare disease drug development . the guidance discusses important aspects of drug development , such as the need for an adequate understanding of the natural history of the disease and the drug's proposed mechanism of action , and the standard of evidence to establish safety and effectiveness . cber published additional draft guidance in july 2018 on rare disease drug development specific to gene therapy in order to help manufacturers consider issues such as limited study population size , safety issues , and outcomes . fda has also conducted studies to understand rare disease drug development challenges . in march 2011 , fda issued a report to congress on the strengths and weaknesses of its regulatory process with respect to rare and neglected tropical diseases . in that report , a group of expert fda officials found that its regulations allowed experienced reviewers to use flexibility and scientific judgment in determining the safety and efficacy of rare disease drugs . however , the group also noted areas for improvement , such as the need to develop training for fda reviewers and to increase communication efforts with stakeholders , including industry and advocacy organizations . one other key area the group identified was the need to analyze the agency's orphan drug marketing approvals to further understand the factors helping or hindering drug development . to do so , fda analyzed a subset of orphan drug approvals and published two studies: fda's february 2012 publication on rare disease drug approvals between 2006 and 2011 found that substantial proportions of marketing approvals were for innovative drugs , and most clinical studies were highly unique in terms of the study design , controls , and outcome measures used . fda concluded that developing defined policy and consistency around such diverse drugs and unique clinical studies would be difficult .