reporting on pepfar results . according to the guidance , these indicators are intended to demonstrate progress in the fight against hiv / aids while also promoting responsible program management . in addition , among other things , the guidance establishes a distinction between national results and pepfar direct results . the guidance defines national results as achievements of all contributors to a partner country's hiv / aids program and defines pepfar direct results as achievements of the pepfar program through its funded activities . ( see app . ii for a summary of ogac criteria for assessing pepfar direct support. ) with regard to treatment programs , the guidance instructs pepfar country teams providing direct support for treatment services to report to ogac using the pepfar direct indicators . in addition , the guidance directed these country teams , as well as pepfar country teams providing technical assistance and other support to build partner - country capacity for managing treatment programs , to report on one national indicator . table 1 summarizes these indicators . from fiscal year 2010 through 2012 , ogac reported pepfar results in terms of three primary indicators: ( 1 ) the number of people currently on treatment directly supported by pepfar ( pepfar direct number of people on treatment ) , ( 2 ) the percentages of eligible people receiving treatment in partner countries ( national treatment coverage rates ) , and ( 3 ) the percentage of adults and children known to be alive and on treatment 12 months after starting treatment ( pepfar direct treatment retention rates ) . however , two of these indicators have limitations that could affect their usefulness . regarding the first indicator , although the number of people on treatment directly supported by pepfar has increased significantly , this indicator alone does not provide complete information needed for assessing pepfar's contributions to partner countries' treatment programs . regarding the third indicator , 10 pepfar country teams reported percentages of adults and children known to be alive and on treatment 12 months after starting treatment that exceeded 80 percent . however , the treatment retention data are not always complete and have other limitations , which ogac acknowledged and is taking steps to address . in addition to these limitations , ogac lacks a common set of indicators for monitoring quality assurance efforts . although ogac indicated in 2010 that it would establish a common set of indicators to monitor the results of pepfar's efforts to improve the quality of treatment programs , it has not yet done so . responding to treatment - related requirements in the 2008 leadership act , ogac reports on the number of people currently on treatment directly supported by pepfar as a key indicator of program results . this number is calculated by determining the number of people who ever started treatment at facilities where pepfar directly supports treatment services , minus patients who died , stopped treatment , transferred out , or have unknown treatment outcomes . ( see app . ii for a summary of ogac guidance on determining whether people can be counted as receiving direct services through pepfar. ) pepfar met or exceeded annual targets for this indicator in fiscal years 2004 through 2012 .