cash transfers . in its march 2013 progress report and data released in october 2013 , usaid reported fiscal year 2012 dollar amounts and percentages of mission program funds obligated to local organizations , both including and excluding cash transfers . for all 3 fiscal years for which data are available , if cash transfers are included in the indicator definition , the overall percentage of funds obligated to local organizations increases . as of fiscal year 2012 , according to usaid data , the agency obligated about 14 percent of mission program funds , or about $1.4 billion , to local organizations , excluding cash transfers . with cash transfers included , the agency obligated more than 17 percent , or about $1.7 billion in fiscal year 2012 . qualifying trust funds . according to usaid officials , after publication of the march 2013 progress report , usaid determined that contributions to certain trust funds made by two missions met the the addition of these qualifying agency's definition of local funding . trust funds increases the agency - wide percentage of local funding for fiscal year 2012 from about 14 percent to about 21 percent . according to usaid officials , the agency plans to include these qualifying trust fund contributions in its future tracking and reporting of local mission program funding because they meet the agency's definition of local funding . cash transfers and qualifying trust funds . when both cash transfers and all qualifying trust funds are included in the indicator definition , the agency - wide percentage of local funding rises to about 24 percent in fiscal year 2012 . the october 2013 data published by usaid on its website reflect the agency's determination that about $29 million and $671 million in trust fund contributions made by usaid missions in bangladesh and afghanistan , respectively , met the definition of local funding . meet the local solutions definition of local funding and determine whether to include it . example of evaluations that are relevant for the local solutions initiative , usaid officials stated that headquarters will undertake at least one multicountry evaluation of long - term effects of basic education programs in fiscal year 2014 , and some of those programs may have used local partners for implementation . as of april 2014 , the agency's website allows users to search for evaluations by document type ( eg , evaluation summary or program evaluation guide ) , by sector ( eg , health , education , democracy and governance ) , and by year , among other things . however , the online registry of evaluations does not provide users with a means to search for evaluations of programs or projects implemented by local organizations . without a means to track evaluations of programs or projects that use a local solutions approach , usaid headquarters officials and stakeholders are not able to easily obtain evidence needed to demonstrate local solutions' progress in achieving usaid's local solutions goals related to country capacity , country ownership , and program sustainability . according to usaid , the agency's 2013 progress report constitutes a local solutions evaluation plan ; however , the report does not include plans for evaluating programs or projects implemented through local organizations .