buprenorphine . this medication eliminates opioid withdrawal symptoms , including drug cravings , and it may do so without producing the euphoria or dangerous side effects of other opioids . it can be used for detoxification and maintenance therapy . buprenorphine is also a controlled substance , and when used to treat opioid use disorder , may be administered or dispensed within an opioid treatment program , or prescribed or dispensed by a qualifying provider who has received a waiver to do so . providers who receive this waiver are limited in the number of patients they may treat for opioid use disorder . in addition to medication - assisted treatment , vha has initiatives aimed at preventing opioid - related overdose deaths . for example , vha's opioid overdose education and naloxone distribution program includes education and training regarding opioid overdose prevention as well as naloxone distribution . naloxone is a medication that can reverse opioid overdoses . veterans may receive services from community providers via local contracts or community care . for local contracts , individual va medical centers establish contracts with local community providers . for example , a va medical center may develop a contract with a community residential rehabilitation treatment program provider to set aside a number of beds specifically for veterans . for community care , veterans may be eligible if , for example , vha does not offer the care or service the veteran requires or vha cannot provide the care or services consistent with its access standards . in general , community care services must be authorized in advance of when veterans access the care . prior to june 6 , 2019 , eligible veterans could receive community care via one of multiple vha community care programs . in 2018 , the va mission act required va to implement a permanent community care program that consolidated several community care programs . on june 6 , 2019 , the consolidated community care program , the veterans community care program , went into effect . among the 518,570 veterans who received sud services in fiscal year 2018 , vha provided specialty sud services to 152,482 veterans in fiscal year 2018 . this number has increased slightly but remained relatively unchanged since fiscal year 2014 , as shown in table 1 below . these veterans received care in vha's health care systems — that is , in va medical centers or in one of the medical centers' affiliated outpatient clinics and other medical facilities . during the same time period , vha expenditures for these specialty sud services increased from $552 million in fiscal year 2014 to $601 million in fiscal year 2018 . total specialty sud expenditures per capita increased from $3,691 to $3,941 from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . adjusted for inflation , however , per capita expenditures remained relatively unchanged between fiscal years 2014 and 2018 . our analysis of vha data shows that veterans received specialty sud services from vha's health care systems in multiple settings from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 , with most veterans receiving these services in outpatient settings . veterans may receive specialty sud services across multiple settings within a year .