these are positive steps . dod also stated it will adjudicate its eri - funded force requirements through its global force management process , adding that it will continue to resource oco funds for eri requirements until there is a sufficient increase in dod's base budget to do so . however , we continue to believe , as noted in our report , that dod could improve its planning for posture initiatives funded under eri , whether or not they are funded through oco , by using dod's established posture planning processes . although dod's global force management process directly affects overseas military posture in the near term , this process is not designed to evaluate long - term posture priorities . if dod does not prioritize the forces and infrastructure projects funded under eri against those funded using the military services' base budgets , it will continue to lack an understanding of the relative importance of the posture initiatives funded under eri . without such an understanding , dod increases the risk that the services will need to make critical and potentially costly decisions without a clear idea of which posture initiatives are most critical to the department . dod partially concurred with our second recommendation that eucom and the military services develop estimates for future sustainment costs and plan for these costs in future budgets . in its comments , dod stated that its components will continue to estimate the sustainment costs for prepositioned stocks and other infrastructure projects during dod's annual program and budget review process . dod also commented that without additional topline base budget funding , some portion of the associated sustainment costs will need to be financed with oco funds . however , as we noted in our report , neither the army nor the air force has fully estimated these potentially significant future costs , nor had either service incorporated them into their future budgets . using oco funds would mark a departure from dod leadership's emphasis that the services would need to fund eri posture sustainment costs through their respective base budgets . additionally , not developing robust estimates for sustaining these initiatives could increase long - term fiscal risk for the department if dod shifts more eri - associated enduring costs into its oco budget . in the absence of robust cost estimates and deliberate planning to address those costs in future budgets , dod will continue to be limited in its ability to evaluate the affordability of posture initiatives funded under eri , and the military services may not plan adequate funding to sustain posture investments in europe . dod partially concurred with our third recommendation , to provide congress with estimates of the future costs for posture initiatives funded under eri and information on any underlying assumptions , such as those pertaining to the level of host nation support and burden sharing . in its comments , dod stated that it does not currently prepare a formal 5-year future years defense program for oco - related costs . moreover , dod commented that it factors in host nation support and burden sharing when preparing budget estimates for congress .