other factors . legislative requirements that mandate or limit a transit agency from using a certain level of contracting , is another reason that can influence certain agencies' decisions to contract out service . however , state laws were not a leading factor in contracting decision - making , according to our survey respondents and seven transit agency for example , the state of colorado limits officials that we interviewed.the amount of contracting used by the denver regional transit district ( denver , colorado ) to 58 percent . according to agency officials whom we interviewed , the cap on contracting has not had much impact on the agency's contracted services , which are currently about 56 percent of their bus and ada paratransit operations . at the federal level , as described previously , when existing transit service is contracted out , section 13 ( c ) protections may be triggered , including assurances of employment and priority of reemployment . to prepare the questionnaire , we pretested potential questions with transit agencies of different sizes and that operate all of the modes to ensure that ( 1 ) the questions and possible responses were clear and thorough , ( 2 ) terminology was used correctly , ( 3 ) questions did not place an undue burden on the respondents , ( 4 ) the information was feasible to obtain , and ( 5 ) the questionnaire was comprehensive and unbiased . on the basis of feedback from the four pretests we conducted , we made changes to the content and format of some survey questions . the results of our survey can be found at gao - 13-824sp . to identify transit agencies to survey , we conducted interviews with the appropriate fta officials responsible for the national transit database to learn about information collected from transit agencies regarding transit contracting and obtain contact information . we contacted all of the transit agencies in advance , by e - mail , to ensure that we had identified the correct respondents and to request their completion of the questionnaire . after the survey had been available for 1 week , and again after 2 and 4 weeks , we used e - mail and telephone calls to contact transit agencies who had not completed their questionnaires . using these procedures , we received responses from 463 transit agencies for a response rate of 73 percent . the results of our survey are not generalizeable to all transit agencies . estimates and responses to survey questions in this report refer only to the views of the respondents . the survey was a census survey , and we did not try to extrapolate the findings to the agencies that chose not to respond . because this was not a sample survey , there are no sampling errors . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted , in the sources of information that are available to respondents , or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results .