ambassador in that country . once proposed activities have been identified by the offices of security of cooperation , usaraf is responsible for further developing the concepts for those activities in coordination with the offices of security cooperation , identifying resources and authorities to support the activities , and validating the proposed activities in consideration of the country - level objectives and in coordination with africom . usaraf has established a working group and review boards to facilitate this process , including a security cooperation working group to guide and coordinate concept development , and synchronization , resourcing and final decision boards that collectively review and determine whether to approve and move forward with planning an activity . usaraf officials said that , in addition to these mechanisms , component officials responsible for planning activities are consistently engaged in informal conversations with the offices of security cooperation regarding the proposed activities . security cooperation activities that are identified and validated through these processes are tasked to the brigades and other executing units on both annual and emergent bases . usaraf provides an annual baseline projection of validated security cooperation activities for the coming fiscal year — via africom and army forces command — to the brigades to aid emergent security cooperation activities may also in their preparation.be generated for execution in the same fiscal year and are tasked to the brigades on an individual basis as they are approved or through quarterly updates to usaraf's annual projection . for example , the united states is in the process of equipping one country with mine resistant ambush protected vehicles to support its deployments to somalia , but late changes to the location where the vehicles are being shipped was expected to result in potential emergent requirements for the brigades , to provide training to the host nation on those vehicles . according to usaraf planning documents and officials , there are an increasing number of emergent activities , which the brigades are being used to support . usaraf officials told us that emergent activities accounted for 51 percent of 2nd brigade , 1st infantry division's activities . africom and usaraf officials attributed the number of emergent activities in africa to a dynamic planning environment with security threats and opportunities that change quickly and to the uncertainty of funding , among other factors . usaraf officials told us that as a result of this environment , emergent activities may develop with limited warning , challenging the command's planning . furthermore , planned activities are frequently cancelled or delayed as a result of the dynamic environment . for example , the 4th brigade , 1st armored division was tasked to support 188 baseline and emergent activities as of may 2015 according to brigade documents . of the 188 activities that the brigade was tasked with , 74 have been canceled and 26 placed on hold ; usaraf officials said these cancellations and delays are due mostly to changing conditions on the ground that are driven by the host nation . while usaraf and the offices of security cooperation are responsible for supporting the brigades' preparation for the individual activities , officials from each brigade also told us that the information they receive for upcoming security cooperation activities is often untimely or incomplete .