inc . in addition to the contact named above , clarita mrena ( assistant director ) , kate blumenreich ( analyst - in - charge ) , ben bolitzer , and meredith moore made significant contributions to all phases of the work . also contributing to this report were james bennett , david chrisinger , kathy leslie , james rebbe , walter vance , and laura yahn . disclosure policies . other countries , such as australia and canada , have adopted “comply or explain” disclosure arrangements . under such arrangements , if companies choose not to implement or comply with certain recommendations or government - suggested approaches related to board diversity — such as establishing a diversity policy — they must disclose why . voluntary approaches . the united kingdom has aimed to increase the representation of female directors through a voluntary , target - based approach rather than through the use of government - mandated interventions . as part of this effort , the government worked with leading companies , investors , and search firms to encourage the adoption of a set of recommendations to increase representation of women on boards . these recommendations included , for example , that certain companies achieve a minimum of 25 percent women on boards by 2015 and publicly disclose the proportion of women on the company's board , management , and workforce . in addition , executive search firms were encouraged to draw up a voluntary code to address gender diversity and best practices covering relevant search criteria for board directors . selected search firms in the united kingdom have entered into a voluntary code of conduct to address gender diversity on boards in their search processes , including trying to ensure that at least 30 percent of proposed candidates are women . based on our analysis , we found that women's representation on boards of companies in the s&p 1500 has increased steadily over the past 17 years , from about 8 percent in 1997 to about 16 percent in 2014 . as figure 2 illustrates , part of what is driving this increase is the rise in women's representation among new board directors — directors who joined the board each year . while the number of female board directors among s&p 1500 companies has been increasing , particularly in recent years , we estimated that it will likely take a considerable amount of time to achieve greater gender balance . when we projected the representation of women on boards into the future assuming that women join boards in equal proportion to men — a proportion more than twice what it currently is — we estimated it could take about 10 years from 2014 for women to comprise 30 percent of board directors and more than 40 years for the representation of women on boards to match that of men ( see fig . appendix i contains more information about this projection . even if every future board vacancy were filled by a woman , we estimated that it would take until 2024 for women to approach parity with men in the boardroom . using 2014 data , we also found that women's representation on boards differed by company size and industry ( see fig .