documentation . processes for recording information produced during the system development life cycle , which includes identifying documents to be produced ; identifying the format , content , and presentation items for each document ; and developing a process for reviewing and approving each document . configuration management . processes to establish and maintain the integrity of work products through the system development life cycle , including developing a configuration management plan , identifying work products to be maintained and controlled , establishing a repository to maintain and control them , evaluating and approving changes to the work products , accounting for changes to the products , and managing the release and delivery of products . the natural environment that the system must withstand during transportation , storage , and operation , including ( 1 ) temperature , ( 2 ) humidity , ( 3 ) rain , and ( 4 ) motion / shock . 1990 analysis: requirements identified for temperature , humidity , rain , transit drop , and vibration . any commercial standards that must be used in the system's development . 1990 analysis: vendors are instructed to design equipment in accordance with best commercial and industrial practice ; software is to be designed in a modular fashion , preferably using a high - level programming language . the system's physical characteristics , including size , weight , color , nameplates , markings of parts and serial / lot numbers , transportability , and parts interchangeability . 1990 analysis: all requirements identified . requirements for preventing or minimizing unintended hazards to personnel , property , and the physical environment . 1990 analysis: all systems shall be designed to meet the requirements of the occupational safety and health administration requirements for who will use or support the system , such as number of workstations and built - in help / training features . 1990 analysis: vendors instructed to include information on number of personnel and skill level required to maintain the voting system . requirements for training devices and materials to be included with the system . 1990 analysis: vendors instructed to document information required for system use and operator training , and orientation and training of poll workers , user maintenance technicians , and vendor personnel . requirements for system maintenance , software support , and system transportation . 1990 analysis: vendors instructed to document information required in these three areas . yes draft standards satisfied ? definition / analysis the process of recording information produced during the life - cycle process . describes and records information about a product , the processes used to develop the product , and provides a history of what happened during the development and maintenance of the product . includes ( 1 ) identification of documents to be produced and delivered to customer or tester , ( 2 ) identification of format , content , and presentation items for each document , and ( 3 ) review and approval process for each document . 1990 analysis: requirements identify products to be produced , including the content and format of the documents . review and approval process not specified .