pub . 112-239 , ยง 224 ( e ) , ยง 231 ( e ) , ยง 229 ( c ) , and ยง 228 ( c ) . for our assessments of dod's reports , see gao , missile defense: precision tracking space system evaluation of alternatives , gao - 13-747r ( washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2013 ) and regional missile defense: dod's report provided limited information ; assessment of acquisition risks is optimistic , gao - 14-248r ( washington , d.c.: mar . at the time of publication of this report , our work on dod's reports on the ground - based midcourse defense system's test plan and homeland defense is ongoing . officials from the aegis bmd sm - 3 block ib , aegis ashore , and aegis modernized weapon system software program offices . in huntsville , we interviewed program officials for bmds sensors , c2bmc , gmd , and thaad as well as officials in mda's acquisition and cost directorates . we also visited several contractor facilities that were working on programs covered in our review . these facilities were located in huntsville and courtland , alabama as well as tucson and chandler , arizona . in huntsville , we discussed the manufacturing of the aegis bmd sm - 3 block ib interceptor with raytheon officials and met with gmd's prime contractor , boeing , to discuss progress in resolving development challenges and their plans to deliver additional interceptors . in courtland , we met with officials from lockheed martin to discuss the production of the extended medium - range ballistic missile target , which was used in flight test operational 01 on september 10 , 2013 . in tucson and chandler , arizona , we met with gmd's subcontractors raytheon and orbital to discuss their progress in resolving development challenges with the interceptor , flight testing , and future development efforts . we also interviewed officials from various testing agencies located in arlington , virginia and huntsville , alabama . in arlington , we met with officials from dod's director , operational test and evaluation , as well as dod's director of developmental test and evaluation , to discuss mda's test plans and results from recent tests . lastly , in huntsville , we spoke with officials from the bmds operational test agency to discuss mda's performance assessment . we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to april 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , david best , assistant director ; aryn ehlow ; meredith allen kimmett ; wiktor niewiadomski ; kenneth e. patton ; john h. pendleton ; karen richey ; steven stern ; roxanna sun , robert swierczek ; brian tittle ; hai v. tran ; and alyssa weir made key contributions to this report .