to do this , it is necessary to: 1 . assess the results of that analysis ; 7 . take action based on those results ; and 8 . monitor the effectiveness of actions taken to achieve the designated performance goals . this strategic approach to homeland security includes identifying threats and managing risks , aligning resources to address them , and assessing progress in preparing for those threats and risks . at the same time , it is important to recognize that the equipment , skills , and training required to prepare for and respond to identified terrorist threats and risks may be applicable to non - terrorist risks as well . for example , the equipment , skills , and training required to respond effectively to a discharge of lethal chlorine gas from a rail car is much the same whether the cause of the discharge is an accidental derailment or a terrorist act . as we reported in may 2004 , in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , the departments of homeland security , justice , and health and human services awarded about $340 million through 16 first - responder grants to ncr jurisdictions to enhance regional emergency preparedness . oncrc was created by the homeland security act . according to ncr emergency management officials we contacted during the time of our previous reviews , oncrc could play a potentially important role in assisting them to implement a coordinated , well planned effort in using federal resources to improve the region's preparedness . as we stated in the past , meeting the office's statutory mandate would fulfill those key responsibilities . the homeland security act established oncrc within dhs to oversee and coordinate federal programs for , and relationships with federal , state , local , and regional authorities in the ncr . the oncrc's responsibilities are primarily ones of coordination , assessment , and advocacy . with regard to coordination , the oncrc was mandated to: coordinate the activities of dhs relating to the ncr , including cooperation with the dhs' office for state and local government coordination ; coordinate with federal agencies in the ncr on terrorism preparedness to ensure adequate planning , information sharing , training , and execution of the federal role in domestic preparedness activities ; coordinate with federal , state , local , and regional agencies and the private sector in ncr on terrorism preparedness to ensure adequate planning , information sharing , training , and execution of domestic preparedness activities among these agencies and entities ; serve as a liaison between the federal government and state , local , and regional authorities , and private sector entities in the ncr to facilitate access to federal grants and other programs .