open . recommendation as omb continues to make strides to address issues related to intragovernmental transactions , the director of omb should direct the controller of omb to develop policies and procedures that document how omb will enforce the business rules provided in omb memorandum m - 07-03 , business rules for intragovernmental transactions . per treasury and omb treasury has taken the lead role for resolving intragovernmental disputes and major differences between trading partners . in fiscal year 2011 , treasury published the updated intragovernmental business rules , which include dispute resolution procedures for trading partner agencies to follow . treasury's dispute resolution process includes a new intragovernmental dispute resolution request form to be certified by federal entity chief financial officers ( cfo ) . treasury as the enforcer of the updated business rules , working with omb as necessary , will work with agencies , to help ensure the effectiveness of the dispute resolution process during each fiscal year and will document the resolutions . per gao closed . as omb continues to make strides to address issues related to intragovernmental transactions , the director of omb should direct the controller of omb to require that significant differences noted between business partners be resolved and the resolution be documented . see the status for recommendation no . closed . recommendation the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to design procedures that will account for the difference in intragovernmental assets and liabilities throughout the compilation process by means of formal consolidating and elimination accounting entries . per treasury and omb treasury has designed and implemented formal consolidating and eliminating procedures with regard to intragovernmental assets and liabilities , but some issues remain . during fiscal year 2012 , treasury is revising existing guidance and policies , and developing new guidance and policies as needed , for these remaining issues . upon implementation of the revised guidance and policies by the agencies , treasury's consolidation and elimination accounting entries should effectively account for the difference in intragovernmental assets and liabilities . final resolution is contingent on fully resolving material intragovernmental differences . see the status for recommendation no . per gao open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to develop solutions for intragovernmental activity and balance issues relating to federal agencies' accounting , reconciling , and reporting in areas other than those omb now requires be reconciled , primarily areas relating to appropriations . see the status for recommendation no . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to reconcile the change in intragovernmental assets and liabilities for the fiscal year , including the amount and nature of all changes in intragovernmental assets or liabilities not attributable to cost and revenue activity recognized during the fiscal year . examples of these differences would include capitalized purchases , such as inventory or equipment , and deferred revenue . treasury's consolidating procedures request information from the agencies related to asset capitalization and agency advances or deferred revenue to assist in ensuring the proper reporting of this activity .