dod . for example , in questionnaire responses provided to us by the army , officials stated that there are no controls separate from their data collection system to ensure accuracy and that errors sometimes occur , such as data indicating negative customer wait times ( times of less than 0 days ) . the navy and air force responded that they did have controls separate from their data - collection systems . in addition , officials we spoke with from transcom , the services , and several other dod components told us of a number of potential inaccuracies in the data transcom uses to evaluate distribution performance . dod officials said that in some cases units in combat zones delay entering records of new deliveries because personnel responsible for this task have other , higher - priority duties . specifically , on forward operating bases , dod officials stated that the priority was to complete the mission rather than completing paperwork as soon as a delivery is made . in these cases , the delivery data may be inaccurate because the recorded delivery date may be after the actual delivery was made . however , dod officials said that delays in logging deliveries also occur in noncombat areas . sometimes the logging of deliveries is delayed because the personnel responsible for this task are not present at the time of the deliveries . the joint logistics board is cochaired by the assistant secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness and the joint staff director of logistics , and has senior - level participants from the military services , combatant commands , and dla . in an effort to reduce transportation costs to improve distribution , dla began , in fiscal year 2014 , implementation of phase 1 of its distribution effectiveness effort , formerly known as the strategic network optimization project , in collaboration with the military services and transcom . the project's purpose is to optimize the global distribution network supporting the warfighter . appendix i provides further information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to february 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod defines its logistics mission , including supply chain management , as supporting the projection and sustainment of a ready , capable force through globally responsive , operationally precise , and cost - effective joint logistics support for america's warfighters . supply chain management is the operation of a continuous and comprehensive logistics process , from initial customer order for materiel or services to the ultimate satisfaction of the customer's requirements . according to dod , its goal is to have an effective and efficient supply chain , and the department's current improvement efforts are aimed at improving supply chain processes , synchronizing the supply chain from end to end , and adopting challenging but achievable standards for each element of the supply chain .