ii ) . in monitoring nations' progress in implementing the recommendations , fatf collaborates with other multilateral organizations , particularly the fatf - style regional bodies that represent nations in seven geographic areas . these regional groups are to help nations in the region to implement the international standards developed by fatf . also , these standards have been recognized and endorsed by the world bank and imf for use in conducting evaluations and assessments of nations' progress in implementing measures to counter money laundering and terrorist financing . to be compliant with fatf recommendations , a nation must , among other measures , establish an effective fiu . what actions is fincen taking to maximize its performance as a global partner in combating money laundering and terrorist financing ? to address these questions , we interviewed responsible officials at and analyzed relevant documentation obtained from the departments of justice , state , and the treasury and applicable components . also , in further reference to promoting international cooperation , we focused on obtaining information about treasury's role and activities regarding multilateral organizations — particularly the financial action task force on money laundering ( fatf ) , an intergovernmental entity that has developed international standards for combating money laundering and terrorist financing , and the various fatf - style regional bodies that implement the standards . we obtained information about fincen's participation in the egmont group , the association of fius worldwide , whose purpose is to facilitate transnational cooperation and information sharing to combat money laundering and terrorist financing . regarding statistical information that we obtained from fincen — such as the number of requests for assistance submitted by foreign fius to fincen — we discussed the sources of the data with fincen officials and worked with them to resolve any discrepancies . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review . we conducted our work from may 2005 through march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i presents more details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . in an international context , the treasury department is the united states' counterpart to other nations' ministries of finance . the department's responsibilities , among other things , include safeguarding the u.s. financial system from abuse by money launderers , terrorists , and other criminals . over the years , in carrying out this responsibility , the department has established relationships with finance ministries , central banks , and other financial institutions in nations around the world as well as with multilateral organizations such as fatf , the fatf - style regional bodies , the international monetary fund ( imf ) , and the world bank . fatf is an intergovernmental entity whose purpose is to establish international standards and to develop and promote policies for combating money laundering and terrorist financing . at its formation in 1989 by the united states and other industrialized nations , fatf's original focus was to establish anti - money - laundering standards and monitor the progress of nations in meeting the standards . in 1990 , fatf issued its “forty recommendations on money laundering” to promote the adoption and implementation of anti - money - laundering measures .