is not more precise than acs . to address the concern that acs data do not provide sufficiently precise estimates of lmi for many nonentitlement communities , an alternative data source would need to be considered reliable for small geographic areas . however , census bureau officials said that acs is the nation's largest household survey that includes income information , and other census bureau surveys that include income information ( eg , survey of income and program participation , current population survey ) have smaller sample sizes than acs , which would be associated with less certainty about the reliability of the data . administrative data , such as those on program participation , would not have limitations related to sample size that would affect their preciseness , but they would face at least one of the other previously noted challenges , such as not allowing the community to fully determine if it is lmi . hud officials said that in circumstances where a nonentitlement community disagreed with what acs showed for their lmi percentage , hud would consider allowing states to use an alternative data source beyond an income survey . however , they noted that such a provision would need to be fairly and consistently applied within the state . hud officials said that they have not received inquiries from states about using alternative data sources to demonstrate lmi status . as a result , hud has not developed formal guidance on accepting alternative data sources and is still determining how any such requests should be evaluated . in addition , in july 2015 , the census bureau announced a plan to evaluate the availability and sustainability of using external data sources , such as social security administration and internal revenue service data , to supplement income information collected by acs , which they said could improve the data . according to the research plan , the census bureau expects to make specific recommendations before march 2017 . is not available at small geographic levels . because nonentitlement communities are small communities , an alternative data source would need to be available at a sufficiently small geographic level . specifically , the current lmi summary data are available for census block groups and places . however , many other sources of income data or related proxies do not have data available at these levels . for example , census bureau officials said this would be the case for census surveys other than acs . they noted that saipe income data , for example , are available at the county level , which would likely be too large for many nonentitlement cdbg projects . other data sources , including snap participation rates and bureau of economic analysis per capita income data , are also only available at the county level . census bureau officials noted that it may be possible to use survey and administrative data to create estimates of income levels for small areas using statistical models . they noted that saipe is based on such models , which can estimate income levels for a specific geographic level based on other characteristics , even if there is no specific income data point for that area .