the same is true for opm . until 2012 , opm annually reviewed and provided feedback on nmb's human capital management report . however , beginning in 2013 , opm officials told us that opm no longer requires small agencies to submit their human capital management reports for review . opm last audited nmb's human capital program in 2007 . opm followed up with nmb and , as of 2008 , considered that evaluation closed . it has no plans for future evaluations . however , opm surveys nmb's employees as part of its federal employee viewpoint survey of federal agencies , which captures nmb employees' views of the agency's strengths and challenges . although nmb contracts for annual financial statement audits and rotating internal control reviews of program and management areas , the agency does not have continual , internal mechanisms in place to monitor and review its operations and programs , such as an audit committee or internal audit function as recommended by internal control standards . in addition , top nmb management officials do not take operational responsibility for addressing the findings of the independent auditors . as a result , problems identified in those auditors' reviews of program and management areas may not be revisited for 5 or more years , when that topic again comes up for review . nmb does not have a statutory inspector general ( ig ) to fill this oversight role . in comparison , two other federal agencies with similar missions , the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) and the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) , have statutory igs . nmb's independent auditors said they can only perform the reviews nmb hires them to do . in contrast , an ig can target any area of an agency's operations for an audit , inspection , or investigation . the house version of the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 , h.r . 658 , contained a provision that would have authorized the ig of the department of transportation to review nmb operations , issue findings and recommendations to address any identified problems , and keep the chairman of the nmb board and congress informed on agency efforts to address them . for example , it now performs annual checks to identify cases the parties no longer want heard and remove them from the list of pending work . in addition , nmb has been exploring using alternatives to arbitration to resolve minor disputes , such as grievance mediation . in fiscal years 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 , congress provided nmb with supplemental appropriations ( $657,000 , $560,000 , and $29,000 , respectively ) to reduce the arbitration backlog . by the beginning of fiscal year 2013 , nmb had reduced the number of pending cases to 2,084 . to perform our work , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations and key nmb documents , such as the agency's most recent strategic plan and annual report , policies and procedures for nmb's three program areas ( mediation , arbitration , and representation ) , board member briefing book , and delegation orders for duties of board and staff for fiscal years 1990 through 2013 .