these recommendations have not yet been implemented . in an april 2015 report , the partnership for public service noted a continuing need for the government to develop an understanding of the size and skills of the current cybersecurity workforce ; project the government's future cybersecurity human capital needs ; assess qualitative and quantitative gaps between the current workforce and the workforce needed to address future challenges ; and develop strategies , as well as program and policy goals , designed to close those gaps . the partnership attributed these challenges to the lack of a government - wide master cybersecurity workforce strategy , leaving agencies to operate largely on their own under a haphazard system . in november 2016 , we reported that five selected agencies had made mixed progress in assessing their it skill gaps . these agencies had started focusing on identifying cybersecurity staffing gaps , but more work remained in assessing competency gaps and in broadening the focus to include the entire it community . for example , four of the five agencies had not demonstrated an established it workforce planning process , which would assist them in identifying and addressing skill gaps . in several cases , these shortcomings were due to a lack of comprehensive policies and procedures for assessing workforce needs . we recommended that the agencies take steps to fully implement it workforce planning practices . the agencies agreed or partially agreed with our recommendations ; however , the recommendations have not yet been implemented . an effective hiring process meets the needs of agencies and managers by filling positions with quality employees through the use of a timely , efficient , and transparent process . to recruit and retain personnel with the critical skills needed to accomplish their missions , federal agencies can offer incentives , such as recruitment , relocation , and retention incentive payments ; student loan repayments ; annual leave enhancements ; and scholarships . agencies can also use training and development opportunities as an incentive to help recruit and retain employees . however , we and others have found that agencies have faced persistent challenges in recruiting and retaining well - qualified cybersecurity talent: in november 2011 , we reported that the quality of cybersecurity training and development programs varied significantly across the eight agencies in our review . additionally , most of the eight agencies in our review said they used some incentives to support their cybersecurity workforce ; however , they either had not evaluated or had difficulty evaluating whether incentives effectively support hiring and retaining highly skilled personnel in hard - to - fill positions . we also found that , although opm had planned to develop guidance and tools to assist agencies in the administration and oversight of their incentive programs , it had not yet done so . to address this shortcoming , we recommended that opm finalize and issue guidance to agencies on how to track the use and effectiveness of incentives for hard - to - fill positions , including cybersecurity positions ; opm has since implemented this recommendation . in august 2016 , we reported the results of our review of the current authorities of agency chief information security officers ( ciso ) .