these examples are listed in tables 1 and 2 . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . our findings are discussed in detail in a report that we are releasing today . my statement will focus on ( 1 ) the types of professional and management support services for which dhs has contracted and the circumstances that drove its contracting decisions , and ( 2 ) dhs's consideration and management of risk when contracting for such services . our findings are based on a review of 117 judgmentally selected statements of work for professional and management support services for the coast guard , the office of procurement operations ( opo ) , and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) from fiscal year 2005 . we selected nine of the 117 statements as case studies and examined them in detail . these nine were spread among the three components and represented a variety of services and dollar values among the three components . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . inherently governmental functions require discretion in applying government authority or value judgments in making decisions for the government ; as such , they should be performed by government employees — not private contractors . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) provides 20 examples of functions considered to be , or to be treated as inherently governmental ( see appendix i ) , including determining agency policy and priorities for budget requests , directing and controlling intelligence operations , approving contractual requirements , and selecting individuals for government employment . the closer contractor services come to supporting inherently governmental functions , the greater the risk of their influencing the government's control over and accountability for decisions that may be based , in part , on contractor work . table 1 provides examples of the range of services contractors provide to the federal government — from basic activities , such as custodial and landscaping , to more complex professional and management support services — and their relative risk of influencing government decision making . the potential for the loss of government management control and accountability for decisions is a long - standing governmentwide concern . for example , in 1981 , we found that the level of contractor involvement in management functions at the departments of energy and defense was so extensive that the agencies' ability to develop options other than those proposed by the contractors was limited . more recently , in 2006 , government , industry , and academic participants in gao's forum on federal acquisition challenges and opportunities and the congressionally mandated acquisition advisory panel noted how an increasing reliance on contractors to perform services for core government activities challenges the capacity of federal officials to supervise and evaluate the performance of these activities . far and office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) guidance state that services that tend to affect government decision - making , support or influence policy development , or affect program management are susceptible to abuse and require a greater level of scrutiny and an enhanced degree of management oversight .