these steps have reduced the number of open in - bond transactions . cbp also modified the development plans for its automated commercial environment system ( ace ) to ensure that ace provides adequate in - bond tracking and reporting capabilities . cbp also developed proposed regulatory changes that are expected to address certain weaknesses with in - bond regulation , by shortening the time period during which in - bond shipments can transit the country and requiring importers to notify cbp if their shipment plans change . as of august 2008 , these proposed changes were being reviewed within cbp . to the extent that these changes address problems with the in - bond system , they will also address one of the ways in which textiles and other goods might illegally enter the united states or enter without paying the appropriate duties . in addition to needed improvements on specific programs , we also found that cbp had to find a way to better balance security and important trade functions such as revenue collection . cbp adopted our recommendation to improve the timeliness of this follow - up . we also found that information from overseas customs attaché offices and cooperative efforts by foreign governments can provide important information for port inspections . since the time of our report , cbp has increased the number of attaches in foreign ports to 20 in 2009 . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cbp is the agency primarily responsible for border enforcement , given its authority to detain and examine shipments and seize goods that violate u.s. law . these illegal goods could include textiles and apparel that are illegally entering the u.s. , but could also include goods that violate u.s. laws related to intellectual property , illegal drugs , or product safety . the nine specific revenue function positions congress required cbp to maintain were import specialists ; entry specialists ; drawback specialists ; national import specialists ; fines , penalties , and forfeiture specialists ; attorneys of the office of regulations and rulings ; customs auditors ; international trade specialists ; and financial systems specialists . the act also mandated that cbp maintain , at a minimum , the levels of support staff associated with customs revenue positions . associated support staff provide a variety of management , technical , and administrative support functions . cbp's priority mission is keeping terrorists and their weapons out of the u.s. cbp is also responsible for enforcing immigration and other border related laws and regulations . two cbp offices are central to carrying out policies and procedures related to enforcement efforts at the u.s. border: office of field operations – this office houses cbp's border operations and is comprised of 20 field offices under which are cbp's more than 300 ports of entry . with more than 20,000 cbp officers , the office is responsible for carrying out cbp's cargo and passenger - processing activities related to security , trade , immigration , and agricultural inspection . third , in reviewing the in - bond system , we also found that cbp had failed to perform basic analyses of available information .