benefits . in that capacity , the plans and sponsors have a responsibility to help ensure medicare program integrity , and cms must oversee their efforts to help ensure proper payments . the medicare integrity group , also located within cms's center for program integrity , is responsible for the medicare integrity program . however , other cms components , such as the office of financial management and the center for medicare , also share significant responsibilities for overseeing activities to ensure the integrity of the program . our testimony today focuses on the progress cms has made and important steps still to be taken to better assure the integrity of the medicaid and medicare programs . we will focus on four key strategies and recommendations designed to facilitate them that were identified in our prior work and that can help reduce improper payments: strengthening provider enrollment standards and procedures to help reduce the risk of enrolling entities intent on defrauding the program ; improving prepayment controls , to ensure that claims are paid correctly the first time ; improving postpayment claims review and recovery of improper payments to reduce the likelihood of and recoup overpayments ; and developing a robust process for tackling identified vulnerabilities in order to address risks that lead to improper payments . this testimony is largely based on products that were issued from april 2004 through may 2012.strengthen provider enrollment standards and procedures and improve prepayment and postpayment claims review for medicaid , we analyzed cms's comprehensive reviews of state program integrity activities and its audits of state medicaid providers . this additional work was performed in may 2012 . we also received updated information from cms in may 2012 on its actions related to the laws , regulations , guidance , and open recommendations that we discuss in this statement . we shared the facts contained in this statement with cms and have incorporated their comments as appropriate . our work was conducted in accordance with in addition , to assess cms and state efforts to generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 1996 , congress has taken important steps to increase program integrity funding and oversight , including the establishment of both the medicaid and medicare integrity programs . table 1 summarizes several key congressional actions . cms and the states are continuing to strengthen provider enrollment standards and procedures , as well as developing adequate controls to detect improper claims before they are paid . while cms has made progress in collaborating more closely with states on federal postpayment claims reviews by shifting the focus to state - identified targets , it is too early to assess the potential for medicaid recovery audit contractors ( rac ) to avoid duplicating efforts of ongoing state and federal provider audits . finally , the agency has not established a robust process for incorporating rac - identified vulnerabilities in state corrective action plans .