and the implementation of the framework against industry best practices . details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the focus of these reviews is to identify overlaps and redundancies in existing investments , and to identify gaps in existing capabilities . according to the deputy cio , these portfolio reviews represent a new way of operating for the components , as they were not used to looking at functions across the department , only portfolios within their respective components . according to the cio , as the portfolio governance boards are established , they are expected to take over the role of reviewing these portfolios . program reviews: in fiscal year 2011 , the cio's office performed program health assessment reviews of 47 it programs , primarily focusing on those programs with poor performance ratings or determined to be highly critical or visible by the cio . the department is also responsible for ensuring that the nation's borders are safe and secure , welcoming lawful immigrants and visitors , and promoting the free flow of commerce . created in 2002 , dhs assumed control of about 209,000 civilian and military positions from 22 agencies and offices that specialize in one or more aspects of homeland security . the intent behind the merger that created dhs was to improve coordination , communication , and information sharing among these multiple federal agencies . each of these agencies is responsible for specific homeland security missions and for coordinating related efforts with its sibling components , as well as external entities . figure 1 shows the department - level organizations which are responsible for or share responsibility for it acquisition management activities . within the department's management directorate , headed by the under secretary for management , is the office of the cio . the cio's responsibilities include setting departmental it policies , processes , and standards , and ensuring that it acquisitions comply with dhs it management processes , technical requirements , and approved enterprise architecture , among other things . additionally , the cio chairs dhs's chief information officer council , which is responsible for ensuring the development of it resource management policies , processes , best practices , performance measures , and decision criteria for managing the delivery of it services and investments , while controlling costs and mitigating risks . within the office of the cio , ebmo has been given primary responsibility for ensuring that the department's it investments align with its missions and objectives . ebmo was recently reorganized to include a new enterprise portfolio governance division dedicated to executing portfolio reviews . this division is to provide support to portfolio stakeholders to administer portfolio activities , such as aligning programs with portfolios , creating baseline portfolios , and establishing portfolio pilot efforts .