the department of defense provided no comments . the product team lead for air / ground voice communications and officials from spectrum policy and management , faa , indicated that they generally agreed with the facts and recommendation . these officials , along with those from the national aeronautics and space administration , provided a number of clarifying comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate . to determine the extent to which faa's existing communications system can effectively meet its future needs , we interviewed officials from faa's nexcom program office , the agency's spectrum management office , union officials representing the air traffic controller and maintenance technician workforces , representatives of the mitre corporation , and members of the narc , an advisory committee formed by faa to help ensure that nexcom meets the aviation industry's needs . we reviewed documentation on the current status of faa's existing air - ground communications system as well as documentation on potential measures faa plans to take to increase the channel capacity of its existing system . to determine what faa did to help ensure that its preferred technology for nexcom will meet aviation's future needs , we interviewed officials from faa's nexcom program office ; officials from the department of defense , the national aeronautics and space administration , and eurocontrol ; an expert in satellite communications from the university of maryland ; and contractors who offer vdl - 2 and vdl - 4 communications services . we reviewed documentation indicating to what extent varying technologies could meet faa's time frames for implementing nexcom . we also reviewed documentation indicating how well varying technologies could meet faa's specifications for nexcom . we did not perform an independent verification of the capabilities of these technologies . additionally , we reviewed studies performed by faa in collaboration with the u.s. aviation industry to assess alternative technologies for nexcom that led the u.s. aviation community to endorse faa's decision to select vdl - 3 as its preferred technology for nexcom . to identify issues faa needs to resolve before it can make a final selection for nexcom's technology , we interviewed officials from faa's nexcom program office as well as members of the narc . we also reviewed nexcom program office documentation that prioritizes the program's risks , assesses their potential impact on the program's cost and schedule , and describes the status of faa's efforts to mitigate those risks . in addition , we reviewed the narc's september 2001 report that made recommendations to faa for modernizing its air - ground communications system . we conducted our review from september 2001 through may 2002 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to interested members of congress ; the secretary of transportation ; the secretary of defense ; the administrator , national aeronautics and space administration , and the administrator , faa . we will also make copies available to others upon request . ( see table 1. ) faa has classified these initiatives , which involve a variety of technical , regulatory , and administrative changes , according to how soon it expects to implement them .