diss. , harvard university , 1999 ) . manski , charles , and david wise . college choice in america . cambridge , massachusetts: harvard university press , 1983 . mcpherson , michael s. and morton owen schapiro . “hope for whom ? financial aid for the middle class and its impact on college attendance.” national tax journal 53 , no.3 , part 2 ( september 2000 ) : 629-661 . dynarski , susan . how do postsecondary institutions respond to the changes in the availability of federal student assistance ? have grant and loan increases , or the introduction of tax credits , resulted in tuition increases or reductions in institutional aid to grant , loan and credit recipients and , if so , to what degree ? noting the difficulty of showing the link between title iv spending and outcomes , education has undertaken little work identifying the impact of its grant and loan programs . as a result , it cannot fully assess its progress in achieving its strategic goal to “enhance the quality of and access to postsecondary education.” moreover , treasury and education have not collaborated to provide congress with evidence about the impact of higher education tax credits and title iv student aid . determining whether there is a causal link between program and tax expenditures and desired outcomes is difficult , but not impossible . given an annual investment of billions of dollars — in outlays and revenues foregone — studying their effectiveness is warranted . to ensure that students and families understand how using tax provisions will affect their eligibility for title iv financial aid , we recommend that the secretary of education develop a policy specifying whether the tax - free earnings of state - sponsored college savings plans , tuition prepayment plans , and coverdell education savings accounts should be included in the calculation of the efc and , therefore , reported by aid applicants as untaxed income on the fafsa form . in addition , we recommend that the secretary clarify fafsa instructions , clearly explaining who should report ownership of the assets held in state - sponsored savings plans , coverdell education savings accounts , and series ee savings bonds . in order to provide congress with information about the effectiveness of its title iv programs as well as to ensure its programs are achieving results , we recommend that the secretary of education sponsor research on the impact of title iv programs on postsecondary education attendance and choice , completion , and costs . in order to provide congress with information about the relative effectiveness of education's direct expenditure programs and treasury's higher education tax provisions , we recommend that the secretaries of education and treasury collaborate in studying the impact of tax credits and title iv student aid programs on college attendance and choice , completion , and costs . as a first step , the secretaries will need to identify opportunities for , and limits to , the sharing of data , and develop a plan to address them . in their written comments , education and treasury noted that the report was useful and informative , and generally agreed with our findings and recommendations .