ethanol . it is unclear whether the rfs increased or decreased the cost of ethanol . one source we reviewed indicated that the rfs may have increased the cost of ethanol by increasing demand for corn , which would drive up the price of corn . on the other hand , one expert we spoke to stated that the rfs may have decreased the cost of ethanol in the long term by providing incentives for producers to invest in more efficient ethanol production processes , which would lower production costs over time . however , it is unclear what the longer - term effects of ethanol blending on gasoline prices have been . we believe this is because once all locations had made the infrastructure investments and most gasoline blendstock produced was consistent with blending ethanol then there would be two continuing effects: ( 1 ) the transportation and blending costs of ethanol , which would tend to push retail prices higher and depend on the distance traveled and the modes of transport , and ( 2 ) the lower cost of producing lower octane blendstock . the former effect might dominate for locations far from the production source of ethanol and for which more costly modes of transport were used while the lower blendstock costs might dominate for locations close to the production source of ethanol , those that have low transportation costs , or both . however , the data available to us do not allow us to test this long - term effect . blendstock . the rfs may have initially increased both refiners' costs to produce blendstock compatible with ethanol blending and the costs of shipping and storing such blendstock ; however , these costs may have decreased over time . more specifically , the rfs may have initially increased refiners' costs because refiners had to change their configuration to produce a lower octane blendstock to accommodate ethanol blending . many experts we interviewed stated that producing blendstock with a lower octane level required costly changes to refinery infrastructure and processes . however , according to these experts and stakeholders , since ethanol is relatively high in octane , blending ethanol into retail gasoline allows refiners to produce blendstock with a lower octane level . as a result , according to many of the experts we interviewed , after the initial investment by refineries to switch to the lower octane blendstock , refiners could produce that blendstock at lower cost . this would have led to higher initial costs but lower long - term costs once infrastructure costs had been capitalized . the higher initial cost is consistent with our past work in which we noted that shipping more types of blendstocks — the result of a proliferation of blendstocks adopted by states and localities to meet clean air act standards — increases the costs of shipping and storing blendstocks at terminals for distribution to retail sellers . as a result , according to one expert familiar with our past work , as ethanol blending spread further and further away from the production center in the midwest states , there were more types of blendstocks in the pipeline and storage terminals , which would have increased costs .