structure . gao / ggd - 97-23 . washington , d.c.: november 20 , 1996 . ensuring safety and soundness . ensuring a safe and sound banking system and promoting financial system stability require a balance between the need for effective regulatory oversight and the possibility that too much oversight could hinder competition . fulfilling this goal also requires developing a system that limits the extension of the federal safety net in order to encourage market as well as regulatory discipline . other organizations have noted the importance of clearly specified regulatory goals for regulatory effectiveness . the basel committee on banking supervision developed 25 core principles for effective banking supervision that have been used by countries as a benchmark for assessing the quality of their supervisory systems and for identifying a baseline level of sound supervisory practices . the core principles are a framework of minimum standards for sound supervisory practices and are considered universally applicable . the first of the principles states that an effective system of banking supervision will have clear responsibilities and objectives for each authority involved in the supervision of banks . in august 2007 , imf issued a report regarding the findings of its consultation with the united states as part of its mission to review u.s. economic developments . imf concluded that while the u.s. economy continues to show remarkable dynamism and resilience , it faced important challenges , such as the need to maintain a robust financial system . imf found that the current structure's multiple federal and state regulators overseeing the evolving financial market system may limit regulatory effectiveness and slow responses to pressing issues . therefore , imf suggested the united states increase the use of general principles or goals to guide financial regulation . according to imf , general regulatory goals may ease interagency coordination and shorten reaction times to industry developments . the secretary of the treasury recently announced an action plan that will consider reforms to modernize the u.s. financial regulatory structure as part of a plan to maintain the global leadership of u.s. capital markets . according to treasury's press release , the plan seeks a modern regulatory structure with improved oversight , increased efficiency , reduced overlap , and the ability to adapt to market participants' constantly changing strategies and tools . treasury officials noted they recognize that designing such a system is a long - term endeavor . they said , however , they will seek to propose first steps that would begin the process . treasury intends to publish the result of its study in early 2008 . we provided the secretary of the treasury and the heads of cftc , the federal reserve , fdic , ncua , occ , ots , and sec with drafts of this report for their comment . we received written comments from the chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system and the chairman of ncua who generally agreed with the thrust of our report ; these are reprinted in appendixes ii and iii . in particular , the federal reserve concurred with gao's emphasis on periodically reviewing the financial regulatory framework for potential modifications and the importance of continued federal oversight of financial services firms on a consolidated , group - wide basis .