mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . operational interoperability is planned for fiscal year 2005.the pharmacy prototype is the initial effort within the clinical health data repositories ( chdr ) framework . this framework is the effort to develop software component services that will be used by the va and dod data repositories . the prototype has a planned completion date of october 2004 . this issue remains under review by the veterans health administration's hipaa program office . it is va's understanding that va and dod have concluded that this is not necessary in order to share information on patients that both departments are treating . dod believes that it and va can achieve the appropriate sharing of protected health information within the guidelines of the current regulations . the departments are currently testing an advanced technological demonstration project that transfers images of paper personnel documents to va from official military personnel file repositories in the army , navy , and marine corps , with air force integration into the program in process ( including the dd214 ) . when fully operational , this system will send digital images of any personnel record to the va within 48 hours of the request . department of veterans affairs ( va ) department of defense ( dod ) both the health executive council ( through the deployment health work group ) and the va / dod benefits executive council are currently developing and implementing processes to address these issues . dod is already providing va with daily information on personnel separating from active duty , which includes assignment history , location , and occupational duties through the dd214 . equally critical is an established project management structure to guide project development . industry best practices and information technology project management principles stress the importance of accountability and sound planning for any project , particularly an interagency effort of the magnitude and complexity of this one . inherent in such planning is the development and use of a project management plan that describes , among other factors , the project's scope , implementation strategy , lines of responsibility , security requirements , resources , and estimated schedule for development and implementation . as was the situation when we testified last november , va and dod continue to lack an explicit architecture detailing how they intend to achieve the data exchange capability , or just what they will be able to exchange by the end of 2005 — their projected time frame for putting this capability into operation . va officials stated that they recognize the importance of a clearly defined architecture , but acknowledged that the departments' actions were continuing to be driven by the less - specific , high - level strategy that has been in place since september 2002 . the officials added that just this month , the departments had taken a first step toward trying to determine how their separate data repositories would interface to enable the two - way exchange of patient health records .