the percentage was the same for 2009 appraisals .  sixty - six percent of appraisals from 2010 used the cost approach , generally in combination with the sales comparison approach , similar to 65 percent for 2009 appraisals .  five percent of appraisals from 2010 used the income approach , virtually always in combination with one or both of the other approaches . the corresponding percentage for 2009 appraisals was 4 percent . these percentages were roughly similar for purchase and refinance mortgages . in addition , although fnc's data for the preceding 3 years covered a smaller proportion of total mortgages , the percentages for purchase and refinance transactions combined were generally comparable to those described above . ( see fig . lenders need to know the property's market value , which refers to the probable price that a property should bring in a competitive and open market , in order to provide information for assessing their potential loss exposure if the borrower defaults . lenders also need to know the value in order to calculate the loan - to - value ( ltv ) ratio , which represents the proportion of the property's value being financed by the mortgage and is an indicator of its risk level . for example , officials from some lenders told us their own risk - management policies may require them to obtain an appraisal even when the enterprises do not , or they may obtain an appraisal to better ensure that the mortgage complies with requirements for sale to either of the enterprises . additionally , fha requires appraisals with interior and exterior inspections for all of the purchase mortgages and most of the refinance mortgages it insures , and most of the lenders we contacted make substantial numbers of these mortgages . the enterprises have efforts under way to collect more complete proprietary data on the use of different valuation methods . in order to obtain consistent appraisal and loan data for all mortgages they purchase from lenders , the enterprises are currently undertaking a joint effort , under the direction of fhfa , called the uniform mortgage data program ( umdp ) . umdp has two components related to appraisals . the first component is scheduled to begin september 2011 , when appraisers will be required to use new standardized response options in completing appraisal report forms . the second component will be a web - based portal that will facilitate the delivery of standardized appraisal data to the enterprises , and the enterprises are planning to fully implement umdp by march 2012 . according to officials from the enterprises , umdp will produce a proprietary dataset that will allow the enterprises to work with lenders to resolve any concerns regarding appraisal quality prior to purchasing mortgages . additionally , officials told us that the dataset would also allow them to assess the impact of their valuation policies on appraisal quality and mortgage risk . however , some appraisal industry stakeholders have expressed concerns that in some circumstances the standardized response options may be too limited to clearly and accurately communicate information that is material to the appraisal .