we do not agree . while we recognize that the navy's 1-10 scale does not differentiate between degrees of satisfaction , we believe that doing so would provide insight and perspective that is lacking from merely counting a user as satisfied or not satisfied . when we analyzed the responses to individual questions in terms of degrees of satisfaction , we found that average responses to 10 of 14 survey questions were 5.5 to 7 , which is clearly close to the lower limit of the satisfaction range . also , with regard to customer satisfaction , the navy stated that our inclusion in the report of subjective statements from shipyard and air depot officials did not include any data to support the officials' statements and thus did not support our conclusions . we recognize that the officials' statements are subjective and anecdotal , and our report clearly identified them as such . nevertheless , we included them in the report because they are fully consistent with the customer satisfaction survey results and thus help illustrate the nature of nmci user concerns and areas of dissatisfaction that the survey results show exist . the navy stated that nmci provides adequate reports to key decision makers . however , we disagree because the reporting that the navy has done has yet to disclose the range of performance and customer satisfaction issues that our report contains . our message is that fully and accurately disclosing program and contractor performance and customer satisfaction to the various entities responsible for overseeing , managing , and employing nmci will serve to strengthen program performance and accountability . the navy also provided various technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the navy ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6256 or by e - mail at hiter@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . our objectives were to review ( 1 ) whether the navy marine corps intranet ( nmci ) is meeting its strategic goals , ( 2 ) the extent to which the contractor is meeting its service level agreements ( sla ) , ( 3 ) whether customers are satisfied with the program , and ( 4 ) what is being done to improve customer satisfaction .