schedule the work . estimate the labor and material required to perform the w authorize the budgets , including management reserve . determine objective measure of earned value . develop the performance measurement baseline . n 65 percent of them will be completed by the revised contract plans for the completion of the remaining development work once t contract ends are being reevaluated by nara at the direction of omb ( as previously discussed ) . according to the archivist , the essential goals of era will remain unchanged and may lead to a second phase of the development in the future . if nara were to complete the full era system as originally designed , we project the development phase to be complete by march 2017 with a total cost overrun between $195 million and $433 million . we further project that the total cost overrun incurred at the end of the program life cycle will likely be between $205 million and $405 million . table 4 shows our cost and schedule estimates as compared with nara's estimates for the program . execute the work plan , and record all costs . analyze evm performance data , and record performance measurement baseline plan . forecast estimates at completion . take management action to mitigate risks . formance measurement baseline as changes occur . ●: the agency addressed all aspects of this evm practice . ◐: the agency addressed some , but not all , aspects of this evm practice . ◌: the agency did not address any aspects of this evm practice . ources: gao analysis of nara and contractor data . the era program did not fully establish a comprehensive evm system . of the six key practices in this management area , the program fully implemented one , and partially met five . program and contractor officials attributed this to era's current acquisition strategy approach , which calls for nara to renegotiate the contract ( or replan the baseline ) with every option as such , nara is unable to produce a stable and comprehensive b that reflects all development work planned for the system . instead , a baseline is crea ted for each option period — so work that was not completed in one option period gets replanned or removed in the subsequent one , thus resetting all past contractor cost and schedule performance . we agree that the program's current implementation of the acquisition strategy is inherently incompatible with the use of evm . moreover , this environment sets the contractor up to be favorably positioned to receive a high award fee for each period of performance because the constant rebaselining makes it easier for the contractor to excel at achieving the objectives measured by the award fee evaluation process . we characterized the extent to which the program met each of the 11 practices as either fully implemented ( all sub - elements of the practice were met ) , partially implemented ( some but not all sub - elements were met ) , or not implemented ( none of the sub - elements were met ) . to have fully implemented a key practice , the program must have implemented all characteristics of the practice .