we chose to present median values . we determined that the financial information used in this report , including the cdci program data from treasury and the financial data on banks and credit unions from snl financial , was sufficiently reliable to assess the status and condition of cdci and institutions that participated in the program . for the data from treasury , we tested treasury's internal controls over financial reporting as they related to our annual audit of the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) financial statements and found the information to be sufficiently reliable based on the results of our audits of fiscal years 2010 through 2013 financial statements . we assessed the reliability of the snl financial data by performing manual testing of required data elements and reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them . in addition , we have assessed the reliability of snl financial data as part of previous studies and found the data to be reliable for the purposes of our review . we verified that no changes had been made that would affect the data's reliability . we conducted this performance audit from february 2014 to june 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , kay kuhlman ( assistant director ) , lisa reynolds ( analyst - in - charge ) , emily chalmers , william chatlos , chris forys , marc molino , and patricia moye made significant contributions to this report . these interviews consisted of a brief set of questions about each institution's negative and positive experiences with cdci , their plans for repayment , and factors affecting those plans . therefore , regardless of their current capacity to fully repay treasury , they planned to keep the capital as long as it remained less expensive than alternative capital . finally , regulations reflecting basel iii regulatory capital reforms that are scheduled to take effect in 2015 will increase the percentage of capital that banks must hold . specifically , we interviewed a nonprobability sample of 8 banks and 9 credit unions remaining in the program as well as organizations representing the banks and credit unions participating in cdci . representatives of cdci participant institutions and bank and credit union organizations told us that a key factor in participants' decision to remain in or exit cdci was their ability to access other sources of capital . representatives of a few of the cdci institutions , as well as representatives of two organizations representing cdcis , said that cdci had been one of the few sources of external capital for small community banks and credit unions since the financial crisis and economic downturn .