the length of the airship was 370 feet . prior to its termination in june 2012 , the blue devil block 2 airship effort experienced significant technical problems resulting in cost overruns and schedule delays . according to an air force official , the blue devil block 2 development effort had a very aggressive development schedule because it was intended to meet an urgent need for use in afghanistan . some of the technical problems included the tail fins , which were overweight and failed structural load design testing , rendering the airship not flyable . other technical problems included the flight control software which experienced problems due to issues related to scaling — although the software worked well with a much smaller scale version of the airship , it did not work well with the much larger blue devil block 2 airship . the air force terminated the blue devil block 2 airship effort in june 2012 due to the technical problems experienced with the airframe and the need to avoid substantially increasing costs of the effort . for example , the contractor estimated that the 1-year post - deployment operations and maintenance costs would total $29 million , but the air force's cost estimate ranged between $100 and $120 million — an estimate that was at least 245 percent higher than the contractor's estimate . according to an air force official , the contractor's estimate did not include costs such as for spare parts and repairs . we found that dod used its rapid acquisition process to initiate two airship efforts to quickly deliver warfighter capabilities , but significantly underestimated the risks of meeting cost , schedule , and performance goals . dod has taken a number of steps to provide urgently needed capabilities to the warfighter more quickly and to alleviate the challenges associated with the traditional acquisition process for acquiring capabilities . some of these steps include quicker requirements validation and reduced levels of oversight , including exemption from disciplined analyses that help to ensure requirements are achievable within available technologies , design , and other resources , and that programs have adequate knowledge in hand before moving forward in the acquisition process . the success of this accelerated acquisition process is predicated on efforts that do not involve high development and acquisition risks , such as limiting technology development by using mature technologies . however , in the case of lemv and blue devil block 2 , the risks of these acquisitions were higher than usual for rapid acquisitions . specifically: the lemv acquisition strategy was initially approved when technologies were estimated to be at technology readiness levels 4 through 7 . at the time , dod's acquisition guidance recommended a dod officials technology readiness level 6 for product development.stated that they were willing to assume higher risk with the potential of developing an asset that had much greater on - station endurance and could provide capabilities on a single platform rather than on multiple aircraft . they stated that the higher risk of the effort was justified because there were multiple other efforts that were already providing surveillance capabilities in theater .