epa . epa officials told us that they do not have a comprehensive estimate of costs to clean up hardrock mines . specifically , officials said epa tracks planned obligations to be incurred for sites where the agency anticipates taking action within the next 3 years to help support its budget development process . as of fiscal year 2018 , epa identified about $519 million in planned obligations for 115 hardrock mine or mineral processing sites . epa officials said the planned obligations do not necessarily reflect the total estimated costs remaining at a site because the agency typically requires its regions to report known planned obligations for 3 years , or longer , if available . according to epa data , future costs to address hardrock mines likely will exceed these obligations . for example , epa did not report planned obligations for 423 mine and mineral processing sites where the agency has not completed site assessment work or selected a cleanup remedy . according to epa officials , they generally do not plan obligations for future cleanup work while conducting an assessment . however , they said that if an assessment reveals a need for a time - sensitive response at a site , the agency may fund it . epa officials also told us that they expect responsible parties to pay a portion of the future costs associated with these sites , but that amount is unknown . federal agency officials , state officials from three selected states ( colorado , montana , and nevada ) , and stakeholders cited availability of resources and legal liability concerns as factors that limit efforts to identify , clean up , and monitor hazards at abandoned hardrock mines . federal and state officials said their backlog of work on abandoned mines is greater than current staff and budget levels . in addition , state agency officials and other stakeholders we interviewed , such as nongovernmental organizations and mining companies , have limited their participation in projects to address environmental hazards at abandoned mines because of concerns about their potential legal liability under cercla and the clean water act . all of the officials we interviewed from the forest service , blm , the park service , and epa , as well as from colorado , montana , and nevada , cited availability of resources as a factor that limits their efforts to identify and address the physical safety and environmental hazards at abandoned hardrock mines . representatives from state associations and nongovernmental organizations we interviewed also cited this factor as limiting federal and state efforts . federal and state officials said that their backlog of work on these mines far exceeds their current staff and budget levels . for example , blm officials estimated that with the agency's current abandoned mine budget and staff resources , it could take up to 500 years to confirm the presence of physical safety or environmental hazards at the approximately 66,000 features in its database and the estimated 380,000 features not yet captured in its database . officials from colorado and montana and representatives from a state association noted that these two states regularly receive reclamation funding from osmre to address abandoned coal mines in their states .