for example , transportation discusses strategies for each of its goals . for its new goal transportation describes strategies , such as increasing intelligence efforts in ports ; improving advanced information on passengers , crew , and cargo ; and establishing or improving information and intelligence fusion centers in washington and on both coasts . it also identified more specific efforts , such as increasing boarding and escort operations to protect vessels carrying large numbers of passengers and vessels with dangerous cargo , such as liquefied natural gas or other volatile products , from becoming targets . these programs provided services for the homeless that appeared to be similar . for example , 23 programs operated by four agencies offered housing services , and 26 programs administered by 6 agencies offered food and nutrition services . although our work indicates that the potential for inefficiency and waste exists , it also shows areas where the intentional participation by multiple agencies may be a reasonable response to a complex public problem . in either situation , implementation of federal crosscutting programs is often characterized by numerous individual agency efforts that are implemented with little apparent regard for the presence of efforts of related activities . in our past work , we have offered several possible approaches for better managing crosscutting programs — such as improved coordination , integration , and consolidation — to ensure that crosscutting goals are consistent ; program efforts are mutually reinforcing ; and , where appropriate , common or complementary performance measures are used as a basis for management . one of our oft - cited proposals is to consolidate the fragmented federal system to ensure the safety and quality of food . perhaps most important , however , we have stated that the results act could provide the office of management and budget ( omb ) , agencies , and congress with a structured framework for addressing crosscutting program efforts . omb , for example , could use the governmentwide performance plan , which is a key component of this framework , to integrate expected agency - level performance . it could also be used to more clearly relate and address the contributions of alternative federal strategies . agencies , in turn , could use the annual performance planning cycle and subsequent annual performance reports to highlight crosscutting program efforts and to provide evidence of the coordination of those efforts . omb guidance to agencies on the results act states that , at a minimum , an agency's annual plan should identify those programs or activities that are being undertaken with other agencies to achieve a common purpose or objective , that is , interagency and crosscutting programs . this identification need cover only programs and activities that represent a significant agency effort . an agency should also review the fiscal year 2003 performance plans of other agencies participating with it in a crosscutting program or activity to ensure that related performance goals and indicators for a crosscutting program are consistent and harmonious . as appropriate , agencies should modify performance goals to bring about greater synergy and interagency support in achieving mutual goals .