postal service . we received e - mails from hud , the consumer financial protection bureau , and the department of health and human services in which liaisons to gao for those agencies stated they had no comments on the report . we received technical comments from ftc and the u.s . postal service , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of housing and urban development , the federal trade commission , the director of the consumer financial protection bureau , the secretary of health and human services , and the postmaster general of the u.s . postal service . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or shear@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in this report , we describe ( 1 ) the types of reported fraud schemes committed against housing choice voucher ( hcv ) participants ( including older adults ) , awareness by public housing agencies ( pha ) and other relevant organizations of fraud incidents and how often they occur , and indicators of such schemes online ; and ( 2 ) antifraud regulations , guidance , and informational materials , if any , that the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and phas have in place to identify and mitigate fraud against program participants . to address our first objective we used a variety of methods ( see fig . details on our use of these methodologies are described below . some phas issue online alerts and post these on their websites to inform hcv applicants and participants about potential fraud schemes . we initially identified pha fraud alerts by performing online searches about fraud in the hcv program . we then developed a structured search method for identifying additional fraud alerts . to do this , in 2016 and 2017 , we searched fraud alerts issued by a nongeneralizable sample of 60 phas ; in total , 20 phas published 22 alerts about fraud affecting hcv applicants and participants on their websites . we identified our nongeneralizable sample of 60 phas using 2015 fourth - quarter picture of subsidized households data from hud , which contain information on subsidized housing units by several types of programs including the hcv program . the initial population contained phas ordered by total number of hcv program vouchers available . we selected our sample of phas based on those with the most vouchers . we reviewed consumer complaint data from the federal trade commission's ( ftc ) consumer sentinel database from calendar years 2011 through 2016 . the date range of the data represents the most - recent years available at the time of our request . our review of the data focused on complaints related to the hcv program and companies that offer rental housing services .