anderson trust . u.s. environmental protection agency involvement: none . communication between responsible agencies and the public: no evidence of formal public meetings was identified . litigation: no information on lawsuits was found in the case files . the tranguch site was a gasoline and tire retreading service station in a mixed commercial and residential area of northeastern pennsylvania that was abandoned in 1995 . several operating gasoline service stations as well as numerous abandoned or removed underground storage tank systems lie within the vicinity of the site . this information is included in appendix i . to address these issues , we reviewed and evaluated program data from epa and interviewed program officials in epa's office of underground storage tanks and epa regions 3 ( philadelphia ) , 4 ( atlanta ) , 5 ( chicago ) , and 9 ( san francisco ) . we also reviewed and evaluated data from and conducted interviews with state program officials in california , maryland , michigan , north carolina , and pennsylvania . in addition , we selected one leaking tank site in each of these 5 states for comparison of cleanup status , costs , and other factors . we included the tranguch tire service , incorporated , facility in luzerne county , pennsylvania , among the sites in our review due to congressional interest . we selected the remaining 4 sites primarily on the basis of their high cleanup costs , cleanup status , and other similarities with the tranguch site for comparison . we interviewed site project or incident managers and reviewed case files for each site . additional information regarding our objectives , scope , and methodology is included in appendix ii . we conducted our review between august 2004 and november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , including assessing the reliability of the data we obtained . data collected from the states and reported by epa indicate that epa and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks over the past decade and a half . according to epa , of the more than 447,000 releases confirmed as of the end of 2004 , cleanups had been initiated for about 92 percent , and about 71 percent of these cleanups had been completed . figure 1 shows confirmed releases from underground storage tanks , cleanups initiated , and cleanups completed annually from fiscal years 1997 through 2004 . as this figure indicates , the number of new releases confirmed annually declined , from about 12,000 in 2003 to less than 8,000 in 2004 — about 35 percent . however , while figure 1 shows a decline in the number of releases confirmed annually over the period , it also shows a decrease in the number of cleanups initiated and completed . according to epa , the number of cleanups completed each year has generally decreased over recent years and fell by 23 percent — from more than 18,000 in fiscal year 2003 to just over 14,000 — in fiscal year 2004 . furthermore , there still remains a national backlog of almost 130,000 cleanups yet to be completed . epa's ust program is primarily implemented by the states .