we provided a draft of this report to hhs . hhs provided written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , in which the agency agreed with our findings . hhs said the information and analysis provided in the report will be helpful to stakeholders considering issues related to tanf moe spending . hhs noted that , as our report describes , there is a growing tendency for states to count the expenditures of nongovernmental third - party sources as state moe spending and that these expenditures do not necessarily represent added state spending , but simply an increase in the claiming of existing state or non - profit spending . hhs also noted that while the report shows some states reported these arrangements fostered public - private partnerships , the report does not provide evidence that such partnerships occurred as a result of the third - party moe provisions . it also noted that congress wanted states to be active partners in the welfare reform process . allowing states to count nongovernmental third - party expenditures toward their moe requirement was a policy choice hhs first articulated in december 2004 . hhs later set forth the policy in a rule as part of the regulations implementing the deficit reduction act of 2005 . if a state fails to meet its tanf moe requirement for any fiscal year , hhs is required by law to reduce dollar - for - dollar the state's basic tanf grant amount for the following fiscal year . states' levels of moe spending can affect other tanf requirements , such as their required work participation rates . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the tanf block grant was created through the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) and was designed to give states the flexibility to provide both traditional welfare cash assistance benefits as well as a variety of other benefits and services to meet the needs of low - income families and children . tanf has four broad goals: ( 1 ) provide assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or homes of relatives ; ( 2 ) end dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; ( 3 ) prevent and reduce out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and ( 4 ) encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families . within these goals , states are responsible for designing , implementing , and administering their welfare programs to comply with federal requirements , as defined by federal law and hhs . we conducted this performance audit from october 2015 through february 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the creation of tanf significantly changed the federal government's role in financing welfare programs in states .