ii. ) generally , hospitals that reclassify but do not satisfy the standard wage criterion receive a post - reclassification labor cost adjustment that reflects average wage levels much higher than the wages they actually pay . for hospitals that meet the standard wage criterion , however , reclassification results in an adjustment that better matches their actual labor costs than did their original one . of the 756 hospitals that paid wages sufficiently higher than their area average wage to meet the reclassification wage criteria , 310 ( 41 percent ) were reclassified in 2001 ( see table 3 ) . hospitals that met the wage criteria , but did not satisfy the proximity criterion , did not reclassify . just over one - quarter of the higher wage hospitals were in large towns , yet large town hospitals made up almost half of the higher wage hospitals that reclassified . metropolitan hospitals made up 42 percent of the higher wage hospitals , but comprised only 12 percent of the higher wage reclassified hospitals . higher wage hospitals in large towns are likelier to reclassify than other higher wage hospitals because many are rrcs , and so are exempt from the proximity criterion . close to half of the higher wage hospitals in small towns and rural areas reclassify . almost 39 percent of the reclassified higher wage small town and rural hospitals were exempt from the proximity criterion because they were rrcs or schs . some nonreclassified , higher wage small town or rural hospitals that were schs may have opted out of the pps to receive cost - based payments from medicare , making reclassification irrelevant . in 2001 , only 38 of the 317 metropolitan hospitals with wages that were at least 8 percent higher than the average for their area , thus satisfying the standard wage criteria , reclassified to receive a higher labor cost adjustment . nearly two - thirds of all reclassified metropolitan hospitals were in two areas — california and the northeast . metropolitan areas in these two regions are contiguous , so higher wage hospitals may be more likely than hospitals in other areas to satisfy the proximity criterion . in 2001 , 109 ( about 25 percent ) of all hospitals that reclassified for the medicare labor cost adjustment paid wages that were too low to meet the standard wage criterion for reclassification . of these , 89 were rrcs . roughly 42 percent of these rrcs that reclassified had wage costs below the average in their area . some of the hospitals that were reclassified in 2001 but that did not satisfy the standard wage criterion were part of countywide reclassifications . others had been reclassified via legislation . the relationship between a hospital's wages and the average in its geographic area , before and after reclassification , depends on whether it was in a metropolitan or nonmetropolitan area and whether it satisfied the standard reclassification wage criterion ( see table 4 ) . reclassification resulted in higher wage hospitals receiving a labor cost adjustment that more closely reflects the wages they actually paid .