id . at the time of eectio , the ecrow areemet iclded andemifictio roviio thted tht the arm and the lessee “joitl aneverll agree to idemif and hold the ecrow agt hrmless from anagansany anll liabilitie , caus of ctio , clim , deman , jme , dag , co and expns ( iclding reasnable ttorys fee and expns ) tht may rie ot of or i connectio with the ecrow ag's ood fith cceance of or erformance of ittie and oligations under thi ecrow areemet.” ecrow areemet , ¶ 3 ( i ) . o j 2 , 2009 , the partie modified the ecrow areemet to delete the idemifictio roviio . the arm assert tht the “aspaymet for i - kiervice us” it received as rcnsidertio constitte - kid considertio under 10 u.s.c . we disagree . the armas , ict , received cash considertio for the pictinny eul anunder ectio 2667 i reqired to deit such moun speciccount i the treasuablihed for such pue . the cash considertioas deited i ancrow ccount rther tht the degnated ccount i the treasu . we will firt diuss the imlictions of the army's ctions under ectioand the micellaneous recei te . net , we will diuss the idemifictio roviio coed i the ecrow areemeand the atideficie act . by the lessee , of the roert leased as the paymet of part or ll of the considertio for the lease ; ( c ) type of in - kind conideration. — ( 1 ) i dditio to any - kid considertio cceted under subsectio ( ) ( ) , i - kid considertio cceted with respect to leasunder thi ectioayclde the following: ( a ) mtenance , rotectio , ltertio , repair , imrovemet , or retortio ( icldingviromel retortio ) of roert or fcilitie under the cotrol of the secret cocered . ( b ) cnstrctio of ew fcilitie for the secret cocered . ( c ) proviio of fcilitie for usby the secret cocered . ( d ) proviio or paymet of tilit ervice for the secret cocered . ( e ) proviio of reroerttenance ervice for the secret cocered . ( f ) proviio of such other ervice relting to ctivitie tht will occr o the leased roert as the secret cocered consider approrite . ( 2 ) i - kid considertio under paagaph ( 1 ) may cceted any roert or fcilitie under the cotrol of the secret cocered thre elected for thpuby the secret cocered . §§ 2667 ( ) ( ) , 2667 ( c ) ( 1 ) – ( 2 ) . which tht language i used , and the roder cotet of the te as whole.” robiso v. sell oil co. , 19 u.s. 337 , 340 – 41 ( 1997 ) ( iternal qottiork and cittions omitted ) ; b - 318897 , mr. 18 , 2010 , t 2 . sections 2667 ( ) ( ) and 2667 ( c ) ( 1 ) – ( 2 ) re ke dicerng the coheret , constet meanng thcngressteded . thesubpaagap illustrte tht the i - kiconsidertio cotemted by ectio 2667 ( ) ( 4 ) iclde the roviio of ervice or roert .