we concluded that no antideficiency act violation exists . under the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , as amended ( property act ) , gsa is authorized to enter into a lease agreement for a term of up to 20 years to accommodate the federal government . in addition , gsa is authorized under the property act to delegate to the head of another federal agency most of its authorities , which includes leasing authority . is nih complying with the congressional prospectus process for both leases and alterations to leased buildings ? to address nih's compliance with budget scorekeeping guidelines and omb's requirements , we reviewed ( 1 ) the laws and regulations relating to leases ; ( 2 ) budget scorekeeping guidelines and omb's implementing requirements ; ( 3 ) the antideficiency act ; ( 4 ) nih's inventory of leased properties , its revised budget scoring of the 58 leases under its delegated authority in 2003 , and its leasing guidance ; and ( 5 ) hhs's views on the antideficiency act . in addition , we interviewed hhs's deputy assistant secretary from the office for facilities management and policy ; nih's director of the office of acquisitions ; nih's acting chief of the budget branch from the office of business and systems finance , who performed the revised budget scoring ; other relevant nih leasing and financial officials ; and gsa officials . we also wrote to omb concerning agencies that are considered self - insuring under budget scoring guidelines . to address nih's compliance with the congressional prospectus process , we ( 1 ) reviewed the laws and regulations relating to leases ; ( 2 ) gsa's prospectus guidance and delegation of authority to lease ; ( 3 ) nih's inventory of leased properties , its revised prospectus analysis of the 58 leases under its delegated authority in 2003 , and its leasing guidance . in addition , we interviewed hhs's deputy assistant secretary from the office for facilities management and policy ; nih's director of the office of acquisitions ; nih's acting chief of the budget branch from the office of business and systems finance , who performed the revised prospectus analysis ; other relevant nih leasing and financial officials ; and gsa officials . gsa informed us that no alterations to leased buildings were submitted for prospectus approval between fiscal years 1996 and 2005 . for the purposes of our review , the information we gathered was sufficiently reliable . we conducted our work between july 2005 and august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 1996 , gsa began a program called “can't beat gsa leasing” that offered federal agencies the choice of ( 1 ) using gsa as their leasing agent , ( 2 ) assuming responsibility for their own leasing , or ( 3 ) using a combination of both options . the program was an outgrowth of gsa's commitment to streamline its leasing operations , respond to the government's changing needs , and address recommendations from client agencies . gsa delegated leasing authority to hhs in september 1996 , and hhs redelegated this authority to nih , one of its four lease - holding agencies , in december 1996 .