training . prison officials told us that pepper spray refresher training is combined with other employee training , making it difficult for them to provide us with specific cost for pepper spray training . all bop staff are required to take initial and annual refresher training on the use of pepper spray . the initial training lasts about 4 hours , while the annual refresher training lasts about 2 hours . bop issued a program statement in september 2018 , which states that pepper spray is not to be issued to employees working at minimum security prisons . however , the senior bop officials we interviewed — none of whom said they were involved directly in the policy decision — told us they do not believe the explanatory documentation of the decision to not issue pepper spray to minimum security prisons exists . officials stated that the decision was likely made for several reasons: inmates at minimum security prisons are usually nonviolent offenders , incidents at minimum security prisons are usually very minor and do not require the use of pepper spray , the concern that public perception of using pepper spray on inmates at minimum security prisons would not be positive , and canisters of pepper spray would expire before they would be used at minimum security prisons . bop officials we spoke with also stated that inmates at minimum security prisons are less likely than inmates at other security level prisons to become involved in incidents because they do not want to be reassigned to a higher security prison . we found , nonetheless , that bop's truintel database shows that incidents do occur at these prisons — some of which have led to assaults , minor injuries and death . based on our analysis of bop incident data from truintel , we found that in 2018 there were 47 reported incidents in the seven bop minimum security prisons . these incidents included assaults on staff and other inmates ; sexual harassment ; and fighting , among others . five of the incidents resulted in minor injuries to 10 bop employees , and 18 incidents resulted in minor injuries to inmates . further , one incident led to an inmate fatality . additionally , during our site visits , 56 out of 73 officials across various security levels stated that deployment of pepper spray should be expanded to minimum security prisons because it would give employees an additional tool to protect their safety . bop headquarters officials told us they believe the agency's decision to not issue pepper spray to minimum security prisons remains appropriate . regarding the 47 incidents that occurred at minimum security prisons in 2018 , officials stated that many of the confrontational incidents occurring at these prisons can be handled using verbal commands . while a decision to not issue pepper spray at minimum security prisons may be justified based on an analysis of relevant information , bop officials could not provide documentation of such analysis to support its decision . this analysis could include assessing available incident data at minimum security prisons and determining whether any of the incidents could have been prevented or handled more effectively if the officer on duty was carrying pepper spray .