umunhum and mt . thayer near san jose , california . in 1986 , the midpeninsula regional open space district ( mrosd ) , a california state government entity , acquired the former almaden air force station . the property contained various structures , including radar towers , operations buildings , housing facilities , a power plant , above - and below - ground fuel storage tanks , and a sewer treatment plant . mrosd staff occupied several buildings from 1986 to 1998 . a 1989 earthquake damaged some buildings , transformers , and fuel tanks . in 1991 , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) determined that the site was eligible for cleanup under the formerly used defense sites ( fuds ) program and ranked it as high risk due to the presence of various contaminants in transformers , drums , and storage tanks . between 1994 and 1996 , the corps removed transformers , above , and below - ground fuel storage tanks and associated piping , and drums filled with chemicals . after these removal actions , the corps turned its attention to other fuds in the corps district for a number of years . in 2006 , the corps returned to remove more waste from buildings , pipes , generators , and sumps . in 2007 , the corps initiated a site inspection to determine if it had overlooked any contamination , particularly polychlorinated biphenyls ( pcb ) from electrical transformers and petroleum from underground storage tanks and to determine if any further remediation action is needed . corps officials anticipated completing the investigation in 2009 . from 1991 through 2008 , the corps spent $3.5 million investigating , removing materials , and taking remedial actions at the site . in addition to cleaning up any remaining contamination , mrosd also wanted the corps to demolish and remove all remaining structures — many of which contain deteriorating lead - based paint and asbestos — so that it may open the site to the public for recreational use . department of defense ( dod ) and corps officials told us that no building demolition / debris removal can be conducted at this property because the buildings and structures were not unsafe at the time of transfer out of dod jurisdiction . they said that mrosd is responsible for maintaining all buildings and structures on the property , beginning on the date they took title . dod and corps officials also said the defense environmental restoration program ( derp ) authority does not extend to the removal of buildings and structures that become unsafe after they are transferred out of dod jurisdiction and then not maintained by the subsequent owner . in fiscal year ( fy ) 2009 , mrosd requested $4 million from congress for economic adjustment programs , including feasibility studies , legal services , and other activities related to cleaning up the site and language in the national defense authorization or appropriations acts directing dod to clean up the site under the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 . no language or funding regarding almaden was included in either law .