insufficient training . the system integrator has had difficulty training ipt members in time to ensure that they could effectively carry out their duties , and program officials have referred to ipt training as deficient . ipt charters state that members must complete initial training before beginning team deliberations regarding execution of new contracts for deepwater assets . ipt training is to address , among other issues , developing team goals and objectives , key processes , use of the web - based system , and team rules of behavior . according to a coast guard evaluation report , ipt training was implemented late , which has contributed to a lack of effective collaboration among team members . the coast guard hired a consultant to survey ipt members concerning teams' performance from july 2002 to september 2003 . three surveys consisted of questions about mission , team member cooperation , performance , communication , and integrated product and process development . the final report on the survey results highlighted the need for improved communications both within and among teams . respondents were also concerned that workloads were too high . in our 2001 report , we noted that as the deepwater program got off the ground , tough human capital challenges would need to be addressed . a critical challenge we raised was the need to recruit and train enough staff to manage and oversee the contract . to date , the coast guard has not funded the number of staff requested by the deepwater program and has not adhered to the processes outlined in its human capital plan for addressing turnover of deepwater officials . these staffing shortfalls have contributed to the problems ipt members have identified — such as the struggle to keep pace with the workload and the difficulties in making decisions due to inconsistent attendance at ipt meetings . although the deepwater program has identified the need for a total of 264 staff in fiscal year 2004 , only 224 positions have been funded , and only 209 have been assigned to the program . the coast guard's fiscal year 2004 funding for personnel was increased to $70 million ; however , the coast guard did not request sufficient funds to fill the 40 positions that the deepwater program identified as necessary . according to coast guard officials , $70 million is insufficient to fund their fiscal year 2004 personnel plan because they need $67 million of this amount just to fund current personnel levels . the assistant commandant has imposed a temporary hiring freeze and plans to monitor expenditures throughout the year to identify any available funding for additional positions . although we asked , coast guard officials did not explain why they did not request sufficient funds to adequately staff the program . in addition , the coast guard has not adequately addressed the imminent departure of coast guard officials from the deepwater program . coast guard officials will leave each year due to the normal rotational cycle of military members ( every 3 to 4 years ) and retirements .