groundwater . the use of groundwater depends on its location . because some areas receive seasonal rain and snow , average annual precipitation can vary by location , from 3 to over 36 inches of moisture . the state established five regions where groundwater is most limited known as active management areas . permits to use groundwater in these five areas are coordinated through the arizona department of water resources , which provides several permitting options for power plants . outside active management areas , the state subjects groundwater to little regulation or monitoring and generally only requires users to submit a well application to the department of water resources . effluent . effluent is owned by the entity that generates it until it is discharged into a surface water channel . the owner has the right to put effluent to beneficial use or convey it to another entity , such as a power plant , that will put it to beneficial use . however , once it is discharged from the pipe , generally into a surface water body , such as a river , it is considered abandoned and subject to laws governing surface water . arizona has no overall statewide policy on the use of water in thermoelectric power plants . however , in active management areas , the state requires developers of newer power plants with a generating capacity of 25 megawatts or larger to use groundwater in a wet recirculating system with a cooling tower and to cycle water through the cooling loop at least 15 times before discharging it . an official of an arizona public utility noted that it was more common to cycle water 3 to 7 times outside of active management areas . before a power plant developer can begin constructing a power plant with a generating capacity of 100 megawatts or larger , it must go through a two - step certification process and a permitting process , as follows: the first step of the certification process involves public hearings before the arizona power plant and transmission line siting committee , made up of representatives from five state agencies and six additional members appointed by the arizona corporation commission . although the line siting committee is not required to evaluate water use unless the plant will be located within an active management area , it typically considers water rights , water availability for the life of the power plant , and the environmental effects of groundwater pumping around the plant . committee members told us they often ask about the planned water sources and whether alternative water sources and cooling technologies are available . if the plant will be located within an active management area , a representative of the department of water resources serving on the committee takes the lead in evaluating the plant's potential adverse impacts on the water source , including reviewing state data or u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) studies that document the status and health of the proposed water source . a representative from the arizona department of environmental quality serving on the committee considers the plant's potential adverse effects on water quality .