ii. ) as provided by the amended compacts , trust funds have been established for both countries , the earnings from which are to replace sector grants when grant assistance ends in 2023 . according to an oia official , the rmi trust fund was incorporated in april 2004 , and the fsm trust fund was incorporated in august of that year . the fsm government contributed $30 million to its trust fund in october 2004 , while the rmi government , as of march 2005 , had contributed $26.5 million to its trust fund and was $1 million behind with its scheduled trust fund contributions . as provided in the amended compacts , the u.s. government has provided $32 million to the fsm trust fund and $14.5 million to the rmi trust fund for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 . in addition , according to a state official , the rmi has signed an agreement that will provide for a $50 million trust fund contribution from taiwan ( which has also provided economic assistance to the rmi ) . the fsm and the rmi each did not spend about one - third of authorized grant funding for fiscal year 2004 ( the only completed year under the amended compacts ) . the hhs official that participates in the jemco and the jemfac noted the value of oia on - site review in chuuk and said that there needs to be more on - the - ground work . fsm and rmi officials also noted a need for additional on - site review and inspection by oia staff , including site visits to schools in pohnpei and infrastructure projects that are under way in the rmi . for fiscal year 2005 , the oia honolulu office has a travel budget of $170,000 , and for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 ( through mid - april ) , staff in oia's honolulu office spent about 15 percent of their total work time reviewing compact - related activities in the islands . oia officials report that they are allocating their travel based on available funds for travel , while the oia honolulu office reports that they have had no input into the preparation of oia's budget or the allotment process . examples of the impact of on - site review include the previously mentioned visit to chuuk state by oia honolulu staff that uncovered possible misuse , as well as meetings oia program specialists have held in the islands to discuss key issues , such as standardizing and improving both financial and performance measurement reporting , with fsm and rmi officials . according to oia officials , the office has no assessment under way to establish if this amount of time spent in the fsm and the rmi meets oversight needs . while oia officials believe the funding for on - site review is insufficient , the department has not supported increased funds for this purpose . both the fsm and the rmi are seeking to centralize their government contact with the u.s. government and provide for day - to - day management of grant operations , as required in the fpas .