iii ) . bop also offers residential drug abuse treatment in more than half of its facilities and nonresidential drug abuse and drug education programs in all of its facilities . the percentage of participation , number of inmates on waiting lists , and length of the average waiting time varied by program . as tables 11 through 13 in appendix iii illustrate , all of the drug treatment and drug education programs had waiting lists from fiscal years 2006 through 2011 . for example , as of the end of fiscal year 2011 , about 2,400 inmates in male medium security institutions participated in residential drug treatment , almost 3,000 more inmates were on the waiting list to participate , and the average wait for enrollment exceeded 3 months . according to bop officials , if bop cannot meet the substance abuse treatment or education needs of inmates because it does not have the staff needed to meet program demand , some inmates will not receive programming benefits . what was the growth in bop's population from fiscal years 2006 through 2011 , and what are bop's projections for inmate population and capacity ? what is known about the effects of a growing federal prison population on operations ( i.e. , inmates , staff , and infrastructure ) within bop facilities , and to what extent has bop taken actions to mitigate these effects ? what actions have selected states taken to reduce their prison populations , and to what extent has bop implemented similar initiatives ? to address the first question , we analyzed policies and procedures that may affect the increased federal prison population ( eg , bop's inmate classification policy ) and bop's statutory authority affecting its capacity and conditions of confinement . we also analyzed bop's inmate population data and crowding percentages by institutional security level from fiscal years 2006 through 2011 and bop's 2020 long - range capacity plan , which was issued in january 2012 . we assessed the reliability of bop's inmate population and crowding data by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials about how they maintain the integrity of their data , and updating previous assessments that we did for previously issued reports . we found bop's inmate population and crowding data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed bop headquarters officials to discuss how bop's population has grown . to address the second question , we analyzed bop's statutory authority , policies , and procedures pertinent to the effects of the growing population on operations in bop facilities ( i.e. , effects on inmates , staff , and infrastructure ) and bop's ability to mitigate the effects of a growing population . we also analyzed bop studies on the effects of population growth and prison crowding on bop operations , as well as bop data from fiscal years 2006 through 2011 on available bed space , inmate program participation and waiting lists , inmate - to - staff ratios , and available infrastructure costs . we also present systemwide bop staffing ratios from fiscal years 1997 through 2011 because officials believed that presenting the ratios for a longer period better illustrates the effect of bop's population growth relative to the number of staff .