other provisions of the eo have been implemented . for example , each of the four agencies has designated an official to be responsible for ensuring that the agency's actions comply with the eo's requirements . in general , the responsible official at each agency is the agency's senior legal official.epa's and interior's supplemental guidelines specifically identify the designated official by title . agency officials could not provide us with any documentary evidence of this designation for agriculture and the corps , but agency officials assured us that their senior legal official fulfilled this role . officials at each of the four agencies said that they fully consider the potential takings implications of their planned regulatory actions , but again provided us with limited documentary evidence to support this claim . agencies provided us a few written examples of takings implication assessments . agency officials said that these assessments are not always documented in writing , and , with the passage of time , any assessments that were put in writing may no longer be on file . they also noted that these assessments are internal , predecisional documents that generally are not subject to the freedom of information act or judicial review . as a result , they said , the assessments are not typically retained in a central file for a rulemaking or other decision , and therefore difficult to locate . for example , the corps internal guidance states that takings implication assessments should be removed from the related administrative file once the agency has concluded a decision on a permit . in addition , agency officials also noted that they do not maintain a master file of all takings implication assessments . in many cases , attorneys assigned to field offices conduct these assessments . in these cases , agency officials said that headquarters staff might not have copies . nevertheless , with the exception of epa , each agency provided us with some examples of written takings implication assessments . the four agencies were divided on the need to update the guidelines . corps and epa officials supported justice's position that the guidelines do not need to be updated . corps staff indicated that , based on their review of relevant supreme court decisions since 1988 , no fundamental change in the criteria for assessing potential takings had occurred and thus no update to the attorney general's guidelines was necessary . similarly , epa staff said that some of the takings cases decided since 1988 gave the appearance that the court was changing the three - pronged test set out in the penn central decision . however , these officials noted that more recent cases have returned to the penn central test , thereby removing the need for updating the attorney general's guidelines . in contrast , officials at interior and agriculture said that it would be helpful if justice updated the summary of key takings cases contained in an appendix to the guidelines to reflect significant developments in this case law over the past 15 years . other legal experts said that the attorney general's guidelines should be updated , noting that regulatory takings case law had not remained static over the past 15 years .