the fbi has not set targets for either of these measures . overall , these relatively narrow agency - specific measures that exist do not provide a comprehensive basis for assessing governmentwide progress in building foreign partners' capacity for two reasons . first , they necessarily focus on specific program efforts , not governmentwide progress . second , they cover only one of the four key gaps in the capacity of foreign countries to prevent terrorist travel overseas . inhibiting the movement of terrorists across international borders is a key part of the u.s. strategy for protecting the united states and its interests abroad . although agencies have implemented significant new domestic programs to prevent terrorists from entering the united states , events of the past few years illustrate that the international travel system is only as secure as its weakest link . as a result , the united states seeks to enhance the capacity of its foreign partners to prevent terrorist travel overseas , with agencies implementing a variety of programs and activities to close key gaps in our foreign partners' capacity . however , some of these efforts — such as improving foreign partners' capacity to prevent the use of fraudulent travel documents — are not always well coordinated and create the risk of duplication and overlap . in light of the limited resources available to address these important issues , it is critically important to ensure that such resources are used efficiently . further , while more than 5 years have passed since the national strategy to combat terrorist travel linked our foreign partners' capacity to constrain terrorist travel to our own national security , the u.s. government still lacks an effective system for measuring and reporting progress toward the goal of enhancing our foreign partners' capacity . as agencies implement the new national strategy for counterterrorism , it is important to focus on measuring , tracking , and reporting on governmentwide progress toward the goal of enhancing foreign partners' capacity to prevent terrorist travel . without such information , the u.s. government cannot efficiently assess the effectiveness of its efforts and planners and decision makers may lack information vital to addressing foreign policy needs and leveraging u.s. resources . in order to institute a coordinated approach for delivering fraudulent travel document recognition training overseas to ensure that u.s. agencies prevent overlap and duplication ; and given state's role in working with all appropriate elements of the u.s. government to ensure integrated and effective international counterterrorism efforts , we recommend that: state develop a mechanism for agencies involved in funding and implementing fraudulent travel document recognition training at overseas posts to coordinate the delivery of such training to foreign partners . to allow the u.s. government to determine the extent to which it is building foreign partners' ability to prevent terrorist travel abroad and to make adjustments to improve its programs accordingly , we recommend that: the national security council , in collaboration with relevant agencies , develop a mechanism to measure , track , and report on u.s. progress across the government toward its goal of enhancing foreign partners' capacity to prevent terrorist travel .