gao - 03-136 . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2003 . major management challenges and program risks: department of veterans affairs . gao - 03-110 . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . all va medical facilities have computerized medical record systems . clinical reminders are electronic alerts in veterans' computerized medical records that remind providers to address specific health issues . for example , a clinical reminder would alert the provider that a veteran needs to be screened for certain types of cancer or other disease risk factors , such as hepatitis c. in july 2000 , va required the installation of hepatitis c clinical reminder software in the computerized medical record at all facilities . this reminder alerted providers when they opened a veteran's computerized medical record that the veteran needed to be screened for hepatitis c. in fiscal year 2002 , va required medical facilities to install an enhanced version of the july 2000 clinical reminder . the enhanced version alerts the provider to at - risk veterans who need hepatitis c testing , is linked directly to the entry of laboratory orders for the test , and is satisfied once the hepatitis c test is ordered . even though va's fiscal year 2002 performance measurement results show that it tested 62 percent of veterans identified to be at risk for hepatitis c , exceeding its national goal of 55 percent , thousands of veterans in the sample who were identified as at risk were not tested . moreover , the percentage of veterans identified as at risk who were tested varied widely among va's 21 health care networks . specifically , we found that va identified in its performance measurement sample 8,501 veterans nationwide who had hepatitis c risk factors out of a sample of 40,489 veterans visiting va medical facilities during fiscal year 2002 . va determined that tests were completed , in fiscal year 2002 or earlier , for 62 percent of the 8,501 veterans based on a review of each veteran's medical record through its performance measurement process . for the remaining 38 percent ( 3,269 veterans ) , va did not complete hepatitis c tests when the veterans visited va facilities . the virus causes a chronic infection in 85 percent of cases . hepatitis c , which is the leading indication for liver transplantation , can lead to liver cancer , cirrhosis ( scarring of the liver ) , or end - stage liver disease . most people infected with hepatitis c are relatively free of physical symptoms . while hepatitis c antibodies generally appear in the blood within 3 months of infection , it can take 15 years or longer for the infection to develop into cirrhosis . blood tests to detect the hepatitis c antibody , which became available in 1992 , have helped to virtually eliminate the risk of infection through blood transfusions and have helped curb the spread of the virus . many individuals were already infected , however , and because many of them have no symptoms , they are unaware of their infection . hepatitis c continues to be spread through blood exposure , such as inadvertent needle - stick injuries in health care workers and through the sharing of needles by intravenous drug abusers .