standards . those standards required that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . one such industry tool is the electronic product environmental assessment tool ( epeat® ) , which was developed along the lines of epa and doe's energy star program to assist consumers in comparing and selecting laptop computers , desktop computers , and monitors with environmentally preferable attributes . through epeat , manufacturers are rewarded for meeting increasing levels of energy efficiency and environmental standards by providing them with a certification label of bronze , silver , or gold . using this tool , consumers can also evaluate the design of an electronic product for energy conservation , reduced toxicity , extended lifespan , and end - of - life recycling , among other things . operating and managing it resources . effective management of it equipment in use can help reduce energy usage and conserve resources . for example , monitoring and efficiently managing it equipment's power use can help organizations track and reduce specific energy costs . software can be used to turn off or power down personal computers when they are not being used and to track network power usage . new techniques , such as computer virtualization , are also being used to save energy . computer virtualization allows multiple , software - based virtual machines with different operating systems to run in isolation , side - by - side , on the same physical machine . virtual machines can be stored as files , making it possible to save a virtual machine and move it from one physical server to another .  ceq , in conjunction with omb , coordinates federal environmental efforts and works with agencies in the development of policies and initiatives . federal policy and guidance direct agencies to take a variety of green it - related actions . specifically , two executive orders outline broad requirements for green it as part of a larger sustainability effort . the six agencies in our review have taken steps to implement these green it - related requirements . however , the benefits of the agencies' efforts cannot be measured because key performance information is not available . two executive orders — 13423 and 13514 — assign responsibility to federal agencies for meeting green it - related requirements . these requirements , often referred to as electronic stewardship , are part of a much larger effort covered by the executive orders to move federal operations toward environmental sustainability . according to executive order 13423 implementing instructions , electronic stewardship seeks to reduce the environmental and energy impacts of electronic product acquisition , operation and maintenance , and disposition through continual improvement for each of these lifecycle phases . in 2007 , executive order 13423 , “strengthening federal environmental , energy , and transportation management,” set goals for federal agencies to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions , among others .