review and approval is streamlined . pfcs can be used for all aip eligible projects , but also interest costs on airport bonds , terminal gates and related areas , and noise mitigation can also be used . eligibility expanded to include almost any airport – related project , including off - airport intermodal projects . up to 10 large and medium hub airports willing to assume the cost of air navigation facilities are allowed a $7 pfc . how much have airports received for capital development and where is the money coming from ? if current funding levels continue , will they be sufficient to meet planned capital development costs for 2007 through 2011 ? what are some of the potential effects of changes in how airport development will be funded as part of the administration's faa reauthorization legislation ? to determine how much planned development would cost over the next 5 years , we obtained planned capital development data from faa and aci , a key industry association . to determine the sources of airport funding , we obtained capital funding data from faa , the national association of state aviation officials ( nasao ) and thomson financial , a firm that tracks all municipal bond issues . we obtained funding data from 2001 through 2005 because these were the most recent years for which consistent data were available and then adjusted the amounts for inflation to 2006 dollars so that they could be compared to planned development amounts , which are also expressed in 2006 dollars . we did not , however , audit how the databases were compiled or test their overall accuracy , except in the case of state grant data from the nasao and some of the thomson financial bond data , which we independently confirmed . we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we subtotaled each funding stream by year and airport category and added other funding streams to determine the total funding . we met with faa , bond rating agencies , bond underwriters , airport financial consultants , and airport and airline industry associations and discussed the data and our conclusions to verify their reasonableness and accuracy . to determine whether current funding is sufficient to meet planned development for the 5-year period from 2007 — 2011 for each airport category and overall , we compared total funding to planned development . we screened the planned development and funding data for accuracy and compared funding streams across databases where possible . we did not , however , audit how the databases were compiled . to compare the estimates between faa and industry , we reconciled survey data and identified areas where the largest differences occur . in particular we analyzed the effect of various funding levels on how the program funds would be allocated . we reviewed the reliability of these data and concluded that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from august 2006 to march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more details about the scope and the methodology of our work are presented in appendix ii .