total costs were not available . contractors charged $1 per return for developing and operating the system , along with some marketing and technical taxpayer support . in 2006 and 2007 , kansas also received a marketing budget of $100,000 for marketing of webfile and electronic filing . south carolina's scnetfile ! users received direct deposit of refunds within 9-10 days , paper checks were processed within about 3 weeks , according to agency officials . some taxpayers who convert from paper may benefit by not having to respond to notices for math errors , by having lower compliance burdens , and by preferring electronic confirmation that the tax agency received their return . a benefit to some taxpayers using i - file is saving on electronic filing fees . taxpayers who were charged electronic filing fees and convert to i - file would save . taxpayers , who electronically file for free , such as users of the free file program , would not save on fees . another benefit to some taxpayers using state i - file systems is the security of not having to file through a third party such as an ero . however , as was noted earlier and shown in appendix i , some state i - file systems are operated by contractors on the contractors' computer hardware . table 5 compares some of the advantages and disadvantages of the various methods of preparing and filing federal tax returns from a taxpayer's perspective . the cost data we were able to gather from the state tax and federal agencies we profiled , while incomplete , implies that costs were relatively modest . no state tax agency had complete , documented data on the costs of developing their i - file systems . in many cases , i - file costs were not tracked separately from department - wide activities . no state tax agency had available data on costs such as management planning and conceptualization or contractor oversight . however , some state tax agencies did have estimates for large portions of their i - file costs , such as systems development or operating costs , as shown in table 6 . as already noted , state tax agencies varied in the extent to which they used contractors or in - house staff to develop or operate i - file systems . three states profiled - indiana , kansas , and utah - used a contractor and relied almost wholly on the contractor to provide i - file services . the software and servers ( computer hardware ) are owned and operated by the contractors . some taxpayer support for individuals , including technical help desk assistance , is provided by the contractor as well . other states used a contractor to develop the system , but the state owned and operated the server . some states , such as california and maryland , primarily used in - house staff to develop and operate their systems . in these states , taxpayers prepared returns on state - owned servers . available data on total i - file costs show costs are a small percentage of state tax agencies' budgets .