( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . tsa has taken some actions to address these directives . for example , tsa has revised its standard operating procedures and training materials to more clearly instruct personnel trained in behavior detection and other tsa personnel on how to avoid unlawful profiling ; initiated a study to collect data on the race and national origin of passengers referred for behavior detection screening and examine whether disparities exist in the referral trends , and if so , whether these differences suggest discrimination or bias in the referral process ; and issued a management directive establishing tsa policy and procedures for receiving , documenting , and referring passenger screening complaints resulting from the application of tsa security screening policies and procedures , including processes for all involved offices in headquarters and the field that handle passenger complaints . the aviation and transportation security act established tsa as the federal agency with primary responsibility for securing the nation's civil aviation system , which includes the screening of all passengers and property transported by commercial passenger aircraft . at the approximately 440 tsa - regulated airports in the united states , all passengers , their accessible property , and their checked baggage are screened prior to boarding an aircraft or entering the sterile area of an airport pursuant to statutory and regulatory requirements and tsa - established standard operating procedures . tsa began using behavior detection in 2006 as an added layer of security to identify potentially high - risk passengers . through the end of fiscal year 2016 , tsa's behavior detection screening process was a stand - alone program that used specially trained behavior detection officers to observe passengers at the screening checkpoint and engage them in brief verbal exchanges . during this period , behavior detection officers had brief interactions with passengers in the queue leading up to the screening checkpoint . if the behavior detection officers determined during this interaction that a passenger exhibited a certain number of behavioral indicators , the behavior detection officer was to refer the passenger for additional screening or , if circumstances warranted , contact a law enforcement officer . according to tsa procedures , if a passenger was referred for additional screening , one behavior detection officer conducted a pat - down of the passenger and search of his or her personal property while another checked documents and conversed with the passenger , attempting to understand why the behavioral indicators were being displayed and continuing to look for additional behavioral indicators . if a passenger did not exhibit a certain number of additional indicators , he or she was allowed to proceed to the boarding gate . if the passenger did exhibit a certain number of additional indicators , or other events occurred , such as the discovery of a fraudulent document , the behavior detection officer was to call a law enforcement officer . the law enforcement officer then would determine next steps , which could include questioning the passenger or conducting a criminal background check . the law enforcement officer then determined whether to release the passenger , refer the passenger to another law enforcement agency , or arrest him or her .