dhs concurred with our recommendation . to date , dhs has continued to make progress in completing some identified activities but has yet to do so for others . in a september 2007 report and an october 2007 testimony , we reported that consistent with the national strategy requirement to identify and reduce threats and vulnerabilities , dhs was sponsoring multiple control systems security initiatives , including an effort to improve control systems cybersecurity using vulnerability evaluation and response tools . however , dhs had not established a strategy to coordinate the various control systems activities across federal agencies and the private sector , and it did not effectively share information on control system vulnerabilities with the public and private sectors . accordingly , we recommended that dhs develop a strategy to guide efforts for securing control systems and establish a rapid and secure process for sharing sensitive control system vulnerability information . dhs recently began developing a strategy and a process to share sensitive information . we reported and later testified in 2006 that the department had begun a variety of initiatives to fulfill its responsibility , as called for by the national strategy , for developing an integrated public / private plan for internet recovery . however , we determined that these efforts were not comprehensive or complete . as such , we recommended that dhs implement nine actions to improve the department's ability to facilitate public / private efforts to recover the internet in case of a major disruption . in october 2007 , we testified that the department had made progress in implementing our recommendations ; however , seven of the nine have not been completed . to date , an integrated public / private plan for internet recovery does not exist . in 2007 , we reported that public and private entities faced a number of challenges in addressing cybercrime , including ensuring adequate analytical and technical capabilities for law enforcement and conducting investigations and prosecuting cybercrimes that cross national and state borders . in addition to our recommendations on improving key aspects of the national cybersecurity strategy and its implementation , we also obtained the views of experts ( by means of panel discussions ) on these and other critical aspects of the strategy , including areas for improvement . the experts , who included former federal officials , academics , and private sector executives , highlighted 12 key improvements that are , in their view , essential to improving the strategy and our national cybersecurity posture . these improvements are in large part consistent with our above mentioned reports and extensive research and experience in this area . they include: 1 .