( recommendation 1 ) . this is critical to ensuring the effectiveness of the trauma care provided . the planning documents for this element do not yet incorporate any of the four leading practices , including goals , strategies to achieve goals , risks , or plans to assess progress . officials indicated that planning for the implementation of this element will be incomplete until dod establishes the new joint trauma education and training directorate responsible for establishing these partnerships . section 708 of the ndaa states that dod may enter into partnerships with civilian trauma centers to provide trauma care providers with maximum and continuous exposure to a high volume of critically injured patients . according to dod officials , planning for incorporating lessons learned will begin after the directorate reaches initial operating capacity , which they anticipate in 2018 . dod officials also told us that the jts will collaborate with the directorate for trauma education and training partnerships , once it is established , to plan the translation of relevant lessons learned into clinical practice . because planning for this element is still incomplete , it is unclear whether dod will be prepared to use information from these clinical partnerships to improve the effectiveness of the trauma care it provides to injured service members . in an effort to reduce preventable deaths and disabilities due to trauma , and as required by the ndaa , dod is planning for the implementation of its new jts . specifically , the department has submitted its implementation plan to congress as required and has developed other supplemental planning documents that describe how it plans to address the four required elements of the new system . incorporating these elements is a critical step for dod as it works to improve trauma care consistently across the military health system . although the ndaa requires that dod begin implementation in 2018 , dod's planning is ongoing , and its planning documents do not fully incorporate leading practices that can help ensure the success of its efforts . as it moves forward , dod has the opportunity to update its efforts and planning documents to fully incorporate these leading practices . by not doing so , dod may be missing an opportunity to ensure that its efforts to implement a new jts are effective and to help reduce trauma - related deaths and injuries across the military . to fully implement the four required elements of the new joint trauma system , the director of the defense health agency should fully incorporate leading practices — including establishing goals , planning strategies to achieve goals , identifying and addressing risks , and assessing progress — in its planning to guide implementation efforts . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix i , and technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its written comments , dod concurred with our recommendation to fully incorporate leading practices in its planning to guide jts implementation efforts . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .