( app . ii lists the standards and how nsc verifies them during enrollment and reenrollment. ) for example , the on - site inspections are used to check the compliance with the standards for whether the supplier: has a physical facility on an appropriate site that is accessible to beneficiaries and to cms , with a clearly visible sign with hours posted ; has its own inventory in stock on site , off site at another location , or has a contract with another company for the purchase of inventory ; maintains records that document delivery of items to beneficiaries and information provided to beneficiaries on warranties , including how repairs and exchanges will be handled , and how to contact the supplier in case of questions or problems ; and has a written beneficiary complaint resolution policy and maintains records on beneficiary complaints and their resolution . nsc's analysts are expected to follow procedures to review information provided by the on - site inspection and take other steps to verify suppliers' compliance with the standards . for example , when on site the inspectors are expected to check that the supplier has all the valid occupation and business licenses required by its state and has a comprehensive liability insurance policy . the nsc analyst is expected to check that the supplier has all the state licenses that it would need to provide the items it disclosed in its application . the nsc analyst also is expected to contact the insurance underwriter to ensure that the supplier's policy is valid , and the post office to make sure the supplier's address is listed . nsc also has a procedure to match data from its supplier database with computerized lists maintained by the federal government to ensure that supply company owners are not prohibited from participating in federal health care programs or debarred from federal contracting . nsc does not specifically verify adherence to 4 of the 21 standards at enrollment and reenrollment , because violations would generally be apparent through its verification of other standards . for example , the standard that requires suppliers to furnish nsc with complete and accurate information on the application and notify nsc of any changes within 30 days is verified through checking the accuracy of the suppliers' disclosures of information for other standards — such as ownership and the appropriateness of the physical facility . the majority of on - site inspections are conducted by more than 380 field representatives of overland solutions , inc. ( osi ) , a company that performs this work as a subcontractor to nsc . in addition , nsc uses its own personnel , who are located in six cities , to conduct on - site inspections . nsc and osi conducted over 20,000 on - site inspections in fiscal year 2004 . in performing their reviews , the site inspectors follow certain procedures . nsc requires that site inspectors arrive unannounced for any inspection . before the inspection , nsc provides the inspectors with briefing information on the supplier , including information on whether the supplier is enrolling or reenrolling and the type of state licenses to verify .