( see fig . variation in state approval of rate increase requests may have significant implications for consumers . in the above example , if the initial , annual premium for the policy was , for example , $2,000 , consumers would see their annual premium rise by $1,000 in colorado , a state that approved the full increase requested ; increase by only $300 in new york , where a 15 percent increase was approved ; and stay level in connecticut , where the increase was not approved . although state regulators in our 10-state review told us that most rate increases have occurred for policies subject to the loss ratio standard , variation in state approval of proposed rate increases may continue for policies protected by the more comprehensive standards . states may implement the standards differently , and other oversight efforts , such as the extent to which states work with companies , also affect approval of increases . the 10 states in our review have standards established by law and regulations for governing claims settlement practices . the majority of the standards , some of which apply specifically to ltci and others that apply more broadly to various insurance products , are designed to ensure that claims settlement practices are conducted in a timely manner . specifically , the standards are designed to ensure the timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers about claims . in addition to these timeliness standards , states have established other standards , such as requirements for how companies are to make benefit determinations . while the 10 states we reviewed all have standards governing claims settlement practices , the states vary in the specific standards they have adopted as well as in how they define timeliness . for example , 1 state does not have a standard that requires companies to pay claims in a timely manner . for the 9 states that do have a standard , the definition of “timely” the states use varies notably — from 5 days to 45 days , with 2 states not specifying a time frame . in addition , federal laws governing tax - qualified policies do not address the timely investigation and payment of claims or prompt communication with consumers about claims . the absence of certain standards and the variation in states' definitions of “timely” may leave consumers in some states less protected from , for example , delays in payment than consumers in other states . ( see table 2 for key claims settlement standards adopted by the 10 states in our review and examples of the variation in standards. ) the states in our review primarily use two ways to monitor companies' compliance with claims settlement standards . one way the states monitor compliance is by reviewing consumer complaints on a case - by - case basis and in the aggregate to identify trends in company practices . when responding to complaints on a case - by - case basis , regulators in some states told us that they determine whether they can work with the consumer and the company to resolve the complaint or determine whether there has been a violation of claims settlement standards that requires further action .