this is very encouraging . however , continued oversight by the congress will also be key , and in the case of some areas , legislative actions will be needed . just yesterday , we issued another report entitled 21st century challenges: reexamining the base of the federal government ( gao - 05-325sp ) , which presented a number of illustrative questions for the congress and other policy makers to consider as they carry out their various constitutional responsibilities . these questions span a broad range of budget categories and federal operations , including discretionary and mandatory spending , and tax policies and programs . we hope that this new report , along with the high - risk report , will be used by various congressional committees as they consider which areas of government need particular attention and reconsideration . in the final analysis , only elected officials can decide whether , when , and how best to proceed to address these important issues . for this 2005 high - risk update , we determined that three high - risk areas warranted removal from the list because of progress made . they are the department of education's ( education ) student financial aid programs , federal aviation administration ( faa ) financial management , and the department of agriculture's ( usda ) forest service financial management . we will , however , continue to monitor these programs , as appropriate , to ensure that the improvements we have noted are sustained . in 1990 , we designated student financial aid programs as high risk . since then , in intervening high - risk updates , we reported various problems , including poor financial management and weak internal controls , fragmented and inefficient information systems , and inadequate attention to program integrity as evidenced by high default rates and the numbers of ineligible students participating in the programs . in 1998 , the congress established education's office of federal student aid ( fsa ) as the government's first performance - based organization , thus giving it greater flexibility to better address long - standing management weaknesses within student aid programs . in 2001 , education created a team of senior managers dedicated to addressing key financial and management problems throughout the agency , and in 2002 , the secretary of education made removal from gao's high - risk list a specific goal and listed it as a performance measure in education's strategic plan . we reported in 2003 that education had made important progress , but that it was too early to determine whether improvements would be sustained and that additional steps needed to be taken in several areas . since 2003 , education has sustained improvements in the financial management of student financial aid programs and taken additional steps to address our concerns about systems integration , reporting on defaulted loans , and human capital management . furthermore , the agency has met many of our criteria for removing the high - risk designation . education has demonstrated a strong commitment to addressing risks ; developed and implemented corrective action plans ; and , through its annual planning and reporting processes , monitored the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures .