appointing a confidential advisor . similarly , an ocwr official stated that the confidential advisor role was similar to ocwr's counselor role prior to the reform act , which made implementing this requirement more manageable . creating a secure electronic system to file claims . the online system , socrates , was operational starting june 26 , 2019 , 7 days after the requirement's effective date of june 19 , 2019 . between june 19 and june 26 , 2019 , ocwr implemented a fillable pdf form so that claims could be submitted electronically ( email or fax ) . ocwr officials reported that no claims were filed during the 7-day delay , and therefore , they believe that the delay did not negatively affect employees' ability to file claims . according to ocwr , testing the system the week prior to june 19 , 2019 , revealed numerous problems with socrates . for example , if a user did not submit his or her claim within a certain amount of time , the system refreshed the page without saving the user's data , forcing the user to restart the claim . also , during a june 17 , 2019 , meeting between ocwr and congressional staff , ocwr received requests to further revise forms associated with socrates . ocwr was unable to implement these changes before the june 19 , 2019 , deadline . as a result , ocwr delayed the launch of socrates until june 26 , 2019 , to allow time to resolve these issues and fully test the system . however , ocwr did not communicate the decision to delay the full launch of socrates to congressional stakeholders who had expected that the system would be delivered on time . as of october 2019 , ocwr had not completed one requirement that was due by june 19 , 2019 . establishing a program to permanently retain records . the reform act required ocwr to establish and maintain a permanent records retention program , which includes records of preliminary reviews , mediations , hearings , and other proceedings . since november 2017 , ocwr has operated under an interim records retention policy that requires it to permanently keep all records . according to ocwr , it is not destroying or deleting any records . ocwr's interim permanent records retention policy states that ocwr will establish standards and procedures for records integrity , privacy , and confidentiality . however , as of october 2019 , about 4 months after this requirement became effective , ocwr had not developed these standards or established other policies or procedures for maintaining a permanent records retention program other than the interim policy . according to ocwr , it scanned paper records to create electronic files and hired a separate contractor in september 2019 to help further develop its records retention program . as of october 2019 , ocwr was implementing the other three requirements which have varying deadlines , time frames , and effective dates extending beyond june 19 , 2019 ( see table 2 ) . tracking and reporting data and assessments . the reform act created new reporting requirements for ocwr . for example , it required ocwr to issue annual , itemized reports on awards and settlements .