hhi . the key variable in the model was the hhi , a measure of packer market concentration faced by feedlots in a given geographic area — analyzed in the model by county — on a given purchase date . the hhi takes the same value for any transaction in a given county on a given purchase date ( it varies only at the county level and over time ) . our calculation used a 90-day moving average window ( current day and the 89 days prior ) to calculate the hhi for each county on each date . although our model included only cash transactions , we calculated the hhi using all transactions ; that is , we included formula contracts , forward contracts , negotiated grid transactions , and cash transactions . however , we excluded transactions involving packer - owned feedlots and feedlots not in the united states from our hhi calculation . econometric analysis that uses hhis to explain prices generally considers the possibility that the hhi variable is endogenous and is possibly correlated with the error term and to address this issue , we instrumented our hhi variable . beef quality and yield grades . for each lot of cattle transacted , we used as controls the percent of fed cattle in each transaction whose beef graded as choice or better . we also used as a control the percent of fed cattle in each transaction whose beef yield was rated grades 1 or 2 . in addition , we included a measure of the percentages of holstein cattle , ungraded cattle , and cows in the lot . large feedlots . we used an indicator ( dummy ) variable for large feedlots — specifically feedlots that were in the 95th percentile of feedlots for the packing plant with which the transaction occurred . we used this variable to control for possible extra bargaining leverage that large feedlots may have with packers . live weight . we controlled for the average live weight of the cattle lot by including categorical variables ( dummies ) for: less than 1,050 pounds and more than 1,500 pounds ( the 1,050 pounds to 1,500 pounds category is the omitted comparison category ) . we selected these category cut - off values because generally prices are reduced for cattle lots with an average weight of less than 1,050 pounds or more than 1,500 pounds . fixed effects . we used a set of indicator variables to account for fixed effects associated with packing plants , time , and individual counties . specifically , we used a set of packing plant indicator variables to account for effects pertaining to individual packing plants , such as a plant's location . mandatory . under the livestock mandatory reporting act of 1999 , all qualifying packers must report information on all their purchases and sales on a daily basis . the price reporting group receives daily price data on all fed cattle that a packing plant purchases , and all the beef it sells . according to price reporting group officials , they aggregate and summarize the information by sector and publish it within an hour of receipt .