this training is not required . contracting officials we spoke to at va said they struggled with the details of awarding contracts subject to buy american act requirements because they are not provided sufficient agency - specific training and guidance on the topic . moreover , several contracting staff noted an increased need for training due to recent changes in va contracting practices . specifically , in response to a 2016 supreme court decision , va has increased contracting efforts with veteran - owned small businesses through the veterans first contracting program . as a result , contracting officials explained they have reduced their use of schedule contracts , in which the determinations related to the buy american act requirements were made with the initial awards . as one contracting officer explained , prior to this change , more than 90 percent of her division's procurements were through va schedule contracts in which buy american act applicability had already been established . however , this shift in contracting practices means contracting officers will more frequently need to consider the applicability of the buy american act , but contracting officers have not received specific guidance or training to do so . noting the significance of this change , one contracting officer stated she approached va management to obtain buy american act training for her division , but such training was not available . federal internal controls state that agencies should ensure that training is aimed at developing and retaining employee knowledge , skills , and abilities to meet changing organizational needs . in september 2018 , we reported that va was experiencing difficulties implementing multiple aspects of the veterans first policy , and we recommended that va provide more targeted implementation training . as va moves forward to implement this training , incorporating the buy american act requirements will be important to provide greater assurance that staff has the knowledge and skills needed to navigate the changing procurement environment . hhs does not have agency - level buy american training or guidance . the hhs acquisition regulation supplement does not address foreign acquisitions . hhs officials told us that efforts to develop guidance that would address buy american act requirements are underway , but they do not know when they will be finalized and made available to contracting officers , and could not describe the extent to which they will address buy american act implementation . the hhs contracting officers we interviewed discussed informal buy american act training their divisions had developed because department - level training was not available . for example , at hhs' national institutes of health , a contracting official told us about a training course she recently developed because her office was taking on the administration of additional contracts for which the buy american act requirements would apply . contracting officers at hhs' office of biomedical advanced research and development authority described informal training on the agency's contract writing system — included as part of their weekly internal staff meetings — that provides additional guidance on how to appropriately complete certain data fields relevant to the buy american act .