age . enrollees aged 55 or older had the highest average length of coverage , while those aged 25 to 34 had the lowest — 9.2 months compared to 7.8 months . reported household income . aptc - eligible enrollees who reported having a household income between 301 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level had the highest average length of coverage , while those who reported having a household income less than , or equal to , 100 percent of the federal poverty level had the lowest — 8.9 months compared to 8.0 months . eligibility for aptc . enrollees who were eligible for aptc had a higher average length of coverage than enrollees who were not eligible for aptc — 8.6 months compared to 7.8 months benefit level of selected plan . enrollees who selected higher - benefit , gold plans had the highest average length of coverage , while enrollees who selected lower - benefit catastrophic , plans had the lowest — 8.8 months compared to 6.7 months . enrollees who selected silver plans — the most common plan selection — had an average length of coverage of 8.6 months . state of residence . enrollees residing in maine had the highest average length of coverage , while enrollees residing in mississippi had the lowest — 9.4 months compared to 8.0 months . see appendix ii for additional data on the average length of coverage for enrollees by various characteristics . cms's data on terminations of enrollee coverage due to nonpayment of premiums are not complete and accurate . cms officials told us that they collect some information from issuers on their terminations of enrollee coverage for nonpayment of premiums . when issuers terminate policies , the inbound transaction files they send to cms must include , among other elements , a revised coverage end date taking the termination into account . cms uploads these data into its centralized ffe enrollment system . however , while the issuers may also include codes that designate the reasons for the terminations , there is no requirement for them to consistently do so . data on termination codes may therefore not be consistently reported by issuers . cms officials told us that data on reasons for termination are not tracked because they are not critical to ensure the accuracy of aptc payments — which is the main function of the reconciliation process . officials stated that key essential variables that cms does track are whether coverage is effectuated ( that is , whether the first premium payment has been made ) , whether the enrollee is eligible for aptc payments , and whether coverage was terminated . in addition , when issuers do report termination reason codes , these data are not always accurate . specifically , cms told us that , historically , issuers may have incorrectly used the nonpayment termination code for other types of terminations , and two issuers we interviewed acknowledged having done so . we compared data on terminations for nonpayment from cms's centralized enrollment system with data we obtained from three issuers for a small selection of enrollees .