senate report no . 114-49 , which accompanied a proposed senate bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , included a provision for us to review the military services' fuel consumption estimates in dod's annual budget requests . this report ( 1 ) describes the military services' reported actual spending on fuel consumption compared to their budget estimates since 2012 and factors that the services reported to have contributed to any differences ; ( 2 ) assesses the steps dod takes to report accurate and complete fuel consumption data in its annual budget requests ; and ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which dod's approach for determining the fiscal year 2017 standard price it will charge to fuel customers is consistent with federal budget guidance and leading practices for a credible and well - documented cost estimate . to describe the military services' reported actual spending on fuel consumption compared to their budget estimates since 2012 and factors that were reported to have contributed to any differences , we analyzed dod's operation and maintenance ( o&m ) budget justification materials for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 . we compared data on actual obligations reported in the military services' o&m budget justification materials for fuel consumption against the military services' spending estimates for fuel consumption for these same years . we focused our analysis on fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , because this period covered the most recent complete year of actual fuel consumption and provided three years of consumption data to analyze any trends . to determine the reliability of the data , we obtained information on how the data were collected , managed , and used through interviews with and questionnaires to relevant officials and determined that the data presented in our findings were sufficiently reliable to present trends in this report on the military services' actual and estimated o&m spending for fuel consumption for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 . we interviewed an official from the office of the under secretary of defense ( ousd ) comptroller who is responsible for managing the bulk fuel program and officials with the military services to better understand any factors that contributed to differences between actual and estimated fuel consumption . to assess the steps dod takes to report accurate and complete fuel consumption data in annual o&m budget requests , we analyzed dod's o&m budget justification materials for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 as well as military service and defense logistics agency ( dla ) fuel data . we interviewed an official from the ousd comptroller who is responsible for managing the bulk fuel program , officials with military service budget and financial management offices , and dla to determine how o&m budget justification materials generally , and fuel consumption estimates specifically , are prepared , evaluated , and reported to congress . we also interviewed officials from dla to determine how dla reports its fuel sales to the military services .