federal government to . address current and emerging challenges to the well - being address current and emerging challenges to the well - being and financial security of the american people related to . and financial security of the american peoplerelated to . legislative authority . we are requesting legislation to establish a board of contract appeals at gao to adjudicate contract claims involving contracts awarded by legislative branch agencies . gao has performed this function on an ad hoc basis over the years for appeals of claims from decisions of the architect of the capitol on contracts that it awards . recently we have agreed to handle claims arising under government printing office contracts . the legislative proposal would promote efficiency and predictability in the resolution of contractor and agency claims by consolidating such work in an established and experienced adjudicative component of gao and would permit gao to recover its costs of providing such adjudicative services from legislative branch users of such services . we also plan to request legislation that will assist gao in performing its mission work and enhance our human capital policies , including addressing certain compensation and benefits issues of interest to our employees . while there are a number of important provisions , today i will only discuss several of the significant ones . regarding provisions concerned with mission work , we have identified a number of legislative mandates that are either no longer meeting the purpose intended or should be performed by an entity other than gao . we are working with the cognizant entities and the appropriate authorization and oversight committees to discuss the potential impact of legislative relief for these issues . another provision would update the existing authority of the comptroller general to administer oaths when appropriate for an audit or investigation . the comptroller general has long had the authority to “administer oaths to witnesses when auditing and settling accounts” . because of the variety of audits and investigations gao now performs , we propose the deletion of “when auditing and settling accounts” so that in those limited circumstances where appropriate , the comptroller general may authorize the administration of oaths to witnesses . to keep the congress apprized of difficulties we have interviewing agency personnel and obtaining agency views on matters related to ongoing mission work , we will suggest new reporting requirements . when agencies or other entities ignore a request by the comptroller general to have personnel provide information under oath , make personnel available for interviews , or provide written answers to questions , the comptroller general would report to the congress as soon as practicable and also include such information in the annual report to the congress . in regard to gao's human capital flexibilities , among other provisions , we are proposing a flexibility that allows us to better approximate market rates for professional positions by increasing our maximum pay for other than the senior executive service and senior level from gs - 15 , step 10 , to executive level iii . additionally , under our revised and contemporary merit pay system , certain portions of an employee's merit increase , below applicable market - based pay caps , are not permanent .