following is our strategic plan framework . appendix i of this statement delineates in a bit more detail our strategic objectives and our qualitative performance goals for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . we issued our 2001 performance and accountability report that combines information on our past year's accomplishments and progress in meeting our strategic goals with our plans for achieving our fiscal year 2003 performance goals . the report earned a certificate of excellence in accountability reporting from the association of government accountants . we issued our fiscal year 2002 performance and accountability report in january 2003 . our financial statements , which are integral to our performance and accountability , received an unqualified opinion for the sixteenth consecutive year . furthermore , our external auditors did not identify any material control weaknesses or compliance issues relating to gao's operations . during the past year , we acquired new hardware and software and developed user - friendly systems that enhanced our productivity and responsiveness to the congress and helped meet our initial information technology goals . for example , we replaced aging desktop workstations with notebook computers that provide greater computing power , speed , and mobility . in addition , we upgraded key desktop applications , the windows desktop operating system , and telecommunications systems to ensure that gao staff have modern technology tools to assist them in carrying out their work . we also developed new , integrated , user - friendly web - based systems that eliminate duplicate data entry while ensuring the reusability of existing data . as the clinger - cohen act requires , gao has an enterprise architecture program in place to guide its information technology planning and decision making . in designing and developing systems , as well as in acquiring technology tools and services , we have applied enterprise architecture principles and concepts to ensure sound information technology investments and the interoperability of systems . given gao's role as a key provider of information and analyses to the congress , maintaining the right mix of technical knowledge and expertise as well as general analytical skills is vital to achieving our mission . we spend about 80 percent of our resources on our people , but without excellent human capital management , we could still run the risk of being unable to deliver what the congress and the nation expect from us . at the beginning of my term in early fiscal year 1999 , we completed a self - assessment that profiled our human capital workforce and identified a number of serious challenges facing our workforce , including significant issues involving succession planning and imbalances in the structure , shape , and skills of our workforce . as presented below , through a number of strategically planned human capital initiatives over the past few years , we have made significant progress in addressing these issues . for example , as illustrated in figure 3 , by the end of fiscal year 2002 , we had almost a 60 percent increase in the percentage of staff at the entry - level ( band i ) as compared with fiscal year 1998 . also , the proportion of our workforce at the mid - level ( band ii ) decreased by about 8 percent .