( see fig . the average costs per trs plan do not include certain administrative costs that dod was not able to allocate specifically to trs , such as advertising costs and program education . however , dod officials told us that including these costs would not be sufficient to close the gap between trs premiums and the average costs per plan . dod also incurred start - up costs associated with establishing the trs program , which are not included in the average costs per trs plan because dod did not intend for them to be covered by trs premiums . the discrepancy between trs premiums and reported trs costs has implications for dod's cost sharing with trs enrollees . by statute , the portion of the trs premium paid by enrollees in tier 1 — and all enrollees as of october 1 , 2007 — is to cover 28 percent of the full premium . this information is included in appendix i . to compare the annual trs premiums established by dod to the reported costs of providing benefits under trs in 2006 , we reviewed dod's reported trs enrollment data and data on the cost of providing trs benefits through tricare - authorized civilian providers or hospitals , data on the administrative costs associated with providing trs benefits , and data on the costs of providing trs benefits through mtfs . using dod's data , we calculated the average cost per trs plan of providing individual and family coverage as the sum of the reported costs divided by the average number of trs plans . we also reviewed legislation relevant to the trs program and literature on setting health insurance premiums and interviewed experts from the fields of health economics and finance and dod officials in the tricare management activity and the office of the assistant secretary for health affairs , which are responsible for managing the tricare program . we limited our analysis to calendar year 2006 because some 2007 data are still incomplete and because 2005 average cost data in some months are based on a very small number of enrollees . during the time period covered by our analysis , trs included three tiers of eligibility with enrollees in each tier paying different portions of the premium based on the tier for which they qualified . we limited our analysis to tier 1 because it included over 90 percent of trs plans and because tier 1 enrollee premium levels have applied to the entire trs program since october 2007 . in addition , we were unable to report the average cost per plan for tiers 2 and 3 separately , due to the low number of enrollees in these tiers . to compare dod's projected costs for the trs program before implementation with dod's reported costs for the program in 2005 and 2006 , we reviewed the analyses prepared by dod before trs's implementation that projected ( 1 ) the number of individual and family plans in each tier of the trs program and ( 2 ) the costs per plan of providing the trs benefit . these projections were the two major factors used by dod to estimate trs costs .