we summarize these misalignments in our report . we also interviewed bureau officials from the cedcap and 2020 census programs , including the cedcap program manager , associate director of decennial census programs , the chief of the bureau's office of innovation and implementation , and the bureau's acting chief information officer , on their approach to managing schedule , risk , and requirement interdependencies between the two programs . to describe the key information security challenges the bureau faces in implementing the 2020 census design , we reviewed documentation on the 2020 census design — including the 2020 census operational plan , cedcap and 2020 census program risk registers , and a report developed by a contractor for the 2020 census — and interviewed staff within the bureau's office of the chief information security officer . we developed a list of key assumptions on the design of the 2020 census based on the documentation and input from bureau officials . we also reviewed reports by gao and others on information security challenges faced across the federal government . we synthesized the information in these reports to determine which security practices were most important given the design assumptions of the 2020 census , to develop an initial list of key challenges . we then obtained input on our initial list of challenges from relevant experts and the census bureau . specifically , we identified relevant experts within two of the bureau's key advisory groups — the national academy of sciences and census scientific advisory committee . these advisory groups consist of academic and industry experts from various fields , including information technology , and they meet with the bureau regularly to provide feedback on various areas , including the 2020 census program . we also identified relevant experts within the information security field on gao's executive council on information management and technology , including the chair of the association for computing machinery's committee on computers and public policy ; the executive director for the national association of state chief information officers ; and the executive director of the center for education and research in information assurance and security . we provided our list of key information security challenges to these experts , and obtained their perspectives . finally , we provided the list to the census bureau's acting chief information officer and the chief information security officer , to gain their feedback on our list and allow them the opportunity to respond with the bureau's plans for the challenges . we also determined the bureau's progress in addressing recommendations from our 2013 public and limited official use only reports by reviewing bureau documentation , such as the bureau's risk management framework , it security program policy , and guidelines and procedures for incident response plan tests . eleven of these projects are intended to deliver one or more it solutions . the twelfth project — it infrastructure scale - up — is not intended to deliver it capabilities , solutions , or infrastructure ; rather , it is expected to provide funding to the other relevant projects to acquire the necessary hardware and infrastructure to enable 2020 census systems to scale to accommodate the volume of users . table 1 describes the objectives of each project .