employees cannot receive this allowance while receiving the post allowance . the extraordinary quarters allowance is typically granted for up to 90 days to employees and eligible family members at an overseas post when they are required to partially or completely vacate their permanent quarters because of renovations , repairs , or unhealthy or dangerous conditions in their permanent quarters . educational travel cannot be paid at the same time as the education allowance . recruitment and retention incentive allowances compensate employees for service at posts where conditions may be difficult or dangerous . state uses the following three allowances to recruit and retain staff at posts: hardship pay compensates employees for service in foreign areas where conditions of environment differ substantially from conditions of environment in the continental united states in that the living conditions are extraordinarily difficult , involve excessive physical hardship , or are notably unhealthy . employees assigned to designated posts can earn hardship pay at rates ranging from 5 to 35 percent above basic compensation in 5 percent increments , based on the severity of the hardship as determined by state . for the post allowance , spending by country reflects allowance rates , the number of state employees , and the size of state employees' families at each of the country's posts . this system generally captures information on the location where an employee is assigned . according to state officials , the global financial management system captures information on all state payments , including those paid through vouchers , such as for rent paid directly to the landlord . state provides 14 allowances to employees serving overseas to compensate them for the costs and hardships related to foreign assignments across four broad categories — cost - of - living , recruitment and retention incentives , quarters , and other allowances . table 1 includes a brief summary of these allowances . cost - of - living allowances reimburse employees for certain excess costs , exclusive of any quarters costs , incurred from employment overseas . the rate is based on the per diem at post , post allowance , and family size . in contrast to the temporary quarters subsistence allowance , employees can continue to receive the post allowance when they receive the extraordinary quarters allowance . state offers two additional allowances designed to reimburse employees who must maintain an official residence or employees who incur expenses representing the u.s. government in an official capacity to a foreign government . the official residence expense reimburses a principal representative , such as an ambassador , at an overseas post for expenses related to operating and maintaining a suitable official residence in - country when those expenses exceed the usual expenses incurred if he were serving at the post in any other official capacity . the allowance is intended to offset the cost of representing the united states abroad when a principal representative extends official hospitality to foreign dignitaries and important visitors and by hosting appropriate ceremonies ( for an example , see fig . generally , principal representatives are expected to direct at least 3.5 percent of their salary toward maintaining their residences , and state may reimburse expenses above that .