need . the senate veterans' affairs committee asked gao to ( 1 ) determine the the senate veterans' affairs committee asked gao to ( 1 ) determine the characteristics and trends in size of the pensioner population , ( 2 ) assess characteristics and trends in size of the pensioner population , ( 2 ) assess the policies and procedures va has in place to ensure that initial pension the policies and procedures va has in place to ensure that initial pension eligibility decisions are well managed , and ( 3 ) assess the procedures va eligibility decisions are well managed , and ( 3 ) assess the procedures va has in place to ensure that pensioners continue to receive the proper has in place to ensure that pensioners continue to receive the proper benefit payments . benefit payments . pensions are one of the many benefits available to qualified veterans pensions are one of the many benefits available to qualified veterans through va. other va benefits include medical care , educational through va. other va benefits include medical care , educational resources , and compensation for disabilities sustained or worsened as a resources , and compensation for disabilities sustained or worsened as a result of active duty military service . va actually administers three result of active duty military service . va actually administers three pension programs , and we included pensioners from all three programs when analyzing trends in population size , as this allowed for a more thorough understanding of changes within different war cohorts over time . the remainder of the report , however , focuses on the improved pension program , which is the largest and the only one still open to new members . to determine the characteristics and size of the pensioner population , we analyzed data from va's benefit delivery network ( bdn ) , va budget reports , and other reports through fiscal year 2006 . to address our remaining objectives , we reviewed relevant laws , guidance , procedures , and internal controls that va uses to ensure the soundness of pension benefit decisions . we also analyzed va's internal control policies and performance reports . we visited 4 of va's 57 regional offices , located in boston , milwaukee , providence , and st. paul . we selected these sites based on variations in size and geographic locations . we also visited va's three pension maintenance centers ( pmc ) , located in philadelphia , milwaukee , and st. paul , and the debt management center in st. paul . we interviewed va officials and staff at these sites as well as officials at va central office in washington , d.c. we also conducted case file reviews in three locations — milwaukee , providence , and st. paul — to verify the adequacy of documentation in support of initial pension decisions . for more details on our scope and methodology , see app . we conducted our review from november 2006 to february 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .