gao - 02-504r . gao / t - nsiad - 97-178 . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 1997 . space station: cost control problems continue to worsen . gao / t - nsiad - 97-177 . washington , d.c.: june 18 , 1997 . space station: cost control difficulties continue . gao / t - nsiad - 96-210 . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 1996 . space station: cost control difficulties continue . gao / nsiad - 96-135 . washington , d.c.: july 17 , 1996 . space station: estimated total u.s. funding requirements . unity module in december 1998 . the station's occupancy began in october 2000 with the launch of the expedition i crew . since then , four other three - person crews have occupied the station while assembly continues . in addition , the crews have been conducting hands - on scientific research . figure 1 shows the international space station on - orbit . since its inception in 1984 , the space station has undergone a number of redesigns and has been mired by cost growth and schedule slips . in january 2001 , nasa announced that an additional $4 billion in funding over the next 5 years would be required to complete the station's assembly and fund its operation . by may 2001 the estimated cost growth had increased to $4.8 billion . in response to the announcement , the administration directed nasa to take a number of actions , including terminating the propulsion module , deferring the habitation module , deferring the crew return vehicle , and reducing funding for scientific research to stay within the president's budget projections . the president's fiscal year 2002 budget blueprint and budget request for the space station lay out a strategy for containing cost growth that ensures the completion of the u.s. core station and deploys the elements of the program's international partners . to achieve this strategy , nasa was required to construct a plan of action that addressed institutional and program reforms to establish processes for executing the baseline program . in july 2001 , the nasa administrator appointed the international space station management and cost evaluation task force to conduct an independent external review and assessment of the station's cost , budget , and management . the administrator also asked the task force to provide recommendations that could provide maximum benefit to the u.s. taxpayers and the international partners within the president's budget request . the task force reported its findings to the nasa advisory council in november 2001 . in response to the task force's recommendations , nasa is undertaking a number of initiatives to restore credibility to the station program . in addition , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , with input from nasa , is developing criteria that are to be used for measuring progress toward achieving a credible program . omb has imposed a 2-year “probation” period on nasa to provide time to reestablish the space station program's credibility .