specifically: 1 . washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2018 . we provided a draft of this report to the secretaries of the departments of health and human services ( centers for disease control and prevention ) , labor ( bureau of labor statistics ) , and treasury ( office of the comptroller of the currency ) , the acting attorney general ( drug enforcement administration ) and the acting director of opm . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , opm agreed with our findings and concurred with our recommendations . it added that it would establish and implement a process for regularly updating its performance management website , among other things . opm and the departments of health and human services , labor , and treasury also provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of the departments of health and human services , the department of labor , the department of the treasury , the acting attorney general , the acting director of opm , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report ( 1 ) describes federal employee perceptions of performance management as measured by the results of selected statements from the office of personnel management's ( opm ) annual survey of federal employees , the federal employment viewpoint survey ( fevs ) ; ( 2 ) identifies practices that selected agencies use to develop and implement strategies to improve performance management ; and ( 3 ) evaluates opm's guidance and resources to support agency efforts to improve performance management government - wide . fevs provides a snapshot of employees' perceptions about how effectively agencies manage their workforce . topic areas are employees' ( 1 ) work experience , ( 2 ) work unit , ( 3 ) agency , ( 4 ) supervisor , ( 5 ) leadership , ( 6 ) satisfaction , ( 7 ) work - life , and ( 8 ) demographics . opm has administered fevs annually since 2010 . from 2002 to 2010 , opm administered the survey biennially . fevs includes a core set of statements . agencies have the option of adding questions to the surveys sent to their employees . fevs is based on a sample of full - and part - time , permanent , non - seasonal employees of departments and large , small , and independent agencies . according to opm , the sample is designed to ensure representative survey results would be reported by agency , subagency , and senior leader status as well as for the overall federal workforce .