water . the water sector includes about 150,000 water , wastewater , and storm water organizations at all levels of government and has worked with the environmental protection agency on development of the water sector - specific plan , which includes some efforts on control systems security . in addition , the awwa research foundation is currently working on two research projects related to the cyber security of water utility scada systems . over the past few years , federal agencies — including dhs , doe , and others — have initiated efforts to improve the security of critical infrastructure control systems . for example , dhs is sponsoring multiple control systems security initiatives , including the control system cyber security self assessment tool , an effort to improve control systems' cyber security using vulnerability evaluation and response tools , and the process control system forum , to build relationships with control systems' vendors and infrastructure asset owners . additionally , doe sponsors control systems security efforts within the electric , oil , and natural gas industries . these efforts include the national scada test bed program , which funds testing , assessments , and training in control systems security , and the development of a road map for securing control systems in the energy sector . our report being released today provides a more detailed list of initiatives being led by federal agencies . dhs , however , has not yet established a strategy to coordinate the various control systems activities across federal agencies and the private sector . in 2004 , we recommended that dhs develop and implement a strategy for coordinating control systems security efforts among government agencies and the private sector . dhs agreed and issued a strategy that focused primarily on dhs's initiatives . the strategy does not include ongoing work by doe , the federal energy regulatory commission , nist , and others . further , it does not include the various agencies' responsibilities , goals , milestones , or performance measures . until dhs develops an overarching strategy that delineates various public and private entities' roles and responsibilities and uses it to guide and coordinate control systems security activities , the federal government and private sector risk investing in duplicative activities and missing opportunities to learn from other organizations' activities . further , dhs is responsible for sharing information with critical infrastructure owners on control systems vulnerabilities , but lacks a rapid , efficient process for disseminating sensitive information to private industry owners and operators of critical infrastructures . an agency official noted that sharing information with the private sector can be slowed by staff turnover and vacancies at dhs , the need to brief agency and executive branch officials and congressional staff before briefing the private sector , and difficulties in determining the appropriate classification level for the information . until the agency establishes an approach for rapidly assessing the sensitivity of vulnerability information and disseminating it — and thereby demonstrates the value it can provide to critical infrastructure owners — dhs's ability to effectively serve as a focal point in the collection and dissemination of sensitive vulnerability information will continue to be limited .