al security mission . al security mission . to manage its protective forces more effectively and uniformly , doe has considered two principal options — improving elements of the existing contractor system or creating a federal protective force . we identified five major criteria that doe , protective force contractors , and union officials have used to assess the advantages and disadvantages of these options . overall , in comparing these criteria against the two principal options , we found that neither contractor nor federal forces seem overwhelmingly superior , but each has offsetting advantages and disadvantages . either option could result in effective and more uniform security if well - managed . however , we identified transitional problems with converting the current protective force to a federalized force . within the m&o contract . table 7 summarizes the five criteria that doe , protective force contractors , and union officials have used to discuss whether to improve the existing contractor system or federalize protective forces , as well as associated issues or concerns . evaluating the two principal options against these criteria , we found that , for several reasons , either contractor or federal forces could result in effective and more uniform security if the forces are well - managed . first , both options — maintaining the current security force structure or federalizing the security force — have offsetting advantages and disadvantages , with neither option emerging as clearly superior . for example , one relative advantage of a contractor force is the perceived greater flexibility for hiring , disciplining , or terminating an employee ; one relative disadvantage of a contractor force is that it can strike . in contrast , federalization could better allow protective forces to advance or laterally transfer to other doe sites to meet protective force members' needs or doe's need to resize particular forces . second , key disadvantages , such as potential strikes , do not preclude effective operations if the security force is well - managed . according to one protective force manager , a well - managed protective force is less likely to strike . in addition , a 2009 memo signed by the nnsa administrator stated that nnsa had demonstrated that it can effectively manage strikes through the use of replacement protective forces . with respect to federal protective forces , a 2004 department work group on protective force issues observed that even federal operations like ost had experienced difficult labor - management relations that had to be carefully managed in order to ensure effective performance . third , as can be seen in the following examples , distinctions between the two options , each of which could have many permutations , can be overstated by comparing worse - and best - case scenarios , when similar conditions might be realized under either option . while federalization might improve effectiveness and efficiency by driving standardization , nnsa recently announced initiatives to increase standardization among contract protective forces to achieve some of the same benefits , including cost savings . federalization could potentially provide early and enhanced retirement benefits , which could help to ensure a young and vigorous workforce . however , such benefits might also be provided to contractor protective forces .