insecure areas were excluded from the program . the peruvian government's success in combating terrorist groups and narcotics traffickers in the mid - 1990s created a more secure and amenable environment for alternative development . the return of civil governance in program areas allowed usaid - supported activities to resume . this campaign disrupted the coca market , thereby encouraging coca growers to turn to alternative development programs . by targeting narcotics traffickers , rather than coca growers , the peruvian government also limited resentment from farmers over the counternarcotics campaign , according to usaid and peruvian officials . recent political turmoil has created uncertainty about the future direction of the peruvian government's counternarcotics policies and may affect future program accomplishments and sustainability . peru's transitional government ( november 2000 to july 2001 ) invited leaders of coca - growing syndicates to participate in formal roundtable policy discussions , raising concern among usaid officials and some adp implementers that this would impart legitimacy to the syndicates and raise their political profile . a combination of other factors have contributed to the recent successes in bolivia . these factors are less universal than those cited above , but nevertheless usaid officials in bolivia noted them as lessons learned for future alternative development projects . according to usaid officials in bolivia , community self - policing , or “peer pressure,” has not been a reliable mechanism for enforcing voluntary eradication agreements . after the bolivian government's cash compensation program was phased out , the government began providing infrastructure and other in - kind compensation to communities that abandoned coca . we do not agree with state that the report implies such a recommendation . in fact , we cite the need for coordinating alternative development with interdiction and eradication efforts as one of the chief requirements for success . to determine the lessons learned in providing alternative development assistance to bolivia and peru , we interviewed cognizant officials and analyzed program documentation . specifically , in washington , d.c. , we interviewed officials in usaid's office of south american affairs and state's bureau for international narcotics and law enforcement . we also met with officials at the two major usaid contractors that provided alternative development services in bolivia and peru — development alternatives , inc. , and winrock international , inc . in addition , we reviewed usaid project design and evaluation documents , contractor performance reports , and program audits . from our analysis , we determined key goals and accomplishments for the alternative development programs in bolivia and peru . in bolivia and peru , we interviewed usaid mission , u.s. embassy , host - government , and nongovernmental organization officials . we also made site visits to selected project sites and met with project beneficiaries in both countries . from our analysis , we identified critical elements that facilitated or impeded the alternative development efforts in these countries . to determine the current status of usaid's alternative development efforts in colombia and the challenges faced there , we interviewed cognizant officials and reviewed program planning and financial documents .