viii ) . customs said that any concerns that it may have had regarding the audit were addressed through discussions with the audit team . customs also said that its reluctance to officially comment on provisions in h.r . 1833 , as noted in our report , is consistent with administration policy , which holds that omb is the appropriate executive branch entity to issue statements of the administration's position on legislative matters . while customs identified omb as the appropriate agency for providing comments on legislative matters , customs has commented on h.r . 1833 , but not directly to us . instead , as noted in our report , customs headquarters' officials gave us a copy of a letter dated may 25 , 1999 , from the commissioner to the ranking member of the house committee on ways and means that addresses customs positions on h.r . while coss includes pay information on customs officers and other employees , we limited the analysis to officers — customs inspectors and canine enforcement officers — because the proposed legislative changes only applied to them . there are 332 unique port codes in the coss data system , though some of them are office sites ( such as headquarters ) and subports ( such as courier facilities ) , which are not actual ports . according to coss , 106 ports paid out no night differential pay in fiscal year 1999 , and an additional 5 ports paid out less than $1,000 total for the fiscal year . only 112 ports paid out over $10,000 in total night differential pay . the amounts of differential paid at each port ranged from zero to $1,758,696 , with an average of $59,782 and a median of $9,565 . in total , according to coss , 6,510 customs officers received about $13.5 million in night differential pay in fiscal year 1999 . table 9 shows the top 100 ports and the amount of night differential pay officers at these ports received in fiscal year 1999 . we were also able to identify the shifts that account for the highest amounts of night differential pay nationally and how the amount of night differential pay for these shifts would be different if the proposed legislation had been in effect . the six shifts shown in table 10 below account for $11,041,983 in night differential , 82 percent of the total $13,510,798 paid to customs officers nationally in fiscal year 1999 . to understand the effect of the proposed changes on customs officers , we chose five ports as case studies for the specific analyses based on the number of air and land passengers processed: jfk , lax , and miami international airport because they are three of the largest airports in the country ; baltimore - washington international airport and seaport because it represents a medium - sized port ; and san ysidro because it is the largest land border crossing . we were able to extract information about how customs officers were paid using transaction codes provided in coss that indicate what kind of pay was given for that shift .