hardwick . “african , russian , and ukrainian refugee resettlement in portland , oregon.” the geographical review , vol . ised solutions . “transplanted or uprooted ? integration efforts of bosnian refugees based upon gender , class and ethnic differences in new york city and vienna.” the european journal of women's studies , vol . grigoleit , g. “coming home ? the integration of hmong refugees from wat tham krabok , thailand , into american society.” hmong studies journal , vol . hume , s.e. exploring refugee integration: experiences in four american communities . a report prepared at the request of the department of health and human services office of refugee resettlement . june 2010 . ives , n. “more than a ‘good back': looking for integration in refugee resettlement.” refuge , vol . kenny , p. , and k. lockwood - kenny . “a mixed blessing: karen resettlement to the united states.” journal of refugee studies , vol . patil , c.l. , m. mcgown , p.d . nahayo , and c. hadley . “forced migration: complexities in food and health for refugees resettled in the united states.” napa bulletin , vol . 34 , issue 1 ( 2010 ) . shandy , d. , and k. fennelly . “a comparison of the integration experiences of two african immigrant populations in a rural community.” journal of religion & spirituality in social work , vol . smith , r.s . “the case of a city where 1 in 6 residents is a refugee: ecological factors and host community adaptation in successful resettlement.” american journal of community psychology , vol . westermeyer , j.j. “refugee resettlement to the united states: recommendations for a new approach.” the journal of nervous and mental disease , vol . description provides financial support to partially cover resettlement services based on a fixed per capita sum per refugee resettled in the united states . services include arranging for refugees' placement and providing refugees with basic necessities and core services during their initial resettlement period . reimburses states and alternative refugee assistance programs for the cost of cash and medical assistance provided to refugees during the first 8 months after their arrival in this country or grant of asylum . it does not provide reimbursement for refugees deemed eligible for temporary assistance for needy families , supplemental security insurance , and medicaid . funds are provided on a matching basis to provide private , nonprofit organizations to fund an alternative to public cash assistance and to support case management , employment services , maintenance assistance , cash allowance , and social services for new arrivals for 4 to 6 months . provides funding for employment and other social services to refugees for 5 years after their data of arrival or grant of asylum . provides funding for employment - related and other social services for refugees in counties with large refugee populations and high refugee concentrations . provides funds to provide medical screenings to newly arriving refugees , interpreter services , information and referral , and health education . funds to states to implement special employment services not implemented with formula social services grants . provides funding for employment - related and other social services for refugees in counties with large refugee populations and high refugee concentrations .