iii. ) although states generally report high levels of nims implementation in their urts , officials from all four fema regional offices we spoke with and from 9 of the 10 states we spoke with said that the nims self - assessments are perfunctory and do not necessarily measure whether , or how well , nims is being implemented . for example , in fiscal year 2013 , 100 percent of the states and territories reported having “formally adopted” nims , and incorporated nims principles and concepts into training and exercises . similarly , in fiscal year 2014 , states and territories reported that 93 percent of their subjurisdictions had formally adopted nims , about 91 percent had incorporated nims concepts and principles into training , and about 93 percent incorporated nims into exercises . fema regional and state officials we spoke with said there is an incentive to report compliance with nims regardless of the actual status of implementation since it is a requirement for receiving preparedness grants . fema established the nic in 2004 . the nic , a division of fema's national preparedness directorate , is responsible for the ongoing management and maintenance of nims , including developing guidance to define and categorize the resources and job position qualifications requested , deployed , and used in incidents . specifically , the nic is to coordinate with state and local stakeholders to develop national standards , guidelines , and protocols for incident management . in 2008 , fema established new regional positions for federal preparedness coordinators ( fpc ) , who direct and coordinate the activities of each regional national preparedness division to ensure regional implementation of national preparedness programs , policies , goals , and objectives . fpcs are to evaluate preparedness program activities to assess their effectiveness ; changes in risk or capability ; and the performance of preparedness program activities including after - action reports , training evaluations , lessons learned , and corrective actions . for example , fpcs are responsible for monitoring nims compliance and implementation , in addition to other national preparedness initiatives . further , fpcs are to proactively engage stakeholders and acquire an understanding of their preparedness efforts and also assist in the planning , design , execution , and evaluation of federal , state , local , and regional exercises . fema regional nims coordinators act as subject matter experts regarding nims for the local , state , territorial , and tribal nation governments within their fema regions , as well as for the fema regional administrator and staff . the post - katrina act requires that each fema regional administrator establish a rac with members from state , local , and tribal entities to provide advice on emergency management issues specific to the region . while the post - katrina act does not specify how many members a rac should have , the law states that a state , local , or tribal government located within the geographic area served by the regional office may nominate officials , including emergency managers , to serve as members . each of the 10 fema regional offices established a rac after the post - katrina act was enacted in 2006 .