( app . i provides a chronology of major events important to joint experimentation. ) over the next several years , the command's experimentation will focus primarily on two concepts: one to develop a standing joint force headquarters to improve joint command and control ; another to conduct more effective joint operations through “rapid decisive” operations . in november 2001 , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff directed that the command make development of the prototype headquarters its highest near - term priority . additionally , the command will develop a number of other concepts aimed at specialized issues or operational problems to support the two primary concepts . joint experimentation is a continuous process that begins with the development of new operational and organizational concepts that have the potential to improve significantly joint operations ( see fig . the joint forces command identifies new joint concepts including those developed by other dod organizations ( such as the joint staff , services , and combatant commands ) and the private sector and tests them in experiments that range from simple ( workshops , seminars , war games , and simulations ) to complex ( large - scale virtual simulations and “live” field experiments ) . appendix ii provides additional information on joint experimentation program activities . after analyzing experimentation data , the command prepares and submits recommendations to the joint requirements oversight council for review and , ultimately , to the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff for approval.before submitting them to the council , however , the command submits its recommendations to the joint staff for preliminary review and coordination . the recommendations are distributed for review and comment to the joint staff directorates , the military services , the combatant commands , and other dod and federal government organizations . the council then reviews the recommendations and advises the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff on whether they should be approved . the changes , if approved , provide the basis for pursuing the capabilities needed to implement a specific operational concept . the council is also responsible for overseeing the implementation of the recommendations , but it can designate an executive agent , such as the joint forces command , to do so . the council ( or its designated executive agent ) is responsible for obtaining the resources needed to implement the recommendations through dod's planning , programming , and budgeting system . the council also assists the chairman , in coordination with the combatant commands , the services , and other dod organizations , to identify and assess joint requirements and priorities for current and future military capabilities . the council considers requirements ( and any proposed changes ) for joint capabilities across doctrine , organizations , training , materiel , leadership and education , personnel , and facilities . the department of the navy's budget provides funding to the joint forces command for joint experimentation and other command missions . in fiscal year 2002 , the command received from the navy about $103 million for its joint concept development and experimentation program , and it planned to spend about half of this amount for millennium challenge 2002 .