annual compliance reviews . the compliance team from ofs spends one week on site at each hfa . these reviews examine the hfas' internal controls , eligibility determinations , program expenses , administrative expenses , and reporting . the first round of compliance reviews was scheduled to be completed by september 2012 , with the second round to be completed in 2013 . treasury has developed a database to track items identified in the first round of compliance reviews , and officials told us they were working to populate the database with information from the compliance review reports that had already been completed . officials in one state who had recently completed an initial compliance review said that they found the process to be transparent and helpful . treasury staff provided them with a list of documents they needed and a schedule of interviews with hfa staff . one other state told us that the compliance review and findings were very helpful and that it had taken steps to implement treasury's recommendations . treasury stated that the compliance reviews discovered issues that were largely one - time problems — for example , control failures involving undocumented fee schedules or unrecorded approvals . in june 2012 , treasury officials stated that they had been working with servicers to improve the quality of the data provided on pra and were undertaking additional research to look at the effectiveness . however , no data are reported on the extent to which servicers determined that principal reduction was beneficial to the investor but was not offered . as part of its efforts to continue improving the transparency and accountability of hamp , the secretary of the treasury should expeditiously and more clearly inform borrowers that the hope hotline may also be used if they are having difficulty with their hamp application or servicer or feel that they have been incorrectly denied hamp ; monitor the effectiveness of the hope hotline as an escalation process for handling borrower concerns about potentially incorrect hamp denials ; and develop an improved escalation mechanism if the hope hotline is not sufficiently effective . according to treasury , it has promoted the hope hotline through a number of channels to the public as a resource for borrowers with questions and problems about their hamp application , trial period plan or permanent modification . for example , the hotline number is published on treasury's mha website , featured in media campaigns , and used in talking points for borrower / counselor events and media interviews . treasury's mha program guidelines require that servicers include in their notices to borrowers regarding the status of requests for a hamp loan modification the telephone number for the hope hotline , with an explanation that the borrower can seek assistance at no charge from hud - approved housing counselors and can request assistance in understanding the borrower notice by asking for mha help . in mha program guidance issued on november 3 , 2010 , treasury standardized the process required for handling certain borrower inquiries and disputes related to the mha program . we coordinated our work with sigtarp . for additional information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i .