listeriosis . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimated that approximately 1,600 illnesses and 260 deaths due to listeriosis occur annually in the united states . listeriosis is a serious infection with symptoms that can include headache , stiff neck , confusion , loss of balance , and convulsions in addition to fever and muscle aches . infection during pregnancy can lead to miscarriage , stillbirth , premature delivery , or life - threatening infection of the newborn . relationship with the mexican government's food regulatory authorities to narrow down the source of a cyclospora outbreak in 2013 that sickened 631 people in the united states . this office coordinated investigations at the facilities that handled the leafy greens identified as the potential source of the outbreak and certified the facilities as free of cyclospora so the shipment of the products could resume . salmonellosis . according to the cdc , salmonella is estimated to cause more than 1 million illnesses annually in the united states , with 19,000 hospitalizations and 380 deaths . most persons infected with salmonella develop diarrhea , fever , and abdominal cramps 12 to 72 hours after infection . cyclosporiasis . cyclosporiasis is an intestinal infection that can be caused by people ingesting food or water contaminated with feces . in the united states , outbreaks since the mid - 1990s have been linked to various types of imported fresh produce such as raspberries , basil , and mesclun lettuce . the foreign office officials also provided examples of additional actions that stopped the importation of food products that were potentially harmful to humans . for example , in 2012 , the latin america office in mexico city helped stop the importation of a fraudulent dietary supplement into the united states because the officials discovered that the supplement did not contain the ingredients it claimed to include . also , in 2012 , this office helped test shipments of orange juice products from all foreign sources for a pesticide residue , carbendazim , and found that 31 of 166 shipments had carbendazim . epa has not registered carbendazim for use as a fungicide on oranges or established a tolerance or an exemption from a tolerance for carbendazim in orange juice . as a result of the testing , several facilities were stopped from exporting orange juice containing carbendazim residues to the united states , and the occurrence of carbendazim in imported orange juice declined . fda also provided an example of a foreign office's contribution to the safety of imported animal food . specifically , in 2012 , in - country investigators in the china office conducted inspections of five facilities that made jerky pet treats to determine if they were the cause of ongoing illnesses and deaths in pets in the united states . as of may 2014 , fda had received reports of illness involving more than 5,600 dogs and 24 cats , and the deaths of more than 1,000 dogs , which may be related to consumption of jerky pet treats . in addition , fda received three reports of human illness after exposure to jerky pet treats .