we disagree . the policy section of navsup instruction 4200.94 merely states that the “purchase card shall only be used for authorized u.s. government purchases.” we found numerous potentially fraudulent , improper , and abusive purchases that had been approved by supervisors as authorized government purchases . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , 48 c.f.r . 13.301 ( a ) , states that the governmentwide commercial purchase card "may be used only for purchases that are otherwise authorized by law or regulations. therefore , a procurement using the purchase card is lawful only if it would be lawful using conventional procurement methods . further , the treasury financial manual ( tfm ) requires agencies to establish guidance on approved uses of the government purchase card and limitations on types of transactions permitted . the navsup instruction 4200.94 policy statement does not address these specific purchase card requirements of the far or the tfm . as stated in our testimony , without statutory authority , appropriated funds may not be used to furnish meals or refreshments to employees within their normal duty stations . free food and other refreshments normally cannot be justified as a necessary expense of an agency's appropriation because these items are considered personal expenses that federal employees should pay for from their own salaries . likewise , appropriated funds may not be used to purchase gifts for employees or others unless an agency can demonstrate that the items further the purposes for which the appropriation was enacted . the purchase of the flowers and food were both personal rather than official in nature and , therefore , may not be paid for with appropriated funds . given the problems we found , clarifyng the current guidance on the propriety of purchasing food , flowers , and similar personal items could help reduce improper purchase card use for these items . dod stated that the present language in the navsup instruction 4200.94 policy section clearly identifies the consequences for fraud , abuse , and misuse of the purchase card . we disagree . the policy section of the navsup instruction only states that deliberate misuse of the purchase card may be prosecuted as fraud . it does not identify any specific consequences for failure to follow control requirements , such as the failure to ( 1 ) obtain independent documentation of receipt and acceptance of goods and services , ( 2 ) notify property book officers of accountable items acquired with a purchase card , ( 3 ) properly certify purchase card statements for payment , and ( 4 ) comply with prohibitions on certain purchases and split transactions . our work identified pervasive failures to follow established controls in these and other areas . to ensure that the navy's purchase card controls are effective , it is critical that the navy enforce those controls by establishing specific disciplinary consequences — such as removal of cardholder status , reprimands , suspension from employment for several days , and firing — for those employees who fail to follow established controls even if their action does not amount to fraud against the united states .