fda guidance on eligibility criteria . in march 2019 , fda issued four new draft guidance documents and finalized one guidance document with recommendations for drug manufacturers to broaden clinical trial eligibility criteria for drugs that treat cancer . the guidance recommends that manufacturers include certain patient populations that have typically been excluded from participation . the patient populations are adolescents ; pediatrics ( children and adolescents ) ; patients with human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) , hepatitis b virus ( hbv ) , or hepatitis c virus ( hcv ) infections ; patients with brain metastases ( i.e. , cancer that has spread to the brain ) ; and patients with compromised kidney , heart , or liver function , or who have a history of ( or concurrent ) cancer . according to fda , the guidance documents are intended to help drug manufacturers and other investigators broaden cancer trial eligibility criteria . this will help improve patient access to investigational drugs and ensure that the results from the clinical trials are generalizable to patients likely to use the drugs once they are approved . in addition , fda officials have noted that including broader patient populations in clinical trials can lead to new information in a drug's labeling , which will help communicate the safe and effective use of these drugs . table 1 provides a summary of each of the five guidance documents . in june 2019 , fda issued draft guidance for manufacturers on broadening clinical trial eligibility criteria , in accordance with fdara . the guidance applies to a wider range of clinical trials beyond cancer trials and includes recommendations to broaden eligibility criteria and considerations for the use of clinical trial designs and other methodologies to help facilitate patient participation . for example , fda recommends that manufacturers examine each exclusion criterion to determine if it is needed to help assure the safety of trial participants or to achieve the study's objectives . if not , the manufacturer should consider eliminating or modifying the criterion to expand the study population as well as tailoring the exclusion criteria as narrowly as possible to avoid unnecessary restrictions to the study population . two manufacturers' efforts to broaden eligibility criteria . officials from one of the 10 drug manufacturers we interviewed told us they broadened their clinical trial eligibility criteria and another manufacturer we interviewed reported that it was taking steps to do so . according to fda , the agency can use these data to determine how the process is benefiting patients . twenty of the stakeholders we interviewed were familiar with fda's simplified irb review requirements , and of those , 18 told us these updates were helpful for physicians and patients . for example , officials from one drug manufacturer commented that the new irb review requirements reduce the amount of time it takes for patients to obtain access to investigational drugs , which is especially important for patients who are very sick . in addition , we spoke to 12 stakeholders about fda's plans for its pilot program , and of those , nine generally had positive views of the agency's planned activities .