meeting this demand will be a challenge . this hearing offers another important step in the process of overseeing the regulators — ferc and cftc — charged with ensuring these markets operate as intended . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or wellsj@gao.gov . other major contributors to this testimony include karla springer ( assistant director ) , lee carroll , michael derr , patrick dynes , elizabeth erdmann , philip farah , john forrester , mark gaffigan , mike hix , chester joy , jon ludwigson , kristen sullivan massey , cynthia norris , frank rusco , jena sinkfield , rebecca spithill , john wanska , and kim wheeler - raheb . meeting energy demand in the 21st century: many challenges and key questions . gao - 05-414t . washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2005 . natural gas: domestic nitrogen fertilizer production depends on natural gas availability and prices . gao - 03-1148 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2003 . energy markets: additional actions would help ensure that ferc's oversight and enforcement capability is comprehensive and systematic . gao - 03-845 . washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2003 . natural gas: analysis of changes in market price . gao - 03-46 . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2002 . the commission does not prescribe prices for these commodity sales . ferc's regulatory authority applies to the physical markets for energy commodities , such as natural gas , and not to futures markets . in december 2002 , we reported that as energy markets were restructured , ferc had not adequately revised its regulatory and oversight approach to respond to the transition to competitive energy markets . ferc agreed that its approach to ensuring just and reasonable prices needed to change: from one of reviewing individual companies' rate requests and supporting cost data to one of proactively monitoring energy markets to ensure that they are working well to produce competitive prices . that year , the commission established the office of market oversight and investigations to actively monitor energy markets and , when necessary , undertake investigations into whether any entity had or was attempting to manipulate energy prices . as we previously reported , in 2002 , ferc staff undertook several studies and investigations to determine whether there had been attempts to manipulate upward prices for natural gas delivered to california during 2000-2001 . ferc's ability to monitor the natural gas markets has been enhanced in several regards recently . first , the energy policy act of 2005 , passed last september , contains several enforcement provisions that increase the commission's ability to punish wrongdoers that harm the public . in particular , the act provides ferc with the authority to impose greater civil penalties on firms that commit fraud . in addition , eia's weekly natural gas data releases are published each thursday , and according to eia officials , these releases have been well received by natural gas market participants .