sponsors developed the capabilities through dod processes other than jcids . joint staff policy allows for sponsors to develop a new capability through processes other than jcids and then later submit it to the joint staff for approval through jcids . for example , one sponsor said that it did not perform an assessment prior to developing its proposal because the service originally developed and validated the proposed capability through a technology demonstration process separate from the jcids process . dod updated the roadmap in january 2007 . as we testified in april 2007 , the roadmap comprises a catalogue of detailed information on all the isr assets being used and developed across dod , including isr capabilities related to collection , communication , exploitation , and analysis . given the vast scope of isr capabilities , which operate in a variety of media and encompass a range of intelligence disciplines , the isr integration roadmap represents a significant effort on the part of dod to bring together information needed to assess the strengths and weaknesses of current isr capabilities . dod officials have acknowledged that the roadmap has limitations and stated that those limitations will be addressed in future revisions . as dod develops future revisions of the isr integration roadmap , enterprise architecture is a valuable management tool that the department could use to develop a clear vision of a future isr enterprise and a framework for evaluating tradeoffs between competing isr needs and assessing how future isr investments contribute to achieving strategic goals . our previous work has shown that effective use of enterprise architecture is a hallmark of successful public and private organizations . an enterprise architecture provides a clear and comprehensive picture of that organization , consisting of snapshots of its current ( as - is ) state and its target ( to - be ) state , and a transition plan for moving between the two states , and incorporates considerations such as technology opportunities , fiscal and budgetary constraints , legacy and new system dependencies and life expectancies , and the projected value of competing investments . dod and federal guidance on enterprise architecture state that a framework for achieving an integrated enterprise should be based on a clearly defined target architecture , or vision , for a future enterprise derived from an analysis of the organization's future requirements and strategic goals . a target architecture for the dod isr enterprise would ( 1 ) describe the structure of the future isr enterprise and its desired capabilities in a way that is closely aligned with dod isr enterprise strategic goals , and ( 2 ) include metrics that facilitate evaluating tradeoffs between different investments and periodic assessment of progress toward achieving strategic goals . since it is likely that the architecture will evolve over time and be revised , it may also include an exploration of alternative investment options , and an acknowledgment of unknown factors . a clearly defined target architecture that depicts what isr capabilities are required to achieve strategic goals would provide dod with a framework for assessing its isr capability gaps and overlaps by comparing its existing isr capabilities to those laid out in the target architecture .