education is currently researching these transactions . in our april 2001 testimony , we also reported that individual cardholders' monthly purchase limits were as high as $300,000 . education , in response to a letter from this subcommittee dated april 19 , 2001 , said the department has taken action to improve internal controls related to the use of the government purchase card . education has lowered the maximum monthly spending limit to $30,000 , revoked some purchase cards , and lowered other cardholders' single purchase and total monthly purchase limits . while these are important improvements , they will not prevent cardholders from continuing to split large purchases in order to circumvent single purchase limits . in addition , they do not address the issue of lax approval practices . to address these issues , education needs to reiterate and strengthen its policy of requiring review and approval of cardholders' monthly statements , including a review for potentially split purchases . in addition , education should institute a mechanism to periodically monitor purchase card activity to ensure that proper review and approval is occurring and that split purchases are not . further , since mccs can be effectively used to prevent purchases from certain types of vendors , education should expand its list of mccs that are being blocked to further help prevent improper payments . in closing , mr. chairman , i want to emphasize the importance of education management's giving top priority to improving internal control to minimize the agency's vulnerability to improper payments . we are currently reviewing the support to confirm this assessment . we provided education with an additional 833 transactions , totaling about $362,000 , in which the payee appeared to be an unusual vendor to be engaging in commerce with the department . for example , we found one instance , that is now being investigated by our office of special investigations , in which a cardholder made several purchases from two pornographic internet sites . the names of these sites should have aroused suspicions when they appeared on the employee's monthly credit card bill . we also found another instance in which education paid for an employee to take a training course completely unrelated to activities of the department . in addition , we gave education a list of 124 instances , totaling about $600,000 , in which it appears that cardholders may have split their purchases into multiple transactions to bypass pre - established single - purchase spending limits . executive officers determine who has signature authority within their units . from may 1998 through september 2000 , education's payments by third party draft totaled $55 million . during our analysis of the third party draft payment process , we identified several internal control weaknesses , including inadequate computer systems application controls , poor segregation of duties , and inadequate audit trails .