( recommendation 6 ) . direct loans are loans for which the department of education is the lender . they include subsidized loans made to undergraduate students based on financial need , for which the government does not generally charge interest while the student is in grace or deferment status ; unsubsidized loans made to undergraduate and graduate students for which the borrower is fully responsible for paying interest regardless of loan status ; plus loans made to graduate or professional students and parents of dependent undergraduate students for which the borrower is fully responsible for paying the interest regardless of the loan status ; and consolidation loans , which allow the borrower to combine existing federal student loans into a single new loan . ffel loans are loans that were obtained through private lenders , with federal subsidies ensuring that private lenders earned a certain yield on the loans they made . under this program , the department of education entered into agreements with guaranty agencies to insure the private lenders against losses due to a borrower's default . specifically , regarding our recommendation to enroll loan servicers in fsa's continuous monitoring program ( recommendation 1 ) , the agency stated that loan servicers are scheduled to be enrolled in its ongoing security authorization program beginning in fiscal year 2019 . regarding our recommendation to enroll private collection agencies in fsa's continuous monitoring program and , in the interim , require these entities to test all controls at an fsa - defined frequency and regularly report the results ( recommendation 2 ) , fsa stated that it concurred , although the actions it said it planned to take would not fully address the recommendation . specifically , the agency stated that it intends to work with private collection agencies to identify specific relevant criteria to strengthen continuous monitoring testing schedules and include these criteria in private collection agencies' quarterly reports to fsa . this measure , if implemented effectively , would address the interim measure called for in our recommendation . however , fsa did not describe actions to address the first part of our recommendation . specifically , it did not state whether it intended to enroll private collection agencies in its ongoing security authorization program , as called for by its contracts with these agencies . federal law ended the origination of these loans as of july 1 , 2010 ; however , fsa , lenders , and guaranty agencies continue to service ( i.e. , handle billing and other activities related to loan repayment ) and collect outstanding ffel loans . according to fsa , borrowers' eligibility is the same under both the direct loan and ffel programs . the department also administers student aid through grants , such as pell grants , which are student aid funds that generally do not have to be repaid . it also administers the federal work - study program , which provides part - time jobs for students with financial need , allowing them to earn money to help pay educational expenses . in fiscal year 2017 , fsa reported disbursing about $122.5 billion in aid to students through its various programs .