sec . reporting requirements . ( a ) reports required — in furtherance of the purpose of this title , the secretary , after consultation with the chairman of the board , shall submit to the committee on banking , finance and urban affairs of the house of representatives and the committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs of the senate , on or before october 15 each year , a written report on international economic policy , including exchange rate policy . the secretary shall provide a written update of developments six months after the initial report . in addition , the secretary shall appear , if requested , before both committees to provide testimony on these reports . ( b ) contents of report — each report submitted under subsection ( a ) shall contain ( 1 ) an analysis of currency market developments and the relationship between the united states dollar and the currencies of our major trade competitors ; ( 2 ) an evaluation of the factors in the united states and other economies that underline conditions in the currency markets , including developments in bilateral trade and capital flows ; ( 3 ) a description of currency intervention or other actions undertaken to adjust the actual exchange rate of the dollar ; ( 4 ) an assessment of the impact of the exchange rate of the united states dollar on ( a ) the ability of the united states to maintain a more appropriate and sustainable balance in its current account and merchandise trade account ; ( b ) production , employment , and noninflationary growth in the united states ; ( c ) the international competitive performance of united states industries and the external indebtedness of the united states ; ( 5 ) recommendations for any changes necessary in united states economic policy to attain a more appropriate and sustainable balance in the current account ; ( 6 ) the results of negotiations conducted pursuant to section 3004 ; ( 7 ) key issues in united states policies arising from the most recent consultation requested by the international monetary fund under article iv of the fund's articles of agreement ; and ( 8 ) a report on the size and composition of international capital flows , and the factors contributing to such flows , including , where possible , an assessment of the impact of such flows on exchange rates and trade flows . at different times during the period from 1988 to 1994 , treasury found that taiwan , korea , and china manipulated their currencies under the terms of the 1988 trade act . the conditions leading to their first citations and the changes in conditions that later led to their removal are listed below . this appendix presents an overview of recent economic conditions for china and japan that are relevant to exchange rate policies . these include economic growth , external account balances , foreign exchange reserves , exchange rate movements , currency exchange rate regimes , and direct interventions in foreign exchange markets by national authorities . china has experienced high rates of economic growth in recent years .