 advising . advising is the primary type of security force assistance and is the use of influence to teach , coach , and advise while working by , with , and through the foreign security force . advising helps foreign security forces conduct independent decision making and operations , and advisors may also provide foreign security forces with direct access to joint and multinational capabilities , such as air support , artillery , medical evacuation , and intelligence .  partnering . in partnering , the u.s. attaches units to host nation units at various levels in order to leverage the strengths of both u.s. and foreign security forces . partnered units should establish combined cells for intelligence , operations , planning , and sustainment . while effective coordination is always required and initial efforts may require completely fused efforts , foreign security forces should eventually build the capability and capacity to conduct all efforts autonomously . advising and partnering , while complementary , are distinct activities that can be performed simultaneously , sequentially , or in combination . u.s. units , such as army bcts , are partnering with the iraqi and afghan security forces . examples include u.s. battalions conducting combined route clearance missions or manning combined checkpoints with host nation military units in their area of operations . the army's field manual notes that as a foreign security force's capabilities mature , the echelon and degree of partnering decrease . for example , a u.s. army battalion may initially partner with a foreign security force battalion , but as the foreign security force matures , a u.s. army battalion may partner at a higher echelon such as with a foreign security force division while the u.s. battalion's subordinate companies may partner with the foreign security force battalions . like partnering , advising also can occur at various echelons of the foreign security force with the echelon of focus changing as foreign security forces mature . however , brigades have only recently assumed the advising mission in iraq and afghanistan . specifically , prior to 2009 and 2010 , respectively , the advising mission was conducted primarily with transition teams . these transition teams did not exist as units in any of the services' force structures and were instead comprised of company - and field - grade officers and senior non - commissioned officers who were centrally identified and individually selected based on rank and specialty . for the army alone , the number of individually sourced advisors — individually sourced advisors are those identified by army human resources command and assigned to transition teams — required to fill the transition teams in iraq and afghanistan at any one time totaled about 8,000 personnel . as we have previously reported , the demand for these leaders created challenges for the services because the leaders were generally pulled from other units or commands , which then were left to perform their missions while undermanned . augmented bcts also were intended to improve command and control over the mission by placing both the mission and personnel assigned to the mission under a single brigade commander .