retention allowances . a retention allowance is a continuing ( i.e. , biweekly ) payment of up to 25 percent of basic pay that an agency may pay to help retain an employee . the agency must determine that ( 1 ) the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee or a special need of the agency for the employee's services makes it essential to retain the employee and ( 2 ) the employee would be likely to leave the federal government in the absence of a retention allowance . in addition , an agency may offer retention allowances to a group or category of employees . agencies must annually review and certify the allowances , which allows the agencies to terminate the incentive payments when no longer deemed necessary . one senior human resources manager told us , for example , that her department often uses retention allowances to help retain certain specialized employees who are frequently approached by recruiters from private industry and state governments . although agencies generally use retention allowances to retain highly qualified employees , state also uses this flexibility to build employee competencies . in 1998 , when planning for its information technology requirements , state determined that it needed to address the difficulty of attracting and keeping the highly qualified technical workforce necessary to carry out its mission of providing support and coordinating the activities of all u.s. government agencies abroad . as such , it implemented a technology skills development program to attract and retain employees with certain technological skills by granting them retention allowances for obtaining job - related degrees and certifications . under the program , state also paid for training courses leading up to certification but not the examinations to obtain the credentials . according to state , it has granted over $4 million in total retention allowances under this skills development program . the number of information technology employees with degrees or certifications increased from 133 in 1999 to 583 in 2001 . as part of its evaluation of the skills development program , state surveyed the participants and supervisors involved in the program . approximately 61 percent of the employees who participated in the program ( 335 out of 547 ) responded to the 2001 survey . the 2001 survey showed that 80 percent of the responding participants agreed that receiving the retention allowance played a substantial role in their decision to work at the department , and 90 percent agreed that receiving the allowance played a substantial role in their decision to remain at the department . agency and union representatives frequently noted that special hiring authorities available to federal agencies can also be particularly effective in assisting agencies to appoint needed employees . these hiring authorities allow agencies to hire employees without going through the standard federal hiring process , often resulting , according to managers , in shorter hiring times , less onerous paperwork , and more flexibility in selecting the job candidates who managers believe are most qualified . these special hiring flexibilities include the following . student educational employment program .