( see app . ii for a full list of nclba provisions that could be waived under the flexibility initiative. ) officials from 10 states told us the waivers helped them develop a single school accountability system or align their existing federal and state school accountability systems to help streamline data collection and reporting . officials from 14 states told us that implementing teacher and principal evaluation systems was a challenging aspect of their waivers , in some cases due to lack of stakeholder support for needed legislative or collective bargaining changes , or difficulty in meeting education's requirements for incorporating student growth into teacher and principal evaluation systems . officials from 9 states expressed concerns that education's timeframes to implement waiver requirements were too rigid and accelerated for such large - scale reforms . officials from 5 of these states told us that timelines for implementing teacher and principal evaluation systems were especially challenging . officials in 4 states without waivers told us they do not have waivers because they could not come to agreement with education about key aspects of requirements for accountability or teacher and principal evaluation systems . officials in 3 states told us education staff were responsive to day - to - day emails and phone calls ; officials in 3 other states told us education was slow to provide more substantive oversight , such as formal monitoring . officials in 8 states told us that , because of staff turnover at education during the waiver initiative , there was often an incomplete transfer of information from one staff person to the next , which required state officials to explain previous discussions or decisions , frustrating states , and wasting time . appendix ii: no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ) provisions waived through the flexibility initiative the every student succeeds act ( essa ) , enacted december 10 , 2015 . as a result , the provisions referenced in this table do not reflect current law . under the essa , all approved flexibility waivers will terminate on august 1 , 2016 ; other changes made by essa will be phased in over time . after the initiative began , education determined this provision was unnecessary and did not include it for states requesting to renew their waivers . states could request these optional flexibilities when renewing their flexibility waivers . in addition to the contact named above , scott spicer ( assistant director ) , jason palmer ( analyst - in - charge ) , sarah cornetto , brian egger , jean mcsween , linda siegel , and carmen yeung made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were james bennett , deborah bland , holly dye , nisha hazra , john lack , avani locke , and david perkins . officials from 6 states told us the waivers allowed districts to better identify the lowest - performing schools and better target their resources . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .