ce systems . figure 1 shows a simplified view of the program's components . figure 1 shows a simplified view of the program's components . the program is a collaborative effort between the assistant secretary for information and technology , who serves as va's chief information officer , and the assistant secretary for management , who serves as va's chief financial officer . various groups within va have different roles and responsibilities for overseeing and managing programs . figure 2 depicts the relationships between these oversight groups and the flite program . the roles and responsibilities of each oversight group are as follows: the va executive board provides the secretary of veterans affairs with a forum for discussing programs with senior leadership before decisions are made . the strategic management council makes recommendations about programs to the va executive board . the programming and long term issues board focuses on long term multiyear program planning . the budgeting and near term issues board is responsible for overseeing budget formulation and execution activities . the it leadership board is responsible for adjudicating inter - and intraboard issues about programs that cannot be resolved between the programming and long term issues and budgeting and near term issues boards . the flite oversight board is responsible for making decisions regarding flite business requirements , policies , and standards . the flite program office is responsible for overseeing and coordinating all aspects of the program . the office is responsible for performing these functions through the program director's office ( pdo ) , which is responsible for business requirements and processes , and the it program management office ( pmo ) , which is responsible for technical solutions . project teams are responsible for managing sam , ifas , and the data warehouse . in addition , other va organizations provide the office with quality assurance , acquisition , and technology support . these program - specific and va supporting organizations are depicted in figure 3 . table 1 describes the components that comprise the program office and supporting va organizations . va is employing a multiphase approach for both the sam and ifas projects , which are to be implemented by contractors using commercial off - the - shelf systems . the national cemetery administration manages 130 national cemeteries . to support its services to veterans and their families , va relies on an assortment of business systems , including 13 different systems that currently support its asset and financial management . however , the department has long recognized that its business systems and processes are inefficient and do not effectively support the department's mission . for example , according to the department , systems are not integrated , manual entry that involves labor - intensive accounting processes is business processes are not standardized , and processes and systems require multiple entry of business information and result in untimely financial reporting . since fiscal year 1991 , the department has reported on the need for an integrated financial management system and has reported financial management system functionality as a material weakness .