gao - 04-508 . ( see app . i for details on our scope and methodology. ) furthermore , many staff and some managers were unable to articulate longer - term performance plans for their unit's efforts . we performed our work from june 2003 to july 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . china's december 2001 accession to the wto resulted in commitments to open and liberalize its economy and offer a more predictable environment for trade and foreign investment in accordance with wto rules . u.s. investment and trade with china has grown significantly over the past 10 years , and trade between china and the united states exceeded $180 billion in 2003 , based on u.s. trade data . consequently , china was the united states' third largest trading partner in 2003 . u.s. goods exported to china increased by 29 percent to $28.4 billion in 2003 from $22.1 billion in 2002 . u.s. imports from china are also rising and reached a level of $152.4 billion in 2003 . according to 2003 u.s. trade data , the u.s. trade deficit with china ( $124 billion ) is larger than that of any other u.s. trading partner . the u.s. government's efforts to ensure china's compliance with its wto commitments are part of an overall u.s. structure to monitor and enforce foreign governments' compliance with existing trade agreements . ustr has primary responsibility for monitoring and enforcing trade agreements . among other things , ustr is required by law to identify any foreign policies and practices that constitute significant barriers to u.s. goods and services , including those that are covered by international agreements to which the united states is a party . at least 16 other agencies are involved in these monitoring and enforcement activities , but ustr and the departments of commerce , state , and usda have the primary responsibilities regarding trade agreement monitoring and enforcement . each of these four key agencies we reviewed has within its organizational structure a main unit that focuses on china or the greater asian region . these main units have primary responsibility for coordinating the agencies' china - wto compliance activities , although numerous other units within the agencies are also involved . the main units routinely draw on assistance from experts in these other units to obtain information and expertise as needed . additionally , the key agencies have units in china or at the wto , and staff in those overseas units are also involved in the agencies' compliance activities . table 1 lists the main units with china - wto responsibilities , as well as examples of other offices with which the units coordinate on an intra - agency basis . in its 2002 and 2003 reports to congress on china's wto compliance , ustr reported that china had successfully implemented many of its numerous wto commitments , including rewriting hundreds of trade - related laws and regulations and making required tariff reductions . nevertheless , ustr's reports identified over 100 individual compliance problems concerning china's implementation of its wto commitments , according to our analysis .