manufacturing and production delays . the acela program experienced a significant share of manufacturing and production delays . under fra's 1994 master plan for nhrip , developed in response to the amtrak authorization and development act , delivery of enough high - speed trains to initiate limited 3-hour service between boston and new york city was expected by 1999 . however , due to design and manufacturing delays , the first acela trainsets were delivered about a year late , and revenue service using the trainsets did not begin until december 2000 . manufacturing and production delays began early in the procurement process . for example , our review of consortium progress reports indicated that as early as october 1996 , only months after the original contract was signed , change orders and design changes ( mainly related to car interiors ) were being made that were causing delays in production . in addition , train weight was increasing , a condition that continued to plague the trainsets throughout production . amtrak attempted to require the consortium to prepare recovery plans to keep the program on schedule , but we found little evidence of such plans in documents we reviewed . regardless , these plans did not prevent the trainsets from being delivered about a year late . abbreviated testing prior to placement in revenue service . amtrak's acela trainsets also appeared to have had abbreviated testing prior to being deployed into revenue service . a fuller testing of the trainsets may have better identified the range of potential problems and defects that could be experienced prior to placing the trainsets in service . the maximum testing any one acela trainset received was about 35,000 miles of testing — 20,000 miles at the transportation test center ( center ) in pueblo , colorado , and 15,000 miles on the northeast corridor between 1999 and 2000 . however , an fra official believed testing of the trainsets was rushed and that additional testing at the center should have been conducted . this official cited testing of amtrak's aem - 7 electric locomotive as an example of the testing that is normally done on new equipment . this locomotive , which was a new locomotive that entered service in the early 1980's , was tested for 165,000 miles at the center prior to placement in service . an fra official also acknowledged that there were no minimum federal testing requirements for new high - speed trainsets , like acela , only that such equipment comply with existing safety regulations . however , this official believed amtrak was under both financial and time pressures to place the trainsets in service , in part because of delays in trainset production . since placement into revenue service in 2000 , the acela has experienced a number of unexpected problems . one occurrence was in august 2002 when amtrak was forced to withdraw the trains from service to address unexpected equipment problems ( yaw damper brackets ) . the trainsets were not returned to complete service until october 2002 . according to amtrak , this withdrawal cost the corporation a net $17 million in lost revenue .