the ansps also charge for these services . discussions about the commercialization of air navigation services often use a number of terms interchangeably . among these terms are restructuring , privatization , outsourcing , and corporatization , as well as commercialization . what are some initial observations about the commercialization of air navigation services ? to address these questions , we reviewed the characteristics and performance of five ansps , which we selected as illustrative of similarities and differences in the size and scope of commercialized ansps . these ansps — australia's airservices australia ; canada's nav canada ; germany's deutsche flugsicherung gmbh ( dfs ) ; new zealand's airways corporation of new zealand , ltd. ; and the united kingdom's ( uk ) national air traffic services , ltd. ( nats ) — were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating ever since as performance - based organizations along commercial lines . because of the size of our sample , our results cannot be generalized to other commercialized ansps , and our purpose is not to assess or evaluate the selected commercialized organizations . comparisons of performance before and after commercialization are generally not feasible because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the time before commercialization , or the measures have changed in the years following commercialization . furthermore , comparisons between or among ansps are difficult because each ansp may define its measures of cost , safety , and performance differently . we did not verify the data gathered and reported by the five ansps ; however , their financial information is subject to independent audits , and their safety and operating performance data are publicly reported . as a result , we considered the data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . the information presented in this testimony is based on ongoing work and may be updated as additional information becomes available . at the request of the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , its subcommittee on aviation , and senators john mccain and trent lott , we are planning to issue a more detailed report later this year on the topics discussed in this testimony . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from august 2004 through april 2005 . let me turn now to the results of our review . in summary: the five commercialized ansps that we selected for review have a number of common characteristics: each operates as a business rather than a government organization , making and carrying out its own strategic , operational , and financial decisions . additionally , each generates and manages its own revenue to cover its operating and capital costs . each assesses fees on users of air navigation services ( eg , major commercial air carriers , regional air carriers , and in some cases general aviation operators ) and is able to borrow funds from private markets , instead of relying on annual appropriations from the government . all five ansps have retained safety as their primary goal , and each is subject to some external safety regulation .