controlled . we found that the schedule was updated regularly using actual progress and logic by trained at&t personnel , with supporting documentation and review procedures . we also found that not all activities in the schedule had baseline dates . according to firstnet officials , portions of the schedule are baselined on a rolling basis once the next requirements traceability matrixes are created . however , some activities with no baseline dates had already begun or been completed . further , firstnet officials stated that no “basis document” exists for the baselined schedule . our schedule guide notes that a corresponding basis document is important because it explains the overall approach to the program , defines custom fields in the schedule file , details assumptions used in developing the schedule , and justifies constraints , lags , long activity durations , and any other unique features of the schedule . furthermore , while at&t was submitting schedule variance information , it covered only tasks that had been baselined , when the majority of activities in the schedule were missing baseline dates . without formally established baseline - schedule start and finish dates to measure performance against , firstnet is limited in how it can use the schedule to identify or mitigate the effect of unfavorable performance . overall , firstnet officials said they are not concerned about the gaps in the at&t master schedule for a variety of reasons . namely , officials stated that firstnet entered into a contract with at&t that lays out specific milestones that at&t must meet or it does not receive payment . accordingly , they said that the summary level of detail is sufficient for firstnet's purposes , as at&t's program management office determines what activities are appropriate to track to meet those milestones and at&t maintains its own , more detailed schedule . they further added that given the firm - fixed price nature of the contract , it is not practical or helpful for firstnet to collect information on the resources for at&t's deliverables ; if it takes at&t 50 or 50,000 individuals to complete the requirement that decision is for at&t to determine . as such , although the contract cites gao's schedule guide when detailing the schedule's requirements , firstnet excluded requirements related to resources . similarly , firstnet excluded requirements related to schedule risk analysis primarily , according to firstnet officials , because risks to the established schedule milestones were largely considered when evaluating at&t's proposal prior to contract award . finally , firstnet officials highlighted that the schedule is not the only measure for progress and reporting , noting that it employs many other mechanisms to monitor and oversee at&t's progress and performance , and discusses the schedule during program management review and other meetings with at&t . however , the contract itself states that firstnet is responsible for ensuring the overall success of the network and that , to do so , its responsibilities after contract award include overseeing the program schedule . regarding resources in particular , the contract also states that these responsibilities include managing schedule resources .