gao - 12-12 . washington , d.c.: october 14 , 2011 . the performance measures have also changed over time . results from our site visits cannot be generalized to other vamcs . we also interviewed the directors and relevant staff of the four veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) , or regional networks of care , for the sites we visited . to examine the extent to which vha's approach for measuring and monitoring medical appointment wait times reflects how long veterans are waiting , we reviewed vha's outpatient medical appointment scheduling policy and processes and training documents based on the policy , as well as documents related to performance accountability that include wait time measures . the variation in schedulers' interpretation of the desired date suggests confusion about its correct use in different scheduling scenarios . at each of the four vamcs we visited , we interviewed the leadership team , scheduling managers , and managers from all of our selected clinics about oversight activities to ensure the accuracy of scheduling data , and about what data and measures they use to manage clinics and improve medical appointment timeliness . however , we found that at least one scheduler from each of the vamcs we visited did not correctly implement these aspects of the policy when recording the desired date in the vista scheduling system for specific hypothetical scheduling situations . therefore , reported wait times for these appointments may not have accurately reflected how long patients actually waited . altered original desired date based on appointment availability: three schedulers from two vamcs established a desired date that was recorded in the vista scheduling system independent of schedule capacity , but later altered the desired date because of appointment availability . specifically , two of the three schedulers altered the originally established desired date to match the agreed - upon appointment date , which would have incorrectly resulted in no wait time reported for the appointment . the third scheduler altered the established desired date when there was no appointment availability within 2 weeks of that date ; which would have resulted in an incorrectly reported wait time that was shorter than the patient actually waited from his or her original desired date . recorded a new desired date when rescheduling appointment: additionally , eight schedulers from three vamcs incorrectly recorded a new desired date when rescheduling an appointment cancelled by the clinic rather than keeping the original desired date as required by vha's scheduling policy . changing the desired date in this way would incorrectly decrease the reported wait times for the rescheduled appointments ; veterans actually would wait longer than the reported wait times indicated . during our site visits , staff at some clinics told us they change medical appointment desired dates to show clinic wait times within vha's performance goals . a scheduler at one primary care clinic specifically stated that she changes the recorded desired date to the patient's agreed - upon appointment date in order to show shorter wait times for the clinic . a provider at a specialty care clinic at another vamc said providers in that clinic change the desired dates of their follow - up appointments if a patient cannot be scheduled within the 14-day performance goal .