apr . ( washington , d.c.: april 26 , 1996 ) tax administration: status of irs efforts to develop measures of voluntary compliance . gao - 01-535 . ( washington , d.c.: june 18 , 2001 ) summary summarizes uses of taxpayer compliance measurement program ( tcmp ) data and outlines who uses the data . identifies weaknesses of proposed changes and establishes criteria for evaluating proposed changes to measures of voluntary compliance . summarizes irs's plans for the 1994 tcmp and discusses promising changes . identifies several weaknesses in the plan that the internal revenue service ( irs ) needs to fix before implementing the project . testimony on 1994 tcmp before the house subcommittee on oversight , committee on ways and means . discusses uses of tcmp data and status of planned 1994 tcmp effort . discusses some of the criticisms of tcmp . identifies gao reports where tcmp data were used . summarizes errors in audits for 1988 tcmp and suggests changes to codes to be used to categorize the cause of noncompliance for the planned 1994 tcmp project . follow - up on issues raised in our december 1994 report concerning timeliness and the types of data irs planned to gather for tcmp audits . also , briefly discusses other sources of data on voluntary compliance and the relevance of tcmp data for alternative tax system proposals . indicates how irs responded to our recommendations . summarizes the problems caused by cancellation of the 1994 tcmp project . this report also identifies sampling strategies that will reduce the sample size and still provide some data . describes irs's efforts to develop new voluntary compliance measures . also discusses how federal agencies besides irs assess compliance with the rules and regulations governing their programs . the internal revenue service ( irs ) designed a sample of 49,251 returns from the population of form 1040 tax returns filed for tax year 2001 . these include returns from wage earners and from self - employed individuals filing schedule c and farmers filing schedule f. irs developed a representative sample , then added returns to increase the precision of nrp results . included with these additional returns are about 18,000 added to increase the likelihood that there would be enough returns to provide a basis for developing new audit selection formulas . the nrp sample designers used past reporting compliance research results to derive an estimate of the percentage of returns that will likely need to be audited in each of the strata . the designers then used those estimates to add returns to the sample , intending to have at least 500 sufficiently high tax change returns in each grouping of strata that will likely require the development of a unique audit selection formula . officials explained that the 500-return standard was used in past reporting compliance studies to develop audit selection formulas . the designers also said that they considered it important to apply the same standard in nrp . the nrp sample is detailed in table 1 . these decisions are vital to minimizing taxpayer burden . the nrp cadre is another important element of irs's ability to minimize the burden associated with taxpayer contacts under nrp .