the revised circular contains no such prohibition . quotas and arbitrary goals are inappropriate . sourcing goals and targets should contribute to mission requirements and improved performance and be based on considered research and sound analysis of past activities . agencies will need to consider how competitive sourcing relates to the strategic management of human capital , improved financial performance , expanded reliance on electronic government , and budget and performance integration , consistent with the president's management agenda . at the request of senator byrd and this subcommittee , we recently initiated work to look at how agencies are implementing their competitive sourcing programs . recognizing this , the panel adopted a principle stipulating that sourcing and related policies be consistent with human capital practices that are designed to attract , motivate , retain , and reward a high - performing workforce . it is not clear from the revised circular , however , whether the term “cost - effective” means the low - cost provider or whether other factors may be taken into account ( such as the disruption and risk factors previously accounted for through the 10 percent conversion differential ) . finally , the revised circular has created an accountability gap by prohibiting all challenges to streamlined cost comparisons . under the prior circular , both the public and the private sectors had the right to file appeals to ad hoc agency appeal boards . that right extended to all cost comparisons , no matter how small or large ( and to decisions to waive the a - 76 cost comparison process ) . the new circular abolishes the ad hoc appeal board process and instead relies on the far - based agency - level protest process for challenges to standard competitions , which are conducted under a far - based process . while we recognize that streamlined cost comparisons are intended to be inexpensive , expeditious processes for relatively small functions , we are nonetheless concerned that the absence of an appeal process may result in less transparency and accountability . another accountability issue relates to the right of in - house competitors to challenge sourcing decisions in favor of the private sector — an issue that the commercial activities panel addressed in its report . while both the public and the private sectors could file appeals to the ad hoc agency appeal boards under the prior circular , only the private sector had the right , if dissatisfied with the ruling of the agency appeal board , to file a bid protest at gao or in court . under the previous version of the circular , both gao and the court of appeals for the federal circuit held that federal employees and their unions were not “interested parties” with the standing to challenge the results of a - 76 cost comparisons . the panel heard many complaints from federal employees and their representatives about this inequality in protest rights . the panel recommended that , in the context of improving the federal government's process for making sourcing decisions , a way be found to level the playing field by allowing in - house entities to file a protest at gao , as private - sector competitors have been allowed to do .