iii ) . in responding to our survey , grantees selected multiple categories to describe their organizational type . the majority — 89 percent of the grantees — classified themselves as nonprofits . grantees for both programs reported that they refer domestic violence victims to specialists when appropriate . additionally , while both programs target such groups as minority and low - income populations , healthy marriage grantees are more likely to target high school or teenaged youths , and responsible fatherhood grantees are more likely to target incarcerated parents . both programs offer a range of similar activities , and grantees from both programs said they refer victims of domestic violence to specialists in their communities when appropriate ( see fig . however , according to our survey , while both programs offer many similar activities , healthy marriage programs focus more on those related to marriage and relationship services , whereas responsible fatherhood programs are more likely to focus on providing services teaching parenting skills . specifically , 94 percent of healthy marriage grantees , compared to 55 percent of responsible fatherhood grantees , reported offering marriage and relationship activities . during our visits to several healthy marriage grantees , we often observed activities related to marriage and relationships . for example , we observed a healthy marriage workshop where couples took quizzes to determine how well they knew one another and then participated in a discussion about commitment , chemistry , and compatibility . conversely , 92 percent of responsible fatherhood grantees , compared to 47 percent of healthy marriage grantees , reported in our survey that they provide services related to teaching parenting skills . the survey data was collected from february 2008 to april 2008 . because this was not a sample survey , it has no sampling errors . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in interpreting a particular question , sources of information available to respondents , or entering data into a database or analyzing them can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in developing the questionnaire , collecting the data , and analyzing them to minimize such nonsampling error . for example , prior to launching our survey , we worked with social science survey specialists to develop the questionnaire and minimize error . we tested the content and format of the questionnaire with multiple grantees prior to administering the survey to address issues such as differences in question interpretation , and differences in data tracking . we conducted 10 survey pretests . as a result of our pretests , we changed survey questions as appropriate and tested those changes with grantees that participated in our original pretests . further , the final pretests were performed using the web - based survey tool , which checked for accuracy and usability . to ensure grantees responded to the survey , we sent e - mail reminders and conducted follow - up telephone calls with nonrespondents . since this was a web - based survey , respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire , eliminating the need to key data into a database , minimizing error .