this is a concern we share . while holding components accountable is important , without validated and department - approved documents — such as acquisition program baselines and life cycle cost estimates — efforts to fully understand and address the department's overall funding gap will be hindered . in september 2012 , we reported that dhs largely made investment decisions on a program - by - program and component - by - component basis . dhs did not have a process to systematically prioritize its major investments to ensure that the department's acquisition portfolio was consistent with anticipated resource constraints . in our work at dod , we have found this approach hinders efforts to achieve a balanced mix of programs that are affordable and feasible and that provide the greatest return on investment . in our past work focused on improving weapon system acquisitions , we found that successful commercial companies use a disciplined and integrated approach to prioritize needs and allocate resources . as a result , they can avoid pursuing more projects than their resources can support , and better optimize the return on their investment . this approach , known as portfolio management , requires companies to view each of their investments as contributing to a collective whole , rather than as independent and unrelated . with an enterprise perspective , companies can effectively ( 1 ) identify and prioritize opportunities , and ( 2 ) allocate available resources to support the highest priority — or most promising — investment opportunities . over the past several years , we have examined the practices that private and public sector entities use to achieve a balanced mix of new projects , and based on this work , we have identified key practice areas for portfolio management . one i would like to highlight today is that investments should be ranked and selected using a disciplined process to assess the costs , benefits , and risks of alternative products to ensure transparency and comparability across alternatives . in this regard , dhs established the joint requirements council ( jrc ) in 2003 , to identify crosscutting opportunities and common requirements among dhs components and help determine how dhs should use its resources . but the jrc stopped meeting in 2006 after the chair was assigned to other duties within the department . in 2008 , we recommended that it be reinstated , or that dhs establish another joint requirements oversight board , and dhs officials recognized that strengthening the jrc was a top priority . through our ongoing work , we have identified that dhs recently piloted a capabilities and requirements council ( crc ) to serve in a similar role as the jrc . the crc began reviewing a portfolio of cyber capabilities in the summer of 2013 . the pilot is intended to inform the department's fiscal year 2015 budget request ; therefore , it is too soon to assess the outcomes of this new oversight body . it is also unknown at this time how dhs will sustain the crc over time or what its outcomes will be .