iii. ) the second key recycling initiative involves the national recycling coalition , which intends to develop new recycling logos to replace the familiar “chasing arrows” logo currently displayed on many products . according to coalition representatives , one of the new logos will be specific to mail . while these considerations are numerous , the most serious question with respect to the program's feasibility is “who will pay the substantial costs associated with implementing the program ? ” usps has three options to cover the costs of a mail take - back program . first , usps could explore increases in its postage rates for the applicable classes of mail — an action that mailing industry stakeholders would likely strongly oppose . furthermore , it may not be feasible to raise these rates because of a limitation specified in the postal accountability and enhancement act . second , while usps could require mail recipients to pay the postage needed to cover the program's costs , such an action , in our view , would greatly diminish or eliminate public participation . as we reported in 2006 , one key to increasing the volume of materials recycled is to offer financial incentives to increase recycling . thus , a mail take - back program that departs from this premise is , in our view , unlikely to succeed . finally , usps could solicit funding from other parties , such as communities , federal and non - profit organizations , businesses , environmental organizations , congress , and other interested parties . the goal of the pilot — termed “new york city soars ! ” ( saving of america's resources ) — is to identify opportunities to establish and expand recycling programs in usps facilities throughout new york city and , based on lessons learned , identify recycling practices that can be used in other usps facilities . usps is implementing the pilot in stages . the first stage assessed postal recycling activities underway in each of new york city's five boroughs , using a variety of factors , such as costs to usps , feasibility ( including logistical considerations ) , and mission compatibility . the report on the assessment , issued in september 2007 , concluded that recycling in new york city ( 1 ) can generate recycling revenues , ( 2 ) will substantially reduce usps' waste disposal costs , ( 3 ) will not interfere with postal operations , and ( 4 ) will require only a “modest incremental” effort to accomplish .