dod had no comments . in its comments , gsa said it was pleased that our report affirmed that savings can be achieved through leveraged purchasing and better understanding of spend data . gsa also provided additional information on its strategic sourcing initiatives . gsa noted that it would have been very resource intensive for the agency to obtain information from a representative sample of the 270,000 purchase card holders for little added benefit . we revised our report to reflect gsa's comment . gsa provided some suggested language and technical changes to help clarify the report , which we incorporated as appropriate . we did not use gsa's suggested language concerning the limitations we identified in its study because we believe the language in our report accurately reflects our finding on this issue . dhs stated that it appreciated our work and provided additional information on its respective strategic sourcing initiatives . dhs also stated that it has realized savings from the os ii initiative and expects to continue to do so . we are sending copies of this report to the administrator of general services , the secretaries of the department of homeland security and defense as well as the air force , army , and navy . in addition , the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . these transactions were all with the same nationwide retailer . when asked about such substantial price differences for items with the same part number , gsa officials acknowledged that the purchase card data they used for retail prices did not always accurately identify the quantity of items involved in each transaction . the existence of substantial price differences for a number of items indicates that gsa's attempts to compare prices may not have adequately controlled for variations in quantities . we also identified a weakness with the clarity of the gsa report with regard to how price premium estimates were calculated . specifically , gsa's study described a specific formula that was used to calculate the price premiums , but our review of the study's supporting documents found that the gsa actually used a different formula to calculate price premiums for 10 of the 14 office supply categories . in a discussion with gsa officials , they agreed that the study did involve the use of two different formulas . when we used the formula described in the study to recalculate the retail price premiums for those 10 categories of office supplies , we found the price premiums would have changed from what gsa reported by less than 5 percentage points for all categories except drawing and graphic arts supplies . for that category , the recalculated price premium was 68 percent , as compared to the 278 percent reported in the study .