there are three variants . the conventional takeoff and landing ( ctol ) variant will be an air - to - ground replacement for the air force's f - 16 falcon and the a - 10 thunderbolt ii aircraft , and will complement the f - 22a raptor . the stovl variant will be a multi - role strike fighter to replace the marine corps' f / a - 18c / d hornet and av - 8b harrier aircraft . the carrier - suitable variant ( cv ) will provide the navy a multi - role , stealthy strike aircraft to complement the f / a - 18 e / f super hornet . dod began the jsf program in october 2001 with a highly concurrent , aggressive acquisition strategy with substantial overlap between development , testing , and production . the program was replanned in 2004 following weight and performance problems and rebaselined in 2007 due to cost growth and schedule slips . in february 2010 , the secretary of defense announced another comprehensive restructuring of the program due to poor outcomes and continuing problems . this restructuring followed an extensive department - wide review which included three independent groups chartered to evaluate program execution and resources , manufacturing processes and plans , and engine costs and affordability initiatives . dod provided additional resources for testing – funding , time , and flight test assets – and reduced near - term procurement by 122 aircraft . as a result of the additional funding needed and recognition of higher unit procurement costs , in march 2010 the department declared that the program experienced a nunn - mccurdy breach of the critical cost growth statutory threshold and subsequently certified to the congress in june 2010 that the jsf program should continue . the program's approval to enter system development was rescinded and efforts commenced to establish a new acquisition program baseline . the new jsf program executive officer subsequently led a comprehensive technical baseline review . in january 2011 , the secretary of defense announced additional development cost increases , further delays , and cut another 124 aircraft through fiscal year 2016 . restructuring continued throughout 2011 and into 2012 , adding to costs and extending the schedules for achieving key activities . the department's restructuring actions have helped reduce near - term risks by lowering annual procurement quantities and allowing more time and resources for flight testing . in late march 2012 , the department established a new acquisition program baseline and approved the continuation of system development . these decisions , critical for program management and oversight , had been delayed several times and came 2 years after the department alerted the congress that the program experienced a breach of the nunn - mccurdy critical cost growth threshold and thus require a new milestone approval for system development and a new acquisition program baseline . the new jsf baseline projects a total acquisition cost of $395.7 billion , an increase of $117.2 billion ( 42 percent ) from the prior 2007 baseline .