gao - 08-828ni . washington , d.c.: august 22 , 2008 ( for official use only ) . defense critical infrastructure: adherence to guidance would improve dod's approach to identifying and assuring the availability of critical transportation assets . gao - 08-851 . washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2008 . a more thorough description of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . asd ( hd&asa ) , within the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , serves as the principal civilian advisor and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff serves as the principal military advisor to the secretary of defense on critical infrastructure protection . asd ( hd&asa ) has issued guidance to help assure the availability of critical infrastructure . a component of this guidance outlines the roles and responsibilities of the organizations involved in dcip . table 1 summarizes the training and exercise roles and responsibilities of each dcip organization . transcom and the installations we visited that have critical transportation assets have incorporated dcip - like elements into their existing exercises . although installation personnel we met with often were unaware of dcip , we found that many conducted routine antiterrorism , emergency management , information assurance , and continuity of operations planning exercises that often include critical transportation assets located on the installation . as part of their regularly scheduled antiterrorism and continuity of operations programs , installation officials at all 19 installations we visited that have critical transportation assets conducted exercises encompassing critical assets located on their installations . however , unlike dcip , some of these programs do not emphasize an all - threats , all - hazards approach to assuring critical infrastructure . dod guidance requires the testing of antiterrorism and continuity of operations plans annually through various exercises . dod's antiterrorism guidance requires that commanders maintain antiterrorism exercise documentation for no less than 2 years to ensure incorporation of lessons learned . these antiterrorism exercises often contain aspects of dcip , such as ( 1 ) developing adaptive plans and procedures to mitigate risk , ( 2 ) restoring capability in the event of a loss or degradation of assets , ( 3 ) supporting incident management , and ( 4 ) protecting critical infrastructure - related sensitive information . for example , even though installation personnel are often unaware of dcip , we found that exercises testing antiterrorism and continuity of operations plans typically include critical installation infrastructure , and exercises for emergency management plans sometimes include assuring the availability of critical transportation assets in the event of natural disasters . several installations in japan that we visited conducted exercises that assure the availability of critical transportation assets located on those installations . also , several installation officials responsible for critical transportation assets in pacom's area of responsibility with whom we met told us that they conduct exercises that examine the impact of natural disasters , such as earthquakes and typhoons , on critical infrastructure . installation officials responsible for critical transportation assets in centcom's area of responsibility told us that they incorporate lessons learned into future exercises . first , as we previously reported , the military services have not yet developed specific guidance for how installations are to implement dcip .