hud agreed with our recommendations . fha has begun addressing recommendations made by the consultant . for instance , in june 2012 it finalized the delegations of authority needed for the office of risk management and regulatory affairs to establish and maintain risk - management policies , activities , and controls for fha . it also formed a single family credit risk committee and an operational risk committee . fha also has begun addressing our november 2011 recommendations by taking the following actions: fha has begun integrating its quality control initiatives into the processes of the office of risk management . for example , the office of risk management and regulatory affairs is reviewing the results of quality control activities as it prepares baseline operational risk assessments . fha developed a plan for conducting an inaugural annual risk assessment ( including preparing baseline operational risk assessments ) for the office of single family housing . as previously noted , fha has created committees to address credit and operational risks . the charters for both committees indicate that they are to discuss and address emerging risks . and , as part of the annual risk - assessment process mentioned above , fha plans to identify emerging risks . however , some of the initiatives taken in response to our recommendations have not been completed or put fully in place . for example , fha does not expect to complete its inaugural risk assessment until september 2013 . for example , hud officials told us that housing agencies should retain approximately 8.5 percent ( or 1 month's worth ) of their annual funding allocations in reserves . our november 2011 report also identified weaknesses in fha's human capital management . specifically , we noted that leading organizations use workforce planning practices that include defining critical skills and skill gaps , but fha's approach did not have mechanisms for doing so or a current workforce plan . contrary to our internal control standards and hud guidance , fha also did not have a current succession plan . we noted that succession planning was particularly important because , as of july 2011 , almost 50 percent of single family housing staff at headquarters were eligible to retire in the next 3 years . the percentage of staff eligible to retire at the homeownership centers was even higher — 63 percent . additionally , while single - family loan volume grew significantly from 2006 to 2010 , staffing levels for the office of single family housing remained relatively constant . we concluded that without a more comprehensive workforce planning process that included succession planning , fha's ability to systematically identify future workforce needs and plan for upcoming retirements was limited . we recommended that fha develop workforce and succession plans for the office of single family housing . hud agreed with our recommendations . since our november 2011 report , fha has developed a workforce analysis and succession plan that identifies gaps in critical competencies and additional steps that need to be taken , although the timing of many of these steps is not specified . completing these steps remains critical to ensuring that the agency has adequate staff to effectively oversee its mortgage insurance programs .