arctic . status on implementation of the amsa 2009 report recommendations . tromsø , norway: april 2015 . gao . maritime infrastructure: key issues related to commercial activity in the u.s. arctic over the next decade . gao - 14-299 . washington , d.c.: march 19 , 2014 . u.s. department of commerce . national oceanic and atmospheric administration . noaa's arctic action plan: supporting the national strategy for the arctic region . silver spring , m.d: april 2014 . gao . arctic issues: better direction and management of voluntary recommendations could enhance u.s. arctic council participation . gao - 14-435 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2014 . brigham , l. w. alaska and the new maritime arctic executive summary: executive summary of a project report to the state of alaska department of commerce , community and economic development . fairbanks , a.k . : february 1 , 2015 . the international council on clean transportation . a 10-year projection of maritime activity in the u.s. arctic region . washington , d.c.: january 2015 . this report was contracted and coordinated under the u.s. committee on the marine transportation system . executive order no . enhancing coordination of national efforts in the arctic . 80 fed . reg . january 26 , 2015 . the white house . arctic executive steering committee . national strategy for the arctic region implementation report . washington , d.c.: january 30 , 2015 . alaska arctic policy commission . final report of the alaska arctic policy commission . anchorage and bethel , a.k . : january 30 , 2015 . u.s. army corps of engineers . alaska district . alaska deep - draft arctic port system study: draft integrated feasibility report , draft environmental assessment ( ea ) , and draft finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) . nome , ak: february 2015 . gao . arctic planning: dod expects to play a supporting role to other federal agencies and has efforts under way to address capability needs and update plans . gao - 15-566 . washington , d.c.: june 19 , 2015 . world economic forum . global agenda council on the arctic . arctic investment protocol: guidelines for responsible investment in the arctic . geneva , switzerland: november 2015 . noaa . noaa officials originally told us that they were working to complete an update to noaa's strategic plan for the arctic in 2019 . however , as of february 2020 , officials told us that this update is currently on hold pending the completion of a new government - wide national strategy . as mentioned previously , ostp staff said they could not state whether the 2013 national strategy was still current , and ostp provided no additional information as to whether a new strategy was in development . noaa officials told us that the agency's current three priorities in the arctic are ( 1 ) weather and water ( including weather and water research , observations , and arctic contributions to global weather monitoring ) ; ( 2 ) blue economy ( including ocean mapping , seafood competitiveness , tourism , and coastal resilience ) ; and ( 3 ) innovative partnerships in alaska and the arctic .