ii. ) the local deconfliction protocols established specific policies applicable to the geographic area ( eg , states ) covered by the protocol . each local protocol described the process and mechanisms to be used for notification and deconfliction , detailing the types of information to be provided . the protocols also addressed particular issues or needs of the local dea and ice offices . these topics included the identification of the respective title 21 coordinators ; designation of points of contact in addition to the asac / title 21 coordinator when the protocol covered a large geographic area or multiple offices ( eg , protocols that included more than one state ) ; invitation to dea to participate in ice counternarcotics investigations ; participation in each others' groups and task forces within the geographic area ; and the process for coordinating investigative activities with other federal agencies , such as u.s. customs and border protection . to what extent have dea and ice taken actions to monitor the implementation of the 2009 agreement in their respective domestic offices , and make needed adjustments ? to assess the extent to which dea and ice have taken actions to implement the cross - designation , information - sharing , and deconfliction provisions of the 2009 agreement , we analyzed pertinent documents such as the 2009 agreement , related interagency agreements , directives to field offices on implementing the agreement , policies and procedures for cross - designating ice agents , and local deconfliction protocols . specifically , we analyzed the 2009 agreement provisions affecting dea and ice domestic offices and compared dea and ice actions to implement these provisions with the requirements in the provisions . as agreed with your offices , we did not analyze the international provisions of the 2009 agreement because these provisions pose unique sensitivity and law enforcement issues depending on the country or region involved . in addition , we interviewed dea and ice headquarters officials who were responsible for negotiating and implementing the 2009 agreement about the development of the provisions of the agreement and actions taken by dea and ice headquarters officials to implement the 2009 agreement . we also assessed how the provisions of the 2009 agreement addressed pertinent recommendations from our march 2009 report . further , to obtain a field perspective on the 2009 agreement and implementation of the provisions on cross - designation , information sharing , and deconfliction of counternarcotics investigations , we conducted interviews in 8 dea division and 8 ice field offices with 2 separate groups – – ( 1 ) field management and ( 2 ) first - line supervisors in these offices . second , dea and ice field offices also reported using a variety of deconfliction mechanisms , including processing information through local deconfliction center databases , sharing plans for conducting law enforcement actions , and processing information through the special operations division database to deconflict operations and targets of investigations . because of differences in the availability of mechanisms , dea and ice offices may use different mechanisms to deconflict law enforcement actions . for example , dea and ice offices without access to a local deconfliction center may share plans or communicate by telephone to deconflict operations .