see fig . 2 for the pathway for requesting dod and northcom assistance during an incident . northcom conducts or participates in exercises to improve readiness to perform its assigned missions . the command annually conducts 2 large - scale exercises — ardent sentry and vigilant shield — and participates in over 30 smaller command , regional , state , and local exercises . each ardent sentry and vigilant shield training event emphasizes one of the key missions while at the same time including elements of the other . ardent sentry emphasizes the civil support missions ; vigilant shield the homeland defense missions . the basis for northcom's exercises is dod's joint training system . northcom's training and exercise directorate is responsible for planning and executing joint training , exercises , and education programs to ensure northcom is prepared to accomplish its assigned missions . due to the need to prepare for and conduct military operations to defend the united states and fight the nation's wars , dod has developed an established , authoritative , time - tested process for planning , conducting , and evaluating exercises in order to test and improve preparedness to meet its wide range of critical missions . northcom uses dod's joint training system as the basis to design , develop , and conduct exercises . the joint training system provides an integrated , requirements - based method for aligning training programs with assigned missions consistent with command priorities , capabilities , and available resources . the joint system consists of four phases beginning with the identification of critical capabilities required based on assigned missions , proceeding through the planning and scheduling of training events , the execution and evaluation of required training , and assessing training proficiency against required capability ( see fig . this process is designed to ensure that an organization's training program is linked to the joint mission essential task list , the personnel executing the tasks are properly trained , and shortfalls in training are identified and corrected in order to improve readiness . the joint training information management system is an automated system specifically designed to assist users in managing elements of each of the four phases of the joint training system . during the execution phase , commanders and directors focus on executing and evaluating planned training events , which can be accomplished through academic training , exercises , or a combination of these activities . during the execution stage of the joint training system , the joint event life cycle provides a five - stage methodology for joint - event development design , planning , preparation , execution , and evaluation . for example , dod components prepare for the execution of an exercise by conducting five conferences , such as the concept development conference where exercise and training objectives are discussed and scenarios developed . activities for the joint event life cycle are managed through the joint training information management system . evaluating lessons learned and identifying issues for corrective actions are fundamental components of dod's training and exercise process . the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff provides policy , direction , and guidance for dod's joint lessons learned program .