donors can advise on the distributions from the account . for the contribution to qualify as a completed gift , the charity must have ultimate control over how the assets in the account are invested and distributed . according to our interviews with knowledgeable individuals and recent senate testimony , donor - advised funds have generally been in existence since the 1930s and have traditionally been operated by community foundations . in the 1990s , financial investment firms began establishing “commercial funds,” which are tax - exempt public charities that operate donor - advised fund accounts . investment of contributions to the fund accounts is controlled by the commercial fund's board , which hires the investment firm that established the commercial fund to manage the fund's assets . generally , an entity must apply to irs to obtain tax - exempt recognition . most organizations seeking recognition from federal income tax must use specific forms , including form 1023 ( application for recognition of exemption under section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the irc ) or form 1024 ( application for recognition of exemption under section 501 ( a ) ) as well as other documentation . after receiving tax - exempt recognition , public charitable entities must annually file a form 990 information return to report their financial transactions and activities for a tax year . charities that have less than $100,000 in gross receipts and $250,000 in year - end assets may use form 990-ez . entities with gross receipts below $25,000 , and certain types of entities , such as churches and certain entities associated with churches , generally are not required to file . form 990 collects information on revenues , expenses , and assets , and has accompanying schedules . schedule a of form 990 covers several areas such as compensation , lobbying expenditures , and revenue sources . schedule b covers the source of contributions to charities and certain other exempt entities . congress has granted public access to form 990 data in recognition of the importance of public oversight to inform donors about how their money is spent and to stem potential abuses . private foundations , regardless of their amounts of gross receipts or assets , are required file a form 990-pf information return annually . irs oversight of tax - exempt entities generally relies on two activities . first , irs reviews applications for tax - exempt status to determine whether a tax - exempt purpose is envisioned . a pending proposal includes recommendations to create new sections or schedules on the form 990 with questions on donor - advised funds and supporting organizations . because the form 1023 asks questions regarding donor - advised funds and supporting organizations , the proposal recommends aligning the form 990 with form 1023 so that irs can track a charity from its formation . if the recommendation is approved , irs's form 990 redesign team plans to rewrite the form 990 instructions and add a glossary consistent with the form 1023 which , according to irs , may provide better data .