usaid agreed with both of our recommendations . usaid agreed with our recommendation that it fill the vacant port engineer position at the haiti mission within time frames that avoid future project delays . in its letter responding to our draft report , usaid noted that , in may 2013 , it issued a solicitation for a ports advisor , recognizing the need to fill the position to move its program forward . in june 2013 , usaid noted that it expected to fill the position soon ; however , as of june 18 , 2013 , the position was vacant . usaid also agreed with our recommendation that each new permanent housing settlement have community support mechanisms in place before the beneficiaries occupy the houses . as noted in our report , usaid stated that $5 million has been set aside to finance community development activities . in its comments on this report , usaid added that the mission is prepared to provide additional resources , if required . usaid also elaborated on the ongoing and planned activities intended to facilitate community development and sustainability at the first two settlement sites . all reporting requirements have now ended . as of march 31 , 2013 , 31 percent of the supplemental funding provided for haiti reconstruction efforts had been disbursed . of the $651 million in funding from the 2010 supplemental appropriations act that usaid has allocated for bilateral earthquake reconstruction activities , usaid had obligated about $293 million ( 45 percent ) and disbursed about $204 million ( 31 percent ) . the amount of funds obligated and disbursed varies among activities in the six sectors of activities to which supplemental funds were allocated . for example , the majority of funding obligated to date has been obligated in just two sectors ( shelter and governance and rule of law ) , as shown in table 2 . in its periodic reports to congress , state reported on the general amounts of supplemental funding obligated and disbursed , as required in the act . state also included some anecdotal information on program outputs and outcomes , which the act also required . for example , the report submitted by state in january 2013 noted that work had begun to rehabilitate damaged irrigation systems and that reconstruction of earthquake - damaged health infrastructure was underway . however , state's reports did not include , among other things , ( 1 ) a detailed program - by - program description of usaid's activities ; ( 2 ) a description , by goal and objective , and an assessment of the progress of u.s. programs ; and ( 3 ) amounts of funding obligated and disbursed on the programs during the preceding 6 months , as directed by the senate committee on appropriations in its report accompanying the act . for example , none of state's reports included a program - by - program description of usaid's sector activities , such as shelter and energy , or an assessment of sector progress . in particular , state's final report , submitted to congress in january 2013 , did not mention that usaid had substantially reduced the number of permanent shelters it had planned to construct .