in their comments , both departments concurred with our recommendations . in va's written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , va provided additional information related to implementing each of our recommendations . ( see table 2. ) according to a navy official , the teams' recommendations were prioritized based on dod's determination of the importance of their particular area . specifically , recommendations of the governance and budget teams were given a higher priority than the other subject matter teams . as a result , their recommendations to continue operating the fhcc as an integrated facility had more weight in dod's final determination . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . although va and dod have shared resources at some level since the 1980s , the fhcc is the first integrated health care center with a unified governance structure , workforce , and budget.in fiscal year 2015 , the fhcc provided care to about 100,000 patients at a total cost of $474 million . the executive agreement , signed by the secretaries of va , dod , and the navy , defines the departments' sharing relationship at the fhcc and contains key provisions to be met in 12 integration areas . ( see table 1 for the key provisions in the executive agreement. ) according to the governance structure established in the executive agreement , the fhcc is accountable to both va and dod , with va serving as the lead department . the fhcc director , a va executive , is accountable to va for the fulfillment of the fhcc mission , while the deputy director , a navy captain who rotates approximately every 2 years , is accountable to the navy and , ultimately , dod . also in accordance with the executive agreement , staff from the naval health clinic great lakes and the north chicago va medical center merged to create a single , joint workforce . this included the transfer of dod civilian staff employed by the department of the navy to va's personnel system . as of november 2016 , the fhcc's workforce included approximately 3482 civilian , active duty , and contract staff . civilians comprised 69 percent ( about 2396 ) of the facility's overall workforce , while 26 percent ( about 907 ) were active duty servicemembers , and 5 percent ( about 179 ) were contract staff . the ndaa 2010 established the joint dod - va medical facility demonstration fund ( joint fund ) as the funding mechanism for the fhcc , with va and dod both making transfers to the joint fund from their respective appropriations . we conducted this performance audit from december 2015 to january 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as authorized in the ndaa 2010 , the executive agreement requires a financial reconciliation process that permits va and dod to identify their contributions to the joint fund each year .