see table 4 . we made our selection using a variety of criteria — such as a mix of industries ( manufacturing , logistics , and commerce ) ; being specifically identified in the act ; industries that reported sizeable cost impact ; the size of industry ; and mix of coin denominations , among others . we conducted this performance audit from march 2015 to december 2015 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( 3 ) how potential coin composition options could affect government savings and industry costs ? to determine what is known about the potential government savings from changes to the metal composition of circulating coins , we reviewed savings estimates reported by the u.s. mint in its december 2012 and 2014 biennial reports to congress , which were required by the coin modernization , oversight , and continuity act of 2010 act ( the act ) . these estimates identified savings by coin denomination ( nickel , dime , and quarter ) and by alternative metals ( cupronickel and steel - based alternatives ) when compared to fiscal year 2014 actual costs . we also reviewed the concurrent technologies corporation study on alternative metals conducted under contract with the u.s. mint . we interviewed u.s. mint officials to understand ( a ) the rationale for not considering metal alternatives to the penny ; ( b ) the purpose , data sources , methodology , and assumptions used in developing savings estimates ; and ( c ) the process followed in developing these costs estimates . we compared the u.s. mint's cost - estimating process with best practices . specifically , the gao cost estimating and assessment guide ( cost guide ) identifies best practices that represent work across the federal government and are the basis for a high - quality , reliable cost estimate . we analyzed the extent to which the cost - estimating process used by the u.s. mint to develop these cost and savings estimates followed the 12-step process described in cost estimating best practices — and assigned each step with a rating of not met , minimally met , partially met , substantially met , or fully met . we also held detailed discussions with u.s. mint officials and reviewed their documentation to identify key factors that could affect the potential costs and savings such as changes in coin production or workforce and operational changes that may not have been included directly in the estimates . we shared our cost guide , the criteria against which we evaluated the mint's savings estimates , and our preliminary findings with u.s. mint officials . when warranted , we updated our analyses based on the agency response and additional documentation provided to us . finally , we corroborated our analyses in interviews with u.s. mint officials responsible for developing the savings estimates .