our analyses controlled for each of these characteristics . to control for the size of each hospital , we calculated part b drug spending at the per beneficiary level . to control for the effect of teaching hospital status , we examined part b drug spending by teaching hospital level ( major teaching , other teaching , and nonteaching ) and we found substantially higher part b drug spending at 340b dsh hospitals regardless of teaching status . to control for the possibility that 340b dsh hospitals were more likely to treat cancer patients , we conducted a separate analysis of part b spending for oncology drugs at 340b dsh and non - 340b hospitals and found similar results in spending . although controlling for teaching status and conducting separate analyses of oncology drug spending may have in part controlled for the treatment of higher risk patients , we also conducted analyses to determine whether patient health status at 340b dsh hospitals may explain the substantially higher part b drug spending at these hospitals . 340b health expressed concerns about the methodology we used in this analysis , noting that the patient risk scores we used were not intended to predict part b drug spending — which was a limitation we noted in our report . however , the risk scores we used are an indication of the expected overall health care spending for the beneficiaries served by the hospitals in our analysis , and we found small differences in expected overall health care spending across the hospital groups . as we noted above , we believe that the relative difference between the risk scores and the per beneficiary part b drug spending at 340b dsh and non - 340b hospitals indicates that the substantially higher spending at 340b dsh hospitals may not be explained by differences in patient health status . ( see fig . the median amount of uncompensated care provided by 340b dsh hospitals was 1.4 percentage points greater than the median amount provided by non - 340b dsh hospitals , and 3.6 percentage points greater than the median amount provided by other non - 340b hospitals . the median amount of charity care provided by 340b dsh hospitals was 0.8 percentage points greater than the median amount provided by non - 340b dsh hospitals , and 1.4 percentage points greater than the median amount provided by other non - 340b hospitals . ( see table 2. ) for example , we found that , in 2008 , part b drug spending at these hospitals was similar to spending at other non - 340b dsh hospitals . however , in 2012 , after the hospitals joined the 340b program , part b drug spending at these hospitals was 53 percent higher than spending at non - 340b dsh hospitals ( and among the nonteaching hospitals , spending at 340b dsh hospitals was 73 percent higher than non - 340b dsh hospitals ) . furthermore , although spending was higher at these 340b dsh hospitals in 2012 , the average risk score of patients treated at these hospitals ( 1.41 ) was slightly lower than the average risk score of patients treated at non - 340b dsh hospitals ( 1.45 ) .