dod concurred with our recommendation . this concludes my statement , i am happy to answer any questions you have . for future questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to the work this statement is based on include david b . best and patricia lentini , assistant directors ; susan c. ditto ; aryn ehlow ; wiktor niewiadomski ; john h. pendleton ; karen richey ; brian t. smith ; jennifer spence ; steven stern ; robert swierczek ; jay tallon ; brian tittle ; and hai v. tran ; alyssa weir ; and gwyneth b. woolwine . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . more details can be found in our report . when mda was established in 2002 , the secretary of defense granted it exceptional flexibility to set requirements and manage the acquisition of the bmds in order to quickly deliver protection against ballistic missiles . this decision enabled mda to rapidly deliver assets , but we have reported that it has come at the expense of transparency and accountability . examples of key problems we have cited in reports in recent years and which continue to affect mda's acquisitions are highlighted below . mda's highly concurrent acquisition approach has led to significant cost growth , schedule delays , and in some cases , performance shortfalls . concurrency is broadly defined as the overlap between technology development and product development or between product development and production . while some concurrency is understandable , committing to product development before requirements are understood and technologies are mature or committing to production and fielding before development is complete is a high - risk strategy that often results in performance shortfalls , unexpected cost increases , schedule delays , and test problems . at the very least , a highly concurrent strategy forces decision makers to make key decisions without adequate information about the weapon's demonstrated operational effectiveness , reliability , and readiness for production . we have previously made recommendations to improve management of epaa , which are highlighted in this year's report . although dod generally concurred with these recommendations , it has not yet fully implemented them . although we found in march 2014 that mda took some additional steps to improve the clarity of its resource and schedule baselines , this was the fourth year that we have found mda's resource baselines are not sufficiently reliable to support oversight . additionally , issues with the content and presentation of the schedule baselines continue to limit the usefulness of the information for decision makers .