gao - 03-740t . the law is silent on this point . va's determination has resulted in increased administrative expenses and reduced overall collections , thus making fewer dollars available for veteran health care . we believe our previous suggestion to congress — that it consider clarifying the cost recovery provisions of title 38 of the u.s. code to direct va to collect copayments from patients regardless of any amounts recovered from private health insurance except in instances where the insurer pays the full cost of va care — is still valid . such action would reduce the administrative burden on va staff , reduce va administrative expenses , and allow va to maximize collections to help meet its costs for providing health care . to accurately determine and report the cost to collect first - and third - party payments , we recommend that the secretary of veterans affairs direct the under secretary for health to provide guidance for standardizing and consistently applying across va the accounting of costs associated with collecting payments from veterans and private health insurers . we provided a draft of this report to va for comment . in oral comments , an official in va's office of congressional and legislative affairs informed us that va concurred with our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of veterans affairs , interested congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov / . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or michael t. blair , jr. , at ( 404 ) 679-1944 . michael tropauer and aditi shah archer contributed to this report . to do our work , we reviewed our prior work and department of veterans affairs ( va ) office of inspector general reports on va's first - and third - party revenue collection for the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) . we obtained and reviewed copies of va policies and regulations governing these collection activities . also , we reviewed statements by the federal accounting standards and advisory board on managerial cost accounting concepts and standards for the federal government . we interviewed officials at va's chief business office , which provides policy guidance to mccf field staff , and obtained information on what they consider to be direct expenses of collecting first - and third - party revenue and documentation on how they calculate the cost to collect first - and third - party revenue . this information was validated through telephone interviews of key officials at each of va's 21 networks and site visits to 4 medical facilities . also , we obtained information on the organizational structure for each network and its medical facilities and obtained the views of visn and medical facility officials on the accuracy of the chief business office's cost reporting . in addition , we obtained information from the healthcare financial management association on other health care industry practices for reporting the cost to collect first - and third - party payments .