( see fig . the varying nature of china's commitments also complicates u.s. government compliance efforts . on the one hand , some of china's wto obligations require specific actions from china , such as reporting particular information to the wto , or lowering a tariff on a product . assessing compliance with these specific types of commitments is relatively easy . on the other hand , a significant number of commitments are more general in nature and relate to systemic changes in china's trade regime . for example , some commitments of this type require china to adhere to general wto principles of nondiscrimination and transparency . determining compliance with these more general types of commitments is more difficult and can complicate the dialogue over achieving compliance . it is useful to note that many private sector representatives told us that implementing these general types of commitments , such as those that relate to the rule of law , was relatively more important than carrying out specific commitments to increase market access and liberalize foreign investment in china . specifically , china's commitments in the areas of transparency of laws , regulations , and practices ; intellectual property rights ; and consistent application of laws , regulations , and practices emerged as the most important areas of china's accession agreement in our september 2002 survey of and interviews with u.s. companies operating in china . however , private sector representatives also indicated that they thought these rule - of - law - related commitments would be the most difficult for china to implement . because china is such an important trading partner , ensuring china's compliance with it s commitments is essential and requires a sustained effort on the part of the executive branch , congress , the private sector , and the wto and its other members . ( see fig . for example , the executive branch has extensive involvement in monitoring and enforcing china's commitments , and additional resources and new structures have been applied to these tasks . however , the u.s.'s first - year experience showed that it takes time to organize these structures to effectively carry out their functions and that progress on the issues can be slow . in addition to the executive branch's efforts , congress has enacted legislation , provided resources , and established new entities to increase oversight of china's compliance . the private sector also has undertaken a wide range of efforts that provide on - the - ground information on the status of china's compliance efforts and input to the executive branch and to congress on priorities for compliance efforts . finally , the wto has existing mechanisms as well as a new , china - specific mechanism created as a means for wto members to annually review china's implementation of its commitments . nonetheless , despite the involvement of all of these players in the first year , the united states will need a sustained — and cohesive — approach to successfully carry out this endeavor . china's accession to the wto has led to increased monitoring and enforcement responsibilities and challenges for the u.s. government .