pbs programming . almost all public television stations carry pbs programming . pbs programming represents about half of the broadcast hours provided by public television stations and is a cost - effective approach to acquire and broadcast programming . producing stations . a small number of the larger public television stations regularly produce and coproduce programs and series designed for national audiences that are included in pbs's national programming service . examples include wgbh ( boston ) : nova , mystery ! , frontline , and masterpiece theatre ; wnet ( new york ) : american masters , great performances , and nature ; weta ( arlington , virginia ) : the newshour with jim lehrer and washington week ; and opb ( portland , oregon ) : history detectives and the new heroes . aside from broadcasting programs developed for a national audience , stations produce and broadcast their own local programs that are designed to meet the special needs and interests of their individual communities . because program production can be expensive , the amount of a station's local production is closely tied to its budgetary resources and underwriting support from the business community . examples of such locally produced programs include wvpt's ( harrisonburg , virginia ) farm report , rural virginia , and wttw's ( chicago ) showcase of local events and people , chicago tonight . outside producers . these producers are not public television entities but are independent production companies and individual producers who create programming that is acquired by pbs or individual stations for their broadcast schedules . one such production company is sesame workshop , the producer of sesame street . although this long - running program has become strongly identified with public television and pbs , sesame workshop is a nonprofit educational organization . ( see app . iv for a description of sesame workshop. ) local production . ( see app . ken burns , for example , has produced some of public television's best - known series , such as the civil war , baseball , and jazz , as well as profiles of notable americans , such as mark twain and frank lloyd wright . international producers are another source of programming . an example of a for - profit production company is hit entertainment , the producer of shows such as barney & friends and bob the builder . there are also independent producers of public television programming , who are generally not affiliated with a studio , a television station , or a major production company . british productions , in particular , have been a regular feature of public television for decades . the independent television service ( itvs ) . in 1988 , the congress directed cpb to provide adequate funds to an independent television production service . stations can also acquire broadcast rights from international distributors . public television stations broadcast a mix of national and local programs . pbs prime - time and children's programming constitute a majority of broadcast hours for most public television stations . however , stations supplement these programs with both locally produced and instructional programming to meet the needs of their communities . in addition to programming , public television stations provide a variety of nonbroadcast services .