we disagree . dod acknowledges in its response that peo soldier had an internally documented process to account for plate curvature when the deepest point of deformation was laterally offset from the point of aim . the use of correction factor tables is a well - known industry standard that has been in place for years , and this standard practice has been used by nij laboratories and is well - known by vendors . dod and the army presented several statistics on the difference between aim point back - face deformation and deepest point back - face deformation in testing and stated that the difference between the two is small . we do not agree with dod's assertion that a difference of 10.66 millimeters is small . in the case of preliminary design model testing , the difference between measuring at the aim point and at the deepest point was that at least two solutions passed preliminary design model testing that otherwise would have failed . these designs passed subsequent first article testing but have gone on to fail lot acceptance testing , raising additional questions regarding the repeatability of the aberdeen test center's testing practices . dod asserts that the adoption of the laser scanner measurement technique resolves the problems the army experienced in measuring back - face deformations completely . we would agree that the laser scanner has the potential to be a useful device but when used in the manner in which aberdeen test center used it – without an adequate certification and without a thorough understanding of how the laser scanner might effectively change the standard for a solution to pass – we do not agree that it resolved back - face deformation measurement issues . aberdeen test center officials told us that they did not know what the accuracy of the laser scanner was as it was used during first article testing . dod acknowledged the shortcoming we identified . dod then asserted that once the deviation of measuring back - face deformation at the point of aim , rather than at the deepest point of depression was identified , those involved acted decisively to resolve the issue . we disagree based on the timeline of events described in our response to dod's comments on preliminary design model testing , as well as on the following facts . we were present and observed the integrated product team meeting on march 25 and observed that all members of the integrated product team agreed to start measuring immediately at the deepest point , to score solutions based on this deepest point data , to conserve plates , and then at the end of the testing to make up the tests incorrectly performed during the first third of testing , as needed . we observed army testers implement this plan the following day . then , on march 27 , army leadership halted testing for 2 weeks , considered the issue , and then reversed the unanimous decision by the integrated product team and decided to score to the point of aim .