pub . 111-260 , 124 stat . 2751 ( 2010 ) ( cvaa ) . how many people did your company employ as of december 31 , 2014 ? ( please include part - time and temporary staff. ) what was your company's annual revenue for calendar year 2014 ? calendar year 2014 annual revenue: $ ________ 4a . approximately what percentage of your company's annual revenue is accounted for by products or services that are required to be made accessible under sections 255 , 716 , and 718 of the communications act as amended by cvaa ? if you selected “none,” please explain: 4b . approximately what percentage of your company's products or services is required to be made accessible under sections 255 , 716 , and 718 of the communications act as amended by cvaa ? please note: sections 255 , 716 , and 718 contain requirements for manufacturers and service providers to make their products and services accessible to people with disabilities , to the extent achievable . have the requirements of sections 255 , 716 , or 718 had a beneficial effect , no effect , or an adverse effect on your company's design , development , and deployment of new communications technologies ? if you would like to expand on your response to question 5 , please include examples of products or services whose design , development , and deployment were either beneficially or adversely affected by the requirement to be made accessible . in your opinion , what level of burden , if any , have the section 255 , 716 , and 718 requirements posed to your company ? if you would like to expand on your response to question 6 , please include examples where the requirement to make your product or service accessible represented what you see as a burden . section 3: cvaa requirements: recordkeeping please note: section 717 states you “shall maintain , in the ordinary course of business and for a reasonable period , records of the efforts taken by such manufacturer or provider to implement sections 255 , 716 , and 718 , including the following: ( i ) information about the manufacturer's or provider's efforts to consult with individuals with disabilities . ( ii ) descriptions of the accessibility features of its products and services . ( iii ) information about the compatibility of such products and services with peripheral devices or specialized customer premise equipment commonly used by individuals with disabilities to achieve access.” section 717 also requires that “an officer of a manufacturer or provider shall submit to the ( federal communications ) commission an annual certification that records are being kept in accordance with” cvaa . have each of the following section 717 recordkeeping requirements had a beneficial effect , no effect , or an adverse effect on your company's design , development , and deployment of new communications technologies ? ( select one answer in each row. ) if you would like to expand on your response to question 7 , please include examples of products or services whose design , development , and deployment were either beneficially or adversely affected by the recordkeeping requirements .