monitoring . management should assess the quality of internal control performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved . as part of their efforts to respond to section 961 requirements , ocie , corporation finance , and enforcement put in place an internal supervisory control framework that generally reflects federal internal control standards . the framework requires that each office develop a formal process for identifying and assessing risks , identifying key internal controls that address those risks , assessing the operating effectiveness of internal controls , and reporting the results of the testing . according to staff , although internal controls were in place to oversee examinations , investigations , and securities filing reviews , the offices had no formal methods for identifying , documenting , or assessing internal supervisory controls prior to 2010 . before 2010 , the offices annually assessed and provided assurance statements on the adequacy of their internal controls to comply with requirements of fmfia and omb circular no . a - 123 ; however , according to sec officials , these assessments generally focused on controls affecting sec's financial statements and information technology . in response to section 961 of the dodd - frank act , senior officers and staff from ocie , corporation finance , and enforcement and the offices of the chief accountant , general counsel and executive director formed the 961 working group ( working group ) to coordinate the annual assessment and certification . this group also worked to coordinate the section 961 assessments with agencywide efforts to comply with fmfia internal control requirements . the working group included senior - level managers who also were tasked with leading their office's 961 annual assessment efforts . in fiscal year 2011 , the working group expanded to include ocoo.year 2011 the morganfranklin consulting firm , has provided assistance to the offices on certain aspects of sec's 961 program . during our interviews with members of the working group , staff demonstrated knowledge of their respective office's internal control framework , known gaps , and efforts to address gaps . staff discussed risks to their respective programs and how existing controls addressed those risks . for example , ocie staff discussed a key risk of examinations being conducted in a manner inconsistent with policies and procedures due to a gap in its processes for organizing and updating policies and procedures . ocie staff described the development of the new governance structure and how it addresses this gap . pub . 97-255 , 96 stat . responsible for developing detailed policies and procedures to fit their agency's operations . agencies may implement these standards at an office level to establish an overall framework for organizing the development and implementation of internal controls . the standards also can be implemented to help ensure that specific program activities are carried out according to adopted policies and procedures . our standards are similar to the framework for internal control developed by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission ( coso ) . five interrelated standards establish the minimum level of quality acceptable for internal control: control environment .