if so , under what terms ? how quickly can this happen ? how can it work with its employees and customers to minimize potential disruptions ? should usps have greater flexibility to realign its retail networks and workforce , which may involve closing post offices and moving retail services to alternative commercial locations that are often open 7 days a week and keep longer hours than postal facilities ? what process is appropriate to assure sufficient transparency , oversight , and accountability ? reduce compensation and benefit costs: wages and benefits represent 80 percent of usps's costs ( about $60 billion in fiscal year 2010 ) . one of the most difficult yet critical challenges is making changes to usps's compensation systems . these systems have been set in law and also negotiated during collective bargaining with its four largest employee unions . usps also consulted with its three management associations . we suggested that congress should consider revisiting the statutory framework for usps's collective bargaining to ensure that binding arbitration takes usps's financial condition into account . we also reported other possible options for reducing compensation and benefit costs , including implementing a two - tier pay system , outsourcing if it results in cost savings , or revising employees' share of health and life insurance premiums . key questions to consider when evaluating proposals in this area include: what changes , if any , should be made to usps's compensation and benefits ? is it appropriate that usps pays a larger share of its employees' health and life insurance premiums than do most other federal agencies ? what impact would changes to these premiums have on usps and its employees ? generating revenue through new or enhanced products and services: a key issue is whether usps can generate sufficient new revenues using the pricing and product flexibility provided in the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 or if changes are needed . in 2009 , usps asked congress to change the law to permit it to diversify into nonpostal areas to find new opportunities for revenue growth . usps also asked for additional pricing flexibility in a 2010 action plan . however , it is unclear what the potential impact of such changes would be and what statutory or regulatory changes would be needed . key questions to consider when evaluating proposals in this area include: new products and services: what opportunities are there to introduce profitable new postal products and enhancements to existing ones ? should usps engage in nonpostal areas where there are private sector providers ? funding postal retiree health benefits: usps has said that it cannot afford its required annual prefunding payments ( $5.5 billion in fiscal year 2011 and gradually increasing to $5.8 billion by 2016 ) , and it has requested that congress reduce these payments . several proposals have been put forth to revise the current statutory requirements and reduce or defer some of these costs , thereby providing usps with financial relief . changes to this structure , however , could affect the federal budget , and the congressional budget office has raised concerns about how aggressive usps's cost - cutting measures would be if these payments were reduced .