activities . whether a prospective new member has a legally based effective export control system that puts into effect the mtcr guidelines and administers and enforces such controls effectively ; demonstrates a sustained and sustainable commitment to nonproliferation ; would strengthen international nonproliferation efforts . enforcement of a legally based domestic export control system that gives effect to the commitment to act in accordance with the nuclear suppliers group guidelines ; ability to supply items ( including items in transit ) covered by the annexes to parts 1 and 2 of the nuclear suppliers group guidelines ; adherence to the guidelines and action in accordance with them ; adherence to and compliance with one or more of various nonproliferation treaties , including the nuclear nonproliferation treaty or equivalent international nuclear nonproliferation agreement ; support of international efforts towards nonproliferation of wmd and of their delivery vehicles . a state's adherence to fully effective export controls ; whether a state is a producer / exporter of arms or industrial equipment , respectively ; a state's nonproliferation policies , control lists , and , where applicable , guidelines of the nuclear suppliers group , the mtcr and the australia group ; and through adherence to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty , the biological and toxicological weapons convention , the chemical weapons convention and ( where applicable ) start i , including the lisbon protocol . the following are gao's comments on the department of state letter dated october 16 , 2002 . the department provided examples of the commitments that governments make when they become members of the multilateral export control regimes . however , simply listing the types of export control commitments these members make says nothing about how these commitments are implemented in practice and whether they are effective . therefore , it is unclear how state can contend that regime members are effectively implementing regime commitments . we agree with state that proliferators must often look to nonregime suppliers to obtain materials and equipment and discussed this issue in our report . we agree that it is important for regime members to share information on trends in proliferation , procurements , the use of front companies , and end users of concern . we also believe that it is important to collect and share comprehensive licensing information on sensitive export transfers and denials — the building blocks for assessing these broader trends . the department stated that it sees no utility in sharing increased information about export approvals to nonregime members . this statement is inconsistent with its current policy and practice . for example , on october 11 , 2002 , the deputy assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation stated that regime members should share more information on export approvals to facilitate monitoring of regime member compliance with their “no undercut” commitments . moreover , the u.s. government has led efforts to increase this type of information sharing in two regimes . the wassenaar arrangement already expects members to share information on export approvals , and the u.s. government submitted a proposal to the nuclear supplier's group in 2002 that would provide for reporting export approvals . none of the regimes systematically tracks the time regime members take to implement agreed - upon changes in their control lists .