dak. , pine ridge school , s . dak. , loneman day school , s . dak. , fond du lac ojibwe school , minn. , and nay - ah - shing school , minn . the dod schools we visited were maxwell afb elementary school , maxwell afb , ala. , dexter elementary school , fort benning , ga. , faith middle school , fort benning , ga. , loyd elementary school , fort benning , ga. , white elementary school , fort benning , ga. , linwood elementary school , robins afb , ga. , and robins elementary school , robins afb , ga. we obtained data on public schools from readily available sources , typically from department of education ( education ) studies . we conducted our work between june 2000 and july 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to provide an indication of bia and dod students' academic achievement , we reviewed their performance on standardized tests and state assessments . we also obtained data on their performance on college entrance examinations , namely the scholastic assessment test ( sat ) and the american college test ( act ) . in addition , our survey asked administrators to report on the post - high - school plans of graduating seniors . for bia schools , we attempted to collect data on bia students' performance on state assessments from four states that account for more than 70 percent of all bia schools — arizona , new mexico , north dakota , and south dakota . we were able to obtain data for all bia schools in north dakota and south dakota and for 19 of 50 bia schools in arizona that participated in arizona's state assessment program . no data were available for bia schools in new mexico , which has about one - quarter of all bia students . in total , about 36 percent of bia students attend the schools to which our data relate . all data obtained were for school year 1999 – 2000 . from the north dakota department of public instruction , we obtained data on students' performance on the statewide assessment . north dakota uses the terranova basic multiple assessments to assess students in grade 4 and the terranova complete battery plus to assess students in grades 6 , 8 , and 10 . the state provided data on statewide averages for students' performance on the test , a breakdown of these scores by student ethnicity , and the scores for all bia schools . we focused on students' total scores on the test and reported the range of scores across all grades . in south dakota , schools use the stanford achievement test to assess students in grades 2 , 4 , 8 , and 11 . from south dakota's department of education , we obtained the average scores for students statewide , and the scores for all bia schools on the complete battery and for specific skill areas such as language arts , reading , and math . we reported specifically on the range of scores on the complete battery across all grades .