es . second , mms lacks information on how to price gas imbalances and the point at which the agency should begin applying interest to the imbalanc for leases that have terminated from the program or those leases whe re production has ceased . since the rik program first began , mms has updated its guidance letter to operators . although mms's most recent guidance letter states that mms will charge monthly interest on imbalances , past guidance letters state that interest will only be charged if the operator pays its imbalance later than 60 days after the final month the imbalance occurred . interior is required by law to charge interest on late payments and underpayments of royalties . further , while mms's c guidance letter to operators specifies that it will price imbalances according to its own contract price for the gas during the month the imbalance occurred , the previous guidance letters did not contain this language . mms is not actively trying to collect on the imbalances of those leases that have been terminated from the program or those leases wh ere production has ceased because there have been discussions with the office of the solicitor for more than a year about these issues . in a january 2008 memo , mms asked the office of the solicitor for an opinion on when to charge interest and whether its current methodology to price imbalances is consistent with law . in its memo , mms proposed the following two pricing methods , in addition to its current method: 1 . calculating the price of the imbalances based on the value applicable editing to the month before settling the imbalance in cash and after cr any over - allocations existing since the first imbalance month . the price using the value when the last imbalance occurred . recently , the office of the solicitor asked rik program officials to ch the most appropriate pricing and interest methods before issuing an opinion on those methods . however , those methods have not yet been presented to the solicitor , and mms is currently not making additional requests for payment of imbalances for leases that have term the program or those leases where production has ceased . finally , mms could be forgoing revenue because it lacks information daily gas imbalances . section 115 of the federal oil and gas royalty management act , as amended , provides that a lessee's obligation does not become “due” until the end of the month following the month in which th e gas is produced . in its guidance letter to operators , mms requests t deliveries be made on a daily basis equal to the royalty percentage . because the statute authorizes mms to enforce operator obligations only on a monthly basis , mms believes it appropriate to calculate and monito r imbalances owed solely on a monthly rather than daily basis . however , this leaves open the possibility that some companies that owe rik gas could provide less gas to mms on days when gas prices are relatively high , hat and make up the difference by providing more gas on days when prices are relatively low .