st . cloud , minnesota ( permanent housing ) : located on the st . cloud vamc , the studio units are available to veterans who are in transition from a chemical - dependency treatment facility and in need of supportive services and housing . facility amenities include media rooms , a communal kitchen , and a community room . hines , illinois ( transitional housing ) : the supportive - housing eul provides transitional housing and supportive services through the gpd program . these services focus on chemical dependency recovery for residents , and include structured days , balanced meals in a communal dining area , rehabilitative work training , individual counseling , recovery groups , holistic education , and assistance with permanent housing placement . dayton , ohio ( senior housing ) : the senior - living supportive - housing serves low income veterans age 62 and over , including supportive services designed to help veteran residents achieve self - sufficiency . the supportive - housing eul receives housing vouchers from hud programs for the elderly and low income families . in addition to the supportive services provided for residents at supportive - housing euls , va and the lessee provide basic - administrative and operational services , such as transportation , mail delivery , and law enforcement . in some cases , the lessees face challenges getting these services up and running as the provision of these services involves multiple parties , for example: transportation: va officials identified the need to provide transportation services as a challenge in cases where public transportation is not easily accessible to the supportive - housing eul location . see app . iii for participant program eligibility . hud and va established the hud - vash program in 1992 . hud , through public - housing authorities , allocates subsidized housing vouchers to eligible homeless veterans and their families while va provides case management and other services . through the program , the public - housing authority pays the subsidy to the landlord directly and the veteran family pays the remainder of the rent . a majority of the hud - vash vouchers are tenant - based , meaning that the vouchers move with the veterans . with the partnering vamc's support , hud allows public - housing authorities to make their hud - vash vouchers project - based ( i.e. , tied to a specific housing unit and not to a tenant ) . separately , in fiscal years 2010 , 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 , hud awarded project - based vouchers to specific projects through competition . between fiscal year 2008 and 2016 , hud allocated about 82,500 tenant - based vouchers to public - housing authorities and about 4,800 project - based vouchers through competition to specific projects . overall , congress appropriated approximately $75 million each year from 2008 – 2010 and 2012 – 2015 , $50 million in 2011 , and $60 million in 2016 for the hud - vash program . congress originally authorized the gpd program in 1992 and reauthorized the program in december 2001 . the program was permanently authorized in 2006 .