maryland . payments to wmata for montgomery and prince george's counties are made from the maryland transportation trust fund . the trust fund's revenue sources include a gas tax , vehicle title tax , and other motor vehicle taxes and fees , along with other sources such as federal aid . trust fund revenues are also used for operating and capital expenses for various modes of transportation in the state including transit , ports , and aviation , as well as for local road construction . maryland is required by state law to make payments for the share of wmata's operating expenses , capital equipment replacement , and debt service for which montgomery and prince george's counties are responsible . virginia . the individual cities and counties are responsible for making payments to wmata . a portion of these localities' payments are made through the northern virginia transportation commission ( nvtc ) . nvtc holds , in trust , funds from a variety of sources that are used to pay for its members' public transit systems — including wmata and local bus systems such as the fairfax connector and alexandria's dash bus . sources include a 2 percent northern virginia retail motor vehicle fuel tax and state sources such as transit assistance grants and state bonds issued for wmata . nvtc sources accounted for about two - thirds of payments to wmata from northern virginia counties and cities in fiscal year 2006 . the portion of the localities' obligation to wmata that is not covered by nvtc sources is usually paid directly by the localities from their general funds . in 1980 , federal legislation required that for wmata to receive additional funding for construction of the metrorail system , the wmata compact jurisdictions had to demonstrate that they had “stable and reliable” sources of revenue sufficient to pay for the principal and interest on bonds and the local share of the operating and maintenance costs of the transit system . the district of columbia , maryland , and virginia took the following actions to comply with the requirement: district of columbia . the city adopted a law in 1982 to earmark funds for wmata by establishing a metrorail / metrobus account within its general fund . the account was supported by earmarking existing revenues that came from sources receiving direct or indirect benefits from mass transit , including sales taxes on hotels , meals , and gasoline , as well as vehicle registration fees and parking meter fees . the earmarked revenues were sufficient to cover the district of columbia's share of wmata's operating , debt service , and capital expenses . this account is no longer the source of wmata payments . as described above , the district of columbia now provides payments to wmata from its general revenue fund and general obligation bonds . maryland . the state enacted legislation in 1980 to require the maryland transportation trust fund to assume a portion of the costs wmata allocated to montgomery and prince george's counties . the legislation also provided the trust fund with new sources of revenue , including motor vehicle fuel taxes , a portion of the corporate income tax , and all revenues of the state motor vehicle administration .