gao - 03-697 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2003 . workforce investment act: one - stop centers implemented strategies to strengthen services and partnerships , but more research and information sharing is needed . gao - 03-725 . washington d.c.: june 18 , 2003 . officials from other local areas we visited considered other factors . a local official in louisiana said that in - school youth are interested in the wia program , unlike out - of - school youth , who are difficult to engage . in contrast , a rural area in virginia chose to focus primarily on out - of - school youth because so few services were available for this population . the administration has proposed amending the wia youth program to focus more resources on out - of - school youth . department of education officials said that wia's services to in - school youth were not unique , since schools already offer various services to their students to deter them from dropping out . while education officials said that the department's grants geared exclusively toward dropout prevention would be insufficient to address the national dropout problem , they also stated that funding is available under many education programs that could be used for dropout prevention activities . however , local workforce and education officials we spoke with in three states we visited said that they were either unaware of or unable to gain access to other available federal resources that could be used to provide intensive services to at - risk youth . in new hampshire , for example , officials told us that wia provides the only dropout prevention program , and that they were unaware of other available education dropout prevention resources . state and local workforce and education officials we spoke with in the five states we visited said that wia funding complemented rather than duplicated education services and was critical in preventing in - school youth from dropping out of school . for example , in a rural area in ohio , workforce officials stated that the wia program was the only dropout prevention program and that wia provided students with their only chance at academic and career success . in addition , they said that wia's services were more intensive and comprehensive , and were delivered in a one - on - one setting where each student received individualized attention . in one urban school in virginia , there was 1 wia counselor for 50 eligible in - school youth , compared to 1 school counselor for as many as 300 students . local areas tailored services provided to youth based on their needs , emphasizing different services , depending on whether youth were in or out of school . to meet youth's many developmental needs , the wia youth program requires that local areas offer the same menu of 10 academic , employment , and support services to all eligible youth , which wia providers choose from when tailoring services to an individual's service strategy based on an assessment of needs . as shown in figure 2 , services such as work experience and leadership development were provided fairly equally to both youth populations , but there were differences in other areas .