navy . the department of the navy issued guidance in may 2016 . this guidance addresses the requirements that a system be certified on the basis of sufficient business process reengineering and business enterprise architecture compliance . in this regard , the guidance provides guidelines for documenting business process reengineering and requires verification that business process reengineering is complete . the guidance also specifies that defense business systems are to map alignment with the business enterprise architecture in dcmo's integrated business framework – data alignment portal . navy's guidance partially addresses the certification requirement for determining if a defense business system has valid requirements and a viable plan to implement them . specifically , the guidance includes information on validating requirements ; however , it does not include information on determining if a system has a viable plan to implement the requirements . in addition , navy's guidance does not address the remaining two certification requirements , which are to determine that the covered defense business system has an acquisition strategy that eliminates or reduces the need to tailor commercial - off - the - shelf systems , and that the system is in compliance with dod's auditability requirements . in august 2017 , officials in the office of the under secretary of the navy ( management ) stated that the office was in the process of updating its may 2016 defense business system investment certification manual . the officials stated that the goal is to issue interim investment certification guidance by may 2018 . as of november 2017 , however , navy had not established a plan for when it expects to publish finalized certification guidance . army . the department of the army has not issued guidance that addresses any of the act's certification requirements . the army issued a template that was to be used to develop fiscal year 2018 portfolio review submissions . however , the template does not address any of the certification requirements . officials in the army's office of business transformation explained that the army used dod dcmo's 2014 guidance to certify its business systems for fiscal year 2017 . in may 2017 , they stated that the army was in the process of developing guidance to implement dod's new instruction . in november 2017 , an official in the army's office of business transformation stated that the office was in the process of completing the guidance and aimed to provide it to the deputy under secretary's office for signature in january 2018 . however , the department has not committed to a specific time frame for when the new guidance is expected to be issued . without guidance for the certification authority to determine that defense business systems have addressed each of the act's certification requirements , the air force , navy , and army risk allowing systems to proceed into development or production that do not meet these requirements . in particular , the military departments risk wasting funds on developing and maintaining systems that do not have valid requirements and a viable plan to implement the requirements , introduce unnecessary complexity , or that do not adequately support the department of defense's efforts to meet its auditability requirements .