grandfathered rates . fema allows some property owners whose properties are remapped into higher - risk flood zones to continue to pay the premium rate from the lower - risk zone . fema data show that about 9 percent of nfip policies were receiving a grandfathered rate as of june 2019 . in 2008 , we recommended that fema collect data to analyze the effect of grandfathered policies on nfip's fiscal exposure . as of february 2020 , fema officials said they had not fully implemented this recommendation but were in the process of doing so . the officials told us they had finished collecting data on grandfathered policies and that they planned to analyze it as they completed efforts to update their premium rate setting approach . collection and analysis of data on grandfathered policies will help fema understand and communicate the extent to which these policies are contributing to nfip's fiscal exposure . rates designated full - risk . as we reported in 2008 and 2016 , it is unclear whether premiums fema considers to be full - risk actually reflect the full long - term estimated risk of loss . for example , nfip full - risk premium rates do not fully reflect the risk of catastrophic losses or the expenses associated with managing them . private insurers typically manage catastrophic risk using capital , reinsurance , and other instruments , such as catastrophe bonds , and include the associated expenses in premium rates . by contrast , fema has traditionally managed catastrophic risk by relying on its authority to borrow from treasury . in january 2017 , fema began purchasing reinsurance to transfer some of its flood risk exposure to the private reinsurance market . however , fema has not accounted for these expenses in setting its nfip premium rates . reinsurance could be beneficial because it would allow fema to recognize some of its flood risk and the associated costs up front through the premiums it must pay to the reinsurers rather than after the fact in borrowing from treasury . however , because reinsurers must charge fema premiums to compensate for the risk they assume , reinsurance's primary benefit would be to manage risk rather than to reduce nfip's expected long - term fiscal exposure . state and local acquisition programs . while state and local governments are active participants in federal acquisition projects , some have also developed their own acquisition programs . these programs vary on the extent to which they rely on federal funds , if at all . for example: the harris county flood control district , a special purpose district , in texas acquired about 3,100 properties between 1985 and 2017 , according to a 2018 report from rice university , using a combination of fema grants , corps funds , and local dollars . charlotte - mecklenburg storm water services , a joint city - county utility in north carolina , has acquired more than 400 homes since 1999 . initially , it primarily used federal funds , but now it uses almost solely stormwater fees and other local revenue to fund acquisitions .