b . provide necessary tools and technical assistance to the ddss to enable them to conduct long - term workforce planning . ssa should ensure that ssa staff responsible for providing this assistance are well trained in the tenets of workforce planning . c. require each dds to develop its own long - term workforce plan that is linked to the nationwide long - term dds workforce plan . ssa should work in partnership with the ddss and their parent agencies to develop these plans . d. establish an ongoing program of outreach from ssa's leadership to state governors and national associations of state government officials to discuss the benefits and challenges of the federal - state relationship and encourage them to address human capital challenges identified by dds directors , such as salary limits and hiring freezes . e. link performance expectations of appropriate ssa executives to their efforts in accomplishing goals and objectives of the workforce plan . issue regulations that establish uniform minimum qualifications for new disability examiners . the minimum qualifications should be based on an analysis of the position that identifies the examiner's responsibilities and the minimum knowledge , skills , and competencies necessary to adequately perform them . the minimum qualifications for the examiner's position should take into account any changes in the complexity of the tasks required for this position stemming from the commissioner's new long - term strategy . work with ddss to close the gaps between current examiner skills and required job skills . to do so , ssa should work with the ddss to: a. analyze examiner training needs , using as a foundation the analysis of job responsibilities and related minimum knowledge , skills , and competencies recommended above ; b. improve training content and delivery to meet these needs , basing such efforts on analyses of training content and appropriateness of training delivery methods ; and c. develop performance measures to track effectiveness of these improvements to training . we provided a draft of this report to ssa for comment . ssa generally agreed with the intent of the recommendations in the report but stated that the report does not fairly address or adequately discuss the many sides of the dds human capital management issues . in particular , ssa criticized some of our study's methods and expressed concern that we did not sufficiently acknowledge the difficulties involved in making changes to the federal - state relationship . we continue to believe , however , that the report presents a fair and balanced portrayal of the multifaceted issue of human capital management in the ddss . generally agreeing with the intent of our recommendations , ssa said it would consider incorporating a nationwide strategic workforce plan for the ddss into its current strategy to improve the disability determination process . to do so will be essential , since the government performance and results act now requires agencies to report annually , as we noted in our report , on human capital strategies needed to meet their strategic goals . regarding our recommendation on improving training , ssa said that it would continue ongoing efforts to improve examiner job skills .