gao - 17-27 . washington , d.c.: november 14 , 2016 . these accounts are included in the total contract costs . in our review of select espc projects , we found different ways in which these accounts were established and operated . for example , at one installation , officials told us they set up two repair and replacement accounts that are part of their monthly payments , which cover repairs to installed equipment not covered under the contract , such as equipment that was not manufactured by the contractor and controls components that were integrated onto the existing system . funding for these two accounts is included in the installation's annual payment to the contractor , and unused funds in the larger contractor equipment repair and replacement account roll over into the next year to cover any required maintenance as well as the replacement of equipment at the end of the contract term , if needed . finally , we spoke with office of the secretary of defense officials about the president's performance contracting challenge , which challenged federal agencies to enter into a total of $4 billion in performance - based contracts , including espcs and uescs , by the end of calendar year 2016 , to gain an understanding of the results of dod's participation in this effort . to assess the extent to which the military services reported achieving expected savings and verified the reported performance of selected projects , we reviewed agency - level guidance on the different levels of measurement and verification or performance assurance that are required for alternatively financed energy projects , such as dod's instruction on installation energy management and the department of energy's most recent guidelines for measurement and verification and performance assurance , to determine requirements for measuring savings for the different types of projects . using the data on the alternatively financed energy projects that we obtained from the military services , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 17 projects as case studies to discuss during our site visits and to evaluate how those projects reported achieving their estimated savings and the extent to which installation officials verified those reported savings . at another installation , the espc was established with an account for repair and replacement funds to cover costs other than normal preventive maintenance , and this account is also funded annually as part of the payment to the contractor . according to installation officials , the purpose of this account is to have funding available to pay for a larger piece of equipment in case it needed to be replaced , and unused funding for this account is also expected to roll over and be available in future years . installation officials told us that because labor is a large part of the repair and replacement of equipment , the account has generally been drawn down in full each year and there generally have not been funds available to roll over into the next year .