borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . u.s. customs and border protection's border security fencing , infrastructure and technology fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan . gao - 12-106r . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2011 . arizona border surveillance technology: more information on plans and costs is needed before proceeding . gao - 12-22 . washington , d.c.: november 4 , 2011 . gao cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs . gao - 09-3sp . washington , d.c.: march 2009 . program schedules . in march 2014 , we found that cbp had a schedule for deployment for each of the atp's seven programs , and that four of the programs would not meet their originally planned completion dates . specifically , we found that the three highest - cost programs ( ift , rvss , and msc ) had experienced delays relative to their baseline schedules , as of march 2013 . we also reported that cbp had at least partially met the four characteristics of reliable schedules for the ift and rvss schedules and partially or minimally met the four characteristics for the msc schedule . scheduling best practices are summarized into four characteristics of reliable schedules — comprehensive , well - constructed , credible , and controlled ( i.e. , schedules are periodically updated and progress is monitored ) . we assessed cbp's schedules as of march 2013 for the three highest - cost programs and reported in march 2014 that schedules for two of the programs at least partially met each characteristic ( i.e. , satisfied about half of the criterion ) , and the schedule for the other program at least minimally met each characteristic ( i.e. , satisfied a small portion of the criterion ) . for example , the schedule for the ift program partially met the characteristic of being credible in that cbp had performed a schedule risk analysis for the program , but the risk analysis did not include the risks most likely to delay the program or how much contingency reserve was needed . for the msc program , the schedule minimally met the characteristic of being controlled in that it did not have valid baseline dates for activities or milestones by which cbp could track progress . we recommended that cbp ensure that scheduling best practices are applied to the ift , rvss , and msc program schedules . dhs concurred with the recommendation and stated that cbp planned to ensure that scheduling best practices would be applied , as outlined in our schedule assessment guide , when updating the three programs' schedules . in response to our march 2014 recommendation regarding applying scheduling best practices , cbp provided us with updated program schedules for the ift , rvss , and msc programs . based on our assessment of updated program schedules for the ift , rvss , and msc that cbp had completed as of january 2017 , cbp has made significant improvements in the quality of the programs' schedules , but the programs' schedules had not met all characteristics of a reliable schedule .