( see fig . 4 for an example of a hazardous noise sign that does not include the level of hearing protection needed. ) in some limited instances , a sign was not posted in an area that the safety officer guiding our walk - through noted should have had proper signage . moreover , servicemembers enrolled in a hearing protection program that do not necessarily receive more education and training when they appear for their periodic exams represent another lost opportunity for hearing loss prevention . aside from the lack of more thorough and carefully timed training programs , the services and dod have no uniform system for tracking who has received training on hearing loss prevention . the services and dod must ensure that service personnel are cognizant of the immediate and long term risks to hearing posed by exposure to hazardous noise . in terms of strategy , dod itself is not in a position to assess the adequacy of the programs and practices it now requires of the services for hearing preservation without a full set of performance indicators . additionally , without more reliable data and reporting capability , and an integrated system of records that relate hearing injuries to work sites , dod will further lack the ability to approach the problem of hearing loss more strategically — by capitalizing on areas of success and targeting areas of weakness . while each of the services has made some effort to review and improve its hearing loss prevention practices , weaknesses remain in dod efforts to identify and mitigate hazardous noise . some of these individual initiatives , if expanded across each of the services , likely hold promise for addressing these issues . without efforts to expand these initiatives , new insights and improvements could be lost — to the detriment of the services and servicemembers . to position dod and the services to better protect servicemembers from hearing loss , we recommend that the under secretary for personnel and readiness work with the assistant secretary for health affairs and take the following four actions to ensure that: dod and the services improve upon the type , timing , and tracking of training and education provided to servicemembers on hearing protection , by providing information that is more comprehensive and training that is more frequent and possibly earlier in servicemembers' careers . dod work with the services to develop an appropriate set of performance indicators that assess how well services are reducing hearing loss among servicemembers . dod and the services address limitations in the processes used to capture , track , and use performance data . this effort should address issues with data reliability , data entry , reporting capability , and integration across relevant databases . dod work with the services to examine the appropriateness and feasibility of expanding those service - level initiatives that hold promise of improving — - on a dod - wide basis — - the military hearing conservation programs .