washington . florida . a court official in florida acknowledged that the court does not collect guardianship and elder abuse information such as the number of guardians for older adults , the types of guardians currently serving in guardianship roles for older adults , and the number of elder abuse hearings conducted . this official cited lack of funding as a barrier for collecting this type of information . detailed information on financial exploitation specifically may be available at the county level . for example , officials from one county in florida told us that it collects data on the number of guardianships and the assets guardians control , and also identified the amount of fraud over a 4-year period . minnesota . a court official in minnesota told us that the state differentiates between guardianship of the person and conservatorship of the estate . the state collects figures on the ( 1 ) number of guardianship cases , ( 2 ) number of conservatorship - only cases , and ( 3 ) number of combined guardianship and conservatorship cases ; and can break these figures out by minors and adults . the state also has a statewide program housed in the court system — the conservator account auditing program — that audits the financial reports that guardians of the estate ( or conservators ) are required to submit electronically through a system called mymnconservator . this system can calculate the total assets under court jurisdiction in minnesota , which are presented in an annual report . according to the annual report , the program audits accounts with assets over a certain threshold at regular intervals and upon referral by the court . however , one of these officials told us that this system does not track the age of the individuals with guardians of the estate , so the number of older adults in this arrangement is not identifiable . ohio . an official from the supreme court of ohio told us probate courts in the state report to the supreme court quarterly aggregate caseload data including the number of pending guardian applications for adults , the number of new applications for the appointment of guardians , and the number of guardianships closed , but the data are not classified by the age of the person under guardianship . additionally , although local courts may do so , the supreme court of ohio does not capture the number of complaints related to guardianships . court officials directed us to state adult protective services ( aps ) elder abuse complaint data . texas . court officials in texas told us that every county is required to submit monthly information to the office of court administration pertaining to active guardianships . however , officials told us that some counties do not report any active guardianships ( considered to be underreporting ) , and some counties overreport on active guardianships that should have actually been closed , such as when the person under guardianship is deceased . a court official in washington stated that while she could provide the number of adult guardianships statewide , she could not provide this information specifically for older adults .