agencies. ) under the fsb charter , member jurisdictions have committed to undergo periodic peer reviews . fsb's peer program includes two types of reviews: thematic and country . thematic reviews focus on the implementation and effectiveness of fsb - endorsed international standards deemed important for global financial stability . the objectives of the reviews are to encourage consistent cross - country and cross - sector implementation , evaluate ( where possible ) the extent to which standards have had their intended results , and identify gaps and weaknesses in reviewed areas . as previously discussed , fsb has conducted thematic peer reviews in the priority reform areas , such as compensation and resolution regimes . it also has conducted peer reviews in nonpriority reform areas , including the following: the ongoing peer review on credit ratings was assessing fsb member progress implementing fsb's principles for reducing the interim report reliance on credit rating agency ratings.identified several areas where accelerated progress is needed , including the need for fsb members to provide incentives to financial institutions to develop their own independent credit assessment processes . it also identified challenges that need to be addressed , which include reducing undue reliance on credit ratings in international standards , identifying suitable alternative standards of creditworthiness , and addressing constraints in the development of internal risk assessment systems . the peer review on risk governance found that national authorities , since the crisis , have taken several measures to improve regulatory and supervisory oversight of risk governance at financial institutions . these measures include developing or strengthening existing regulation or guidance , raising supervisory expectations for the risk management function , engaging more frequently with the board and management , and assessing the accuracy and usefulness of the information provided to the board to enable effective discharge of their responsibilities . it also made four recommendations targeting areas in which more substantial work was needed , including strengthening regulatory and supervisory guidance , reviewing principles for risk governance , and exploring ways to formally assess risk culture at financial institutions . fsb's country reviews focus on the implementation of international standards and their effectiveness nationally . the reviews examine steps taken or planned by national authorities to address fsap and rosc recommendations of imf and the world bank . ( fsb peer reviews take place 2 to 3 years following an fsap. ) unlike an fsap , an fsb country review does not comprehensively analyze a jurisdiction's financial system structure or policies , or its compliance with international financial standards . according to an fsb official , both country and thematic peer reviews have the inherent limitation of being primarily “desktop - based” reviews , which constrains the review team's ability to engage in on - site interactions to assess implementation progress , challenges , and impact .