portfolio review . covered agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness and identify potential waste and duplication . in establishing the process associated with such portfolio reviews , the law requires omb to develop standardized performance metrics , to include cost savings , and to submit quarterly reports to congress on cost savings . expansion of training and use of it acquisition cadres . covered agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to address supporting the timely and effective acquisition of it . in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres . government - wide software purchasing program . the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software . in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user . maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative . federal agencies are required to compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative . the administrator for federal procurement policy was also required to issue regulations related to the initiative . in june 2015 , omb released guidance describing how agencies are to implement fitara . this guidance is intended to , among other things: assist agencies in aligning their it resources with statutory establish government - wide it management controls that will meet the law's requirements , while providing agencies with flexibility to adapt to unique agency processes and requirements ; strengthen the relationship between agency cios and bureau cios ; and strengthen cio accountability for it costs , schedules , performance , and security . the guidance identified several actions that agencies were to take to establish a basic set of roles and responsibilities ( referred to as the common baseline ) for cios and other senior agency officials , which were needed to implement the authorities described in the law . for example , agencies were required to conduct a self - assessment and submit a plan describing the changes they intended to make to ensure that common baseline responsibilities were implemented . agencies were to submit their plans to omb's office of e - government and information technology by august 15 , 2015 , and make portions of the plans publicly available on agency websites no later than 30 days after omb approval . as of november 2016 , all agencies had made their plans publicly available . in addition , in august 2016 , omb released guidance intended to , among other things , define a framework for achieving the data center consolidation and optimization requirements of fitara .