however , it is important to recognize that these estimates have limitations . oira classifies modifications in agencies' burden - hour estimates as either “program changes” or “adjustments.” program changes are the result of deliberate federal government action ( eg , the addition or deletion of questions on a form ) and can occur as a result of new statutory requirements , agency - initiated actions , or through the expiration or reinstatement of oira - approved collections . of the 244 violations that occurred during fiscal year 2002 , 120 were still occurring at the end of the fiscal year ( september 30 , 2002 ) . therefore , it is not clear whether these individuals or businesses would have refused to complete the required forms if they knew that the collections were being conducted in violation of the pra . although oira and the agencies have clearly made progress in reducing the overall number of pra violations in recent years , more progress is needed . as i am sure that the administrator would agree , 244 violations of the law in 1 year is not acceptable . agencies can and should achieve oira's goal of zero violations . as i noted earlier , oira has taken a number of steps during the past year to try to address this problem . as we recommended last year , oira has used its database to identify information collections that ( 1 ) have recently expired and attempted to determine whether the agencies are continuing to collect the information and ( 2 ) are about to expire , thereby attempting to prevent future violations . oira has also asked the agencies to describe the procedures that they have in place to prevent future violations and has met with agencies that have the highest number of overall , long - standing , or high - burden violations . as figure 2 shows , data that we obtained from the regulatory information service center ( risc ) indicate that almost 95 percent of the 8.2 billion hours of estimated paperwork burden in place governmentwide as of september 30 , 2002 , was being collected primarily for the purpose of regulatory compliance . however , oira still has not taken some of the actions that we previously recommended to improve compliance with the pra . for example , oira could notify the budget side of omb that an agency is collecting information in violation of the pra and encourage the appropriate resource management office to use its influence to bring the agency into compliance . oira could also encourage the use of “best practices” learned from agencies with a good record of pra compliance . however , irs said that other increases in its burden - hour estimate were made at the agency's initiative — not because of new statutes . for example , the agency said that an increase of more than 22 million hours in its estimate for form 941 and related forms were due to changes “requested by irs.” the department of the treasury also indicated in its icb submission that it had taken a number of initiatives to reduce paperwork burden .