bep did not have any comments . the federal reserve provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the director of the u.s. mint , the director of the bureau of engraving and printing , the chair of the board of governors of the federal reserve system , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix describes the economic simulations discussed in this report , including the assumptions we used and their sources , as well as the alternative simulations we conducted . to estimate the net effect on the government of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin , we simulated the benefits and costs to the government of issuing currency — including both notes and coins — under different scenarios and assumptions over a 30-year period . for each set of assumptions we considered , we simulated three scenarios — the status quo scenario , in which the $1 note would continue to be produced , and two replacement scenarios , in which the $1 coin would replace the $1 note . in the gradual replacement scenario , $1 notes are replaced as they become unfit for circulation , while under the active replacement scenario , $1 notes are replaced more quickly . we then compared the net benefit to the government in each replacement scenario to the net benefit under the status quo . as part of our analysis , we also ran alternative simulations with different sets of assumptions , to examine how the assumptions underlying our analysis would affect the estimated net benefit to the government . the various assumptions include the extent to which the public would increase its holdings of cash when coins are used instead of notes , the expected rate of growth in the demand for currency over 30 years , the costs of producing and processing both coins and notes , and the life span of both forms of currency ( see table 3 ) . in our replacement scenarios , we assumed that the replacement would be implemented starting in 2018 , and during that year the u.s. mint ( mint ) would invest in new equipment to establish its production capability for $1 coins . we also assumed that production of the paper note would stop as soon as $1 coins were introduced . a key assumption in our analysis is the extent to which the public may hold more cash when notes are replaced by coins . because of differences in how people use notes and coins , the public may need more than one coin for each note than would otherwise have been demanded .