however , several challenges remain . ebsa closed about 4,000 investigations during that year . ebsa's participant assistance staff supplements ebsa's enforcement activities by helping plan participants obtain retirement and health benefits that have been improperly denied . in fiscal year 2005 , this office conducted roughly 2,000 outreach events to educate participants , beneficiaries , plan sponsors , and members of congress about pension plan rights and obligations , among other topics . in addition , during the same time , the office reported that its benefits advisers closed about 160,000 inquiries and complaints , some of which resulted in monetary recoveries . in those instances where a complaint was not informally resolved , ebsa officials said that it was referred to the enforcement staff in the field offices for possible investigation . as a result of such referrals , ebsa data showed that its investigators closed almost 1,200 investigations in fiscal year 2005 with monetary results of $130.24 million . additionally , ebsa's office of the chief accountant is concerned with employee benefit plans' annual reporting and audit requirements and enforces those provisions through civil penalties under erisa . through their combined efforts , ebsa data indicate that the agency reviewed over 36,000 private sector pension plans in fiscal year 2005 . table 2 shows the number of plans investigated or contacted by each office . dol's office of the solicitor supports ebsa regional offices by litigating civil cases and providing legal support . in fiscal year 2005 , the office litigated 178 of the 258 civil cases referred to it by ebsa . in addition , ebsa conducts criminal investigations in consultation with the u.s. attorneys' offices and in many cases , conducts joint enforcement actions with other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies . ebsa conducted about 200 criminal investigations in fiscal year 2005 . as a result , over 100 plan officials , corporate officers , and pension plan service providers were indicted . in 2002 , we identified several weaknesses in ebsa's management of its enforcement program , including the lack of a centrally coordinated quality review process , better coordination needed among its investigators , the lack of data to assess the nature and extent of noncompliance , and limited attention to its human capital management , despite the agency's actions to strengthen the program in prior years . since our 2002 review , ebsa has improved its enforcement program . the agency has promoted coordination among regional investigators , implemented quality controls , and developed strategies to address its workforce needs . to promote compliance , ebsa has increased its educational outreach to plan participants , sponsors , and service providers , and increased participation in its voluntary correction programs . however , the agency has not fully addressed concerns from our prior reviews . specifically , ebsa still has not ( 1 ) developed complete data on the nature and extent of plans' noncompliance , ( 2 ) established a formal coordination protocol with sec within its regional offices , and ( 3 ) formally evaluated the factors affecting staff attrition . in recent years , ebsa has addressed many of the concerns we raised in our 2002 review .