dhs concurred with our recommendations . in september 2006 dhs issued a final rule that established procedures governing the receipt , validation , handling , storage , marking , and use of critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to dhs . dhs is in the process of implementing our additional recommendations that it define its critical - infrastructure information needs under the pcii program and better explain how this information will be used to build the private sector's trust and attract more users . does the ssp identify the party responsible for conducting a risk - based prioritizing of the assets ? to date , dhs has issued a national plan aimed at providing a consistent approach to critical infrastructure protection , ensured that all 17 sectors have organized to collaborate on protection efforts , and worked with government and private sector partners to complete all 17 sector - specific plans . nevertheless , our work has shown that sectors vary in terms of how complete and comprehensive their plans are . furthermore , dhs recognizes that the sectors , their councils , and their plans must continue to evolve . as they do and as the plans are updated and annual implementation reports are provided that begin to show the level of protection achieved , it will be important that the plans and reports add value , both to the sectors themselves and to the government as a whole . this is critical because dhs is dependent on these plans and reports to meet its mandate to evaluate whether gaps exist in the protection of the nation's most critical infrastructure and key resources and , if gaps exist , to work with the sectors to address the gaps . likewise , dhs must depend on the private sector to voluntarily put protective measures in place for many assets . it will also be important that sector councils have representative members and that the sector - specific agencies have buy - in from these members on protection plans and implementation steps . one step dhs could take to implement our past recommendations to strengthen the sharing of information is for the pcii program to better define its critical infrastructure information needs and better explain how this information will be used to build the private sector's trust and attract more users . as we have previously reported , such sharing of information and the building of trusted relationships are crucial to the protection of the nation's critical infrastructure . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at any time . for further information on this testimony , please contact eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or by e - mail at larencee@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include susan quinlan , assistant director ; r. e. canjar ; landis lindsey ; e. jerry seigler ; and edith sohna . we assessed the sector specific plans ( ssps ) using 8 criteria , consisting of 40 key information requirements . we extracted this information from the requirements included in the nipp as well as on the detailed sector - specific plan guidance issued by dhs .