gao - 05-320t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-488 . for more information , contact eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or larencee@gao.gov . while gao strongly supports human capital reform in the federal government , how it is done , when it is done , and the basis on which it is done can make all the difference in whether such efforts are successful . gao's implementation of its own human capital authorities , such as pay bands and pay for performance , could help inform other organizations as they design systems to address their human capital needs . the final regulations for dhs's new system are especially critical because of the potential implications for related governmentwide reforms . the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) almost one year ago represents an historic moment for the federal government to fundamentally transform how the nation will protect itself from terrorism . dhs is continuing to transform and integrate a disparate group of agencies with multiple missions , values , and cultures into a strong and effective cabinet department . together with this unique opportunity , however , also comes significant risk to the nation that could occur if this transformation is not implemented successfully . in fact , gao designated this implementation and transformation as high risk in january 2003 . the proposed human capital system is designed to be aligned with the department's mission requirements and is intended to protect the civil service rights of dhs employees . many of the basic principles underlying the dhs regulations are consistent with proven approaches to strategic human capital management , including several approaches pioneered by gao , and deserve serious consideration . however , some parts of the system raise questions that dhs , opm , and congress should consider . pay and performance management: the proposal takes another valuable step towards results - oriented pay reform and modern performance management . for effective performance management , dhs should use validated core competencies as a key part of evaluating individual contributions to departmental results and transformation efforts . adverse actions and appeals: the proposal would retain an avenue for employees to appeal adverse actions to an independent third party . however , the process to identify mandatory removal offenses must be collaborative and transparent . dhs needs to be cautious about defining specific actions requiring employee removal and learn from the internal revenue service's implementation of its mandatory removal provisions . labor relations: the regulations recognize employees' right to organize and bargain collectively , but reduce areas subject to bargaining . continuing to involve employees in a meaningful manner is critical to the successful operations of the department . congress provided dhs with significant flexibility to design a modern human capital management system . gao reported in september 2003 that the design effort to develop the system was collaborative and consistent with positive elements of transformation . last friday , the secretary of dhs and the director of the office of personnel management ( opm ) released for public comment draft regulations for dhs's new human capital system .