aphis . veterinarians are one of nine mission - critical occupations at aphis . plans . opm's strategic workforce plan included the following three goals to be addressed by tmac: obtain a comprehensive understanding of the federal veterinary workforce , improve recruiting and retention results for the federal veterinary workforce , and enhance efforts to identify the veterinary workforce needed during emergency events . you asked us to review issues related to the federal veterinarian workforce . this report examines ( 1 ) department - wide efforts usda and hhs have made for their routine veterinarian workforces ; ( 2 ) the extent to which usda has identified the veterinarians needed to augment its workforce for an emergency response to an animal disease outbreak ; and ( 3 ) the steps , if any , that opm and other federal agencies have taken to achieve the goals of the government - wide strategic plan for the veterinarian workforce . to examine the department - wide efforts usda and hhs have made for their routine veterinarian workforces , we obtained and evaluated workforce plans and other documents related to workforce planning from usda , hhs , and their component agencies that are major employers of civilian veterinarians within each department . these component agencies included usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , and the agricultural research service ( ars ) ; and hhs' food and drug administration ( fda ) , national institutes of health ( nih ) , and centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . we evaluated the documents to determine the extent to which they assessed their veterinarian workforces and included workforce planning strategies specifically targeting their veterinarian workforces . we also examined the extent to which agencies followed key principles gao has identified for effective strategic workforce planning , in particular , for assessing their veterinarian workforces and developing strategies to fill any gaps . in addition , we interviewed department - level and component - level human resources managers and component - level program managers of veterinarians regarding their workforce planning processes for veterinarians . to examine the extent to which usda has identified the veterinarians needed to augment its workforce for an emergency response to an animal disease outbreak , we reviewed regulations , plans , assessments , scenarios , agreements , and training programs prepared by usda and dhs for emergency responses requiring a surge capacity of federal veterinarians . we also interviewed usda and dhs officials regarding these efforts . we compared usda's efforts to guidance in dhs's national response framework for development of emergency response plans . to examine the steps that opm and other federal agencies have taken to achieve the goals of the government - wide strategic plan for the veterinarian workforce , we observed tmac meetings ; analyzed opm and tmac documents , such as minutes of meetings and documents related to each of the three goals in the government - wide strategic plan ; and interviewed opm , dhs , hhs , and usda officials about their participation in tmac .