hhs provided comments on a draft of this report . first , because it takes 7 years , on average , to successfully complete clinical trials , trends emerging from inds submitted in 1986 could be reflected in nda submission trends beginning in 1993 . second , 2005 was the most recent year with complete data , and these ind data provided an indication of the productivity of research and development expenditures for the drug discovery and preclinical testing phases in more recent years . we performed various tests of data reliability , including obtaining information about the data collection and management system and its controls that fda uses to ensure the data are reliable , and corroborating the data by comparing them to other published information . based on our work , we believe the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of our report . to determine factors affecting new drug development , and to obtain experts' suggestions to expedite the process , we took several steps . first , we interviewed various experts from fda , the pharmaceutical industry , health care organizations , a consumer group , and academia , who possess knowledge of issues that have had an impact on drug development . specifically , we interviewed officials from fda's center for drug evaluation and research and the critical path institute — which was founded by fda , the university of arizona , and sri international , an independent , nonprofit research institute . in addition , we spoke to experts from phrma and other pharmaceutical industry analysts , including an independent consultant to the pharmaceutical industry . we also interviewed representatives from the american medical association , the association of clinical research organizations , and the national institute for health care management . finally , we interviewed officials from public citizen , a consumer advocacy group , and experts at six academic institutions — boston university , the university of california - davis , the university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey , the university of minnesota , tufts university , and vanderbilt university . second , we analyzed reports and articles by pharmaceutical industry financial analysts , academic researchers , consulting firms , and the federal government to obtain information regarding factors impacting drug development and potential solutions to address them . to supplement information from our interviews and review of studies , we contracted with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) to convene a balanced , diverse panel of experts . at our request , these experts discussed key factors accounting for the drug submission and approval trends from 1993-2004 , factors impacting new drug development , and potential solutions that either the pharmaceutical industry , academia , or the government can take to enhance new drug development . we worked closely with nas to identify and select potential panelists who represented industry , government , advocacy groups , and academia who could adequately respond to our questions about the drug development process as well as the fda regulatory review process . in keeping with nas policy , the panelists were invited to provide their individual views , and the panel was not designed to build consensus on any of the issues discussed .