gao - 07-1229t . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2007 . september 11: hhs needs to ensure the availability of health screening and monitoring for all responders . gao - 07-892 . washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2007 . aoec experienced challenges in providing these screening services . for example , many nonfederal responders did not enroll in the program because they did not live near an aoec clinic , and the administration of the program required substantial coordination among aoec , aoec member clinics , and mount sinai . mount sinai's subcontract with aoec ended in july 2004 , and from august 2004 until june 2005 niosh did not fund any organization to provide services to nonfederal responders outside the nyc metropolitan area . during this period , niosh focused on providing screening and monitoring services for nonfederal responders in the nyc metropolitan area . in june 2005 , niosh began its second effort by awarding $776,000 to the mount sinai school of medicine data and coordination center ( dcc ) to provide both screening and monitoring services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area . in june 2006 , niosh awarded an additional $788,000 to dcc to provide screening and monitoring services for these responders . niosh officials told us that they assigned dcc the task of providing screening and monitoring services to nonfederal responders outside the nyc metropolitan area because the task was consistent with dcc's responsibilities for the ny / nj wtc consortium , which include data monitoring and coordination . dcc , however , had difficulty establishing a network of providers that could serve nonfederal responders residing throughout the country — ultimately contracting with only 10 clinics in seven states to provide screening and monitoring services . dcc officials said that as of june 2007 the 10 clinics were monitoring 180 responders . in early 2006 , niosh began exploring how to establish a national program that would expand the network of providers to provide screening and monitoring services , as well as treatment services , for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area . according to niosh , there have been several challenges involved in expanding a network of providers to screen and monitor nonfederal responders nationwide . these include establishing contracts with clinics that have the occupational health expertise to provide services nationwide , establishing patient data transfer systems that comply with applicable privacy laws , navigating the institutional review board process for a large provider network , and establishing payment systems with clinics participating in a national network of providers . on march 15 , 2007 , niosh issued a formal request for information from organizations that have an interest in and the capability of developing a national program for responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area . in this request , niosh described the scope of a national program as offering screening , monitoring , and treatment services to about 3,000 nonfederal responders through a national network of occupational health facilities . niosh also specified that the program's facilities should be located within reasonable driving distance to responders and that participating facilities must provide copies of examination records to dcc .