gao - 13-588 . washington , d.c.: august 1 , 2013 . federal rulemaking: agencies could take additional steps to respond to public comments . gao - 13-21 . washington , d.c.: december 20 , 2012 . federal regulation is a basic tool of government . agencies issue thousands of regulations each year to achieve public policy goals such as ensuring that workplaces , air travel , food , and drugs are safe ; that the nation's air , water , and land are not polluted ; and that the appropriate amount of taxes is collected . congresses and presidents have taken a number of actions to refine and reform the regulatory process over the past 30 years . among the goals of such initiatives are enhancing oversight of rulemaking by congress and the president , promoting greater transparency and participation in the process , and reducing regulatory burdens on affected parties . oira is a key player in the regulatory process with its responsibility for ensuring that regulations are consistent with applicable law , the president's priorities , and the principles set forth in executive orders , among other things . during the past two decades congress has often asked gao to evaluate the implementation of procedural and analytical requirements that apply to the rulemaking process . drawing on that body of work , my remarks today will specifically summarize ( 1 ) our findings and recommendations regarding federal agencies' retrospective regulatory reviews , ( 2 ) our findings and oira's progress to date on our recommendations to improve the transparency of the regulatory review process , and ( 3 ) other opportunities our work has identified for increasing congressional oversight and public participation in the rulemaking process . my testimony today is primarily based on prior reports and testimonies on the rulemaking process prepared at the request of congress . we have updated some of the references in this statement to reflect more recent executive orders and related omb guidance . we used multiple methodologies to develop the findings , conclusions , and recommendations for these prior products . in particular , the administrative conference of the united states ( acus ) issued a report and adopted a statement in december 2013 on improving the timeliness of oira's regulatory review process . acus noted an increase in average review times since 2011 , including many reviews that extended well past the limits established in executive order 12866 , while also acknowledging that oira had recently made progress in addressing the backlog . acus offered a set of principles for improving the timeliness of review and the transparency concerning the causes for delays , such as that oira should , whenever possible , adhere to the timeliness provisions of executive order 12866 and , if unable to complete the review of an agency's draft rule within a reasonable time — but in no event beyond 180 days after submission — should inform the public as to the reasons for the delay or return the rule to the submitting agency . our recent work has continued to highlight both progress made in facilitating transparency , oversight , and public participation in regulatory actions as well as room for improvement .