will i pay it back ? probably not…i look at life as tomorrow's never promised….education is an investment , you're going to get paid back ten - fold , no matter what.” admissions representative suggested undercover applicant switch from criminal justice to the medical assistant certificate , where she could make up to $68,000 per year . while this may be possible , bls reports 90% of medical assistants make less than $40,000 per year . scenario 2 when the applicant asked about financial aid , the 2 representatives would not answer but debated with him about his commitment level for the next 30 minutes . the representative said that student loans would absolutely cover all costs in this 2-year program . the representative did not specify that federal student loans by themselves would not cover the entire cost of the program . while there are private loan programs available , they are normally based on an applicant passing a credit check , and typically carry higher interest rates than federal student loans . the representative said paying back loans should not be a concern because once he had his new job , repayment would not be an issue . the representatives used hard - sell marketing techniques ; they became argumentative , called applicant afraid , and scolded applicant for not wanting to take out loans . encouragement of fraud , and engagement in deceptive , or otherwise questionable behavior scenario 2 admissions representative initially provided misleading information to the undercover applicant about the transferability of the credit . first she told the applicant that the credits will transfer . later , she correctly told the applicant that it depends on the college and what classes have been taken . admissions representative said the bachelor's degree would take 3.5-4 years to complete , but only provided an annual cost estimate for 1 / 5 of the program . scenario 2 admissions representative did not provide the graduation rate when directly asked . instead she indicated that not everyone graduates . scenario 1 admissions representative told the undercover applicant that she could take out the maximum amount of federal loans , even if she did not need all the money . she told the applicant she could put the extra money in a high - interest savings account . while subsidized loans do not accrue interest while a student is in college , unsubsidized loans do accrue interest . the representative did not disclose this distinction to the applicant when explaining that she could put the money in a savings account . scenario 2 admissions representative told the undercover applicant that the college is regionally accredited but does not state the name of the accrediting agency . the college's web site did provide specific information about the college's accreditation , however . admissions representative said financial aid may be able to use what they call “professional judgment” to determine that the undercover applicant does not need to report over $250,000 in savings on the fafsa . admissions representative did not disclose the graduation rate after being directly asked . he instead explained that all students that do the work graduate .