ii ) . based on interviews with cms and 10 state survey agencies , it appears that at least some of this variability is due to differences in states' approaches to surveys as opposed to true differences in lab quality . while some regions were lenient if a state missed the time frame by just 1 day or provided a reasonable explanation — such as staff turnover or illness — other regions were more stringent in scoring states against the standard . however , it is not yet clear to what extent the 2004 scores represent state survey agency shortcomings or a learning curve for the states in understanding the performance review protocols . in partnership with the accrediting organizations , cms is developing performance standards comparable to , but different from , those implemented in 2004 for state survey agencies . for example , both the state survey agency review protocols and those proposed for accrediting organizations measure the timeliness of the surveys , but those proposed for the latter would also focus on several areas that are unique to accrediting organizations . the performance standards would include ( 1 ) timely and consistent information sharing and ( 2 ) alerting cms about decisions to limit or remove accreditation in a timely manner . according to a cms official , the agency plans to phase in the performance standards , starting with a standard on complaints . for example , if the clia complaints database is activated in march 2006 , cms could begin to monitor accrediting organization responsiveness to , and outcomes of , complaints . because the database will contain national lab complaint data , cms will be able to compare the volume and outcome of complaints across survey organizations . it also found that some state survey agencies did not follow the protocol instructions on how to quantify such reviews . proficiency testing desk reviews . because of personnel shortages , some state survey agencies were unable to perform proficiency testing desk reviews between surveys , waiting instead until the next on - site survey to address unsuccessful proficiency testing . cms plans to provide additional surveyor training on desk review requirements . survey time frames . cms regional office staff were inconsistent in scoring whether state survey agencies met the established time frames for initial surveys . according to cms , implementation of the accrediting organization performance standards will be a central — not regional — office responsibility . clinical labs play a pivotal role in the nation's health care system by diagnosing many diseases , including potentially life - threatening diseases , so that individuals receive appropriate medical care . given this important role , lab tests must be accurate and reliable . cms and survey organization oversight is intended to ensure that labs produce reliable test results , a key objective of clia . our work demonstrated that the oversight of clinical labs needs to be strengthened in several areas . determining the quality of lab testing is difficult because it is virtually impossible to crosswalk inspection requirements across survey organizations . without standardized survey findings across all survey organizations , cms cannot tell whether the quality of lab testing has improved or worsened over time or whether deficiencies are being appropriately identified .