we disagree . we had several conversations with representatives from u.s. bank about the data . based on other data elements in its database , u.s. bank representatives told us that they had determined the transactions were made with travel cards issued to cms employees . cms and the bank were both aware of the account numbers associated with these three transactions and other transaction information such as the merchant name and address and transaction date . this information would have provided them an avenue to ascertain the cardholder names . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9508 or by e - mail at calboml@gao.gov if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report . an additional gao contact and staff acknowledgments are provided in appendix iii . the objectives of our review were to determine whether ( 1 ) the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has an effective process for monitoring its travel card program to minimize delinquency rates , write - offs , and unauthorized use of the card and ( 2 ) hhs's controls over travel voucher processing are effective in helping ensure that travelers are not receiving reimbursements in excess of proper travel expenses . we selected five hhs component agencies to review based on the amount of travel card activity and delinquency rates in fiscal year 2001 . table 7 shows the amounts of travel card activity for these component agencies in fiscal year 2001 . these five component agencies , which incurred approximately 370,000 transactions in the amount of $48.8 million , covered nearly 70 percent of hhs's travel card activity in fiscal year 2001 . to determine whether hhs has an effective process for monitoring its travel card program to minimize delinquency rates , write - offs , and unauthorized use of the card , we obtained an understanding of the travel card program , both departmentwide and for the five individual component agencies . we interviewed hhs staff members and officials and reviewed hhs's departmentwide and individual component agencies' policies and procedures to identify procedures for monitoring their travel card programs . we also obtained data from the general services administration on delinquency rates and write - offs and compared hhs to other federal agencies . to determine the extent of unauthorized use of travel cards during fiscal year 2001 , we tested random samples of travel card transactions from each of the five component agencies .