yes . you are invited to participate in the tsa traveler identity verification program by completing and returning the following information to tsa: traveler identity verification form ( word 145 kb ) a copy of your u.s. passport or copies of three of the following: driver's license birth certificate voter registration military id card visa naturalization card government id card how does tsa review my information ? your submission is reviewed to determine if the delays are caused by mistaken identity or incorrect information . tsa will respond to you in writing and provide air carriers with your identifying information to help properly identify you at check - in and expedite your future travel . i participated in the traveler identity verification program , but i'm still experiencing problems . airline check - in procedures must still be followed . we currently distribute the watch lists to the airlines , who compare your reservation information to the watch lists prior to your flight . the airlines use varying procedures and technology to conduct this comparison , which could inadvertently lead to continued delays . we are developing a program called secure flight to enhance the security of air travel in the u.s. while reducing security - related delays for the traveling public . it will allow the federal government , instead of individual airlines , to compare passenger data against the watch lists prior to check - in at the airport , while fully protecting privacy and civil liberties . our goal going forward is to ensure travelers' security with minimal disruptions . please note that you will be subject to screening procedures at the checkpoint . every passenger will still walk through a metal detector , their carry - on bags will still be x - rayed , and every checked bag will still be screened for explosives . additionally , you may be randomly selected at the airline counter or upon arrival at the checkpoint for secondary screening . we will continue to work with travelers to minimize any unnecessary delays . we will continue to look at process and technology improvements to ensure a safe and efficient travel experience. appendix ii provides an overview of the redress process used by the terrorist screening center for addressing complaints or concerns resulting from the use of terrorist watch lists to screen individuals . as stated in appendix ii , the terrorist screening center is to work with frontline - screening agencies to resolve complaints from individuals who are experiencing repeated delays or difficulties during a screening process that may be related to a terrorist watch list . for instance , the terrorist screening center's overview guidance notes that complainants experiencing such problems at u.s. borders and ports of entry should contact u.s. customs and border protection . in further reference to the redress process for misidentifications of these individuals , the overview guidance provides an online link to the u.s. customs and border protection's interagency border inspection system fact sheet ( reproduced below ) . the fact sheet does not specifically mention terrorist watch lists and the redress process .