it does not include the amount of the funding . in general , cdc officials we spoke with told us they will choose the sip mechanism when seeking to fund prevention research that is community - based and would benefit from having access to a multidisciplinary group of researchers . specifically , cdc officials from most of the sponsoring units we spoke to told us that they use the sip mechanism when community participation is important to the research . for example , one sponsoring unit used a sip for the development and testing of an integrated comprehensive communication strategy to promote vaccination for the human papilloma virus in the united states . the sip was focused on developing strategies that engaged local or regional health systems , community - based organizations , and state health departments as key community partners , in order to enhance the acceptability of the vaccination among parents with vaccine - eligible children and to increase the likelihood that a provider would recommend the vaccination . cdc officials from one sponsoring unit also told us they use the sip mechanism when they need to engage community leaders and members of the public in order to answer the research questions . for example , cdc used the sip mechanism to fund a research project focused on enhancing the knowledge , skills , and capacity of community health advocates and leaders from community - based organizations , with the goal to provide participants with the skills necessary to assess local community health needs in order to improve community health . according to cdc , an important aspect of the research was the evaluation of whether there was an increase in the skills and leadership capacities of participants and their influence on local improvements in their communities . in addition , cdc officials told us that they choose the sip mechanism to conduct research when seeking to access researchers who have established partnerships with diverse population groups across the country . prcs are located across the united states and are expected to have cultivated relationships with their local communities . for example , one sponsoring unit used a sip to fund research on the barriers to colorectal cancer screening among south central asian immigrants , primarily indians and pakistanis , who have been shown to have low screening rates . the purpose of the research was to inform the development of culturally relevant strategies to increase colorectal screening . as such , to be awarded the sip , a prc had to demonstrate that it had established relationships within the south central asian community and an ability to recruit from these populations . in contrast , cdc officials explained that they would not choose the sip mechanism if the desired research would be better suited for an entity other than an academic health center . for example: officials from one sponsoring unit told us that a different mechanism was used for a project testing obesity prevention and management strategies because the project required working directly with health care service providers in the community , such as federally qualified health centers .