in 1987 , congress limited the use of such plans . currently , erisa requires that plan administrators provide each plan participant with a summary of certain financial data reported to dol . in particular , congress may wish to consider whether further restrictions on floor - offset arrangements are warranted , whether to provide additional employee flexibility in connection with matches in the form of employer stocks , and whether to limit the amount of employer stock that can be held in certain retirement saving plans . they are also exposed to the possibility of losing a major portion of their retirement savings . for example , dol reports that 63 percent of enron's 401 ( k ) assets were invested in company stock as of the end of 2000 . pension income is crucial to american retirees' standard of living . about half of americans over 65 receive payments from pensions and savings plans , and such income represents about 18 percent of their total income . persons who perform certain tasks , generally involving the use of a plan's assets , become fiduciaries because of those duties . others , such as the plan sponsor , the plan administrator , or a trustee are fiduciaries because of their position . fiduciaries are required to act solely in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries . they are to adhere to a standard referred to as the prudent expert rule , which requires them to act as a prudent person experienced in such matters would in similar circumstances . fiduciaries are required to follow their plan's documents and act in accordance with the terms of the plan as it is set out . if fiduciaries do not perform their duties in accordance with erisa standards , they may be held personally liable for any breach of their duty . yet , even with the high standards and broad guidance provided by erisa , in some cases the actions of fiduciaries can seem to conflict with the best interests of plan participants . during the period when revelations about enron's finances were contributing to the steady devaluation of enron's stock price , enron's plan fiduciaries imposed a lockdown on the 401 ( k ) plan , preventing employees from making withdrawals or investment transfers . enron imposed the lockdown to change recordkeepers , an acceptable practice . some observers , however , have questioned whether enron employees were sufficiently notified about the lockdown . observers have also questioned the equity of treatment between enron senior executives and enron workers during the lockdown . enron's employees were unable to make changes to their 401 ( k ) accounts during the plan's lockdown period . however , enron executives did not face similar restrictions on company stock not held in the plan . fairness would suggest that company executives should face similar restrictions in their ability to sell company stock during lockdown periods when workers are unable to make 401 ( k ) investment changes . this is especially true for those executives who serve as pension plan fiduciaries , including plan trustees .