iv. ) vehicle manufacturers , along with companies that supply them with air bag systems , are working now on developing frontal air bag systems that are intended to meet the requirements in the advanced air bag rule and be ready to be installed in model year 2004 vehicles , as required . the advanced air bag systems envisioned by manufacturers for meeting the rule's requirements include new technologies that have not previously been installed in vehicles as well as significant improvements in existing technologies . the key new technologies that manufacturers anticipate will be needed to comply with the advanced air bag rule are occupant classification sensors that can identify whether the passenger seat is occupied by an infant in a child seat , a small child in or out of a child seat , or a small adult . air bag suppliers have been working on the development of a number of such sensor technologies , and manufacturers are currently considering these technologies . the primary technologies under consideration are weight - based sensors and pattern - based sensors , which would be installed within or under the passenger seat . weight - based sensors attempt to classify the occupant through various means of determining the amount of force or pressure applied to the seat . pattern - based sensors attempt to classify an occupant using a mat , installed directly under the seat cover , which senses the occupant's applied pressure and imprint . manufacturers are also considering augmenting some of these technologies with seat belt tension sensors to identify whether the amount of force applied to the seat is due in part to the seat belt rather than the occupant's weight . in addition to developing new sensors for identifying the type of occupant in the passenger seat , manufacturers plan to increase the use of driver and passenger seat belt use sensors and driver seat position sensors . as described in the previous section , these occupant sensor technologies are already developed and available in some vehicles . manufacturers also plan to continue making improvements in existing technologies for crash sensors , control modules , inflators , and air bags to comply with the advanced air bag rule . manufacturers and suppliers are working on improving the ability of crash sensing systems to differentiate levels of crash severity and types of crashes . consumer safety groups — center for auto safety , consumer federation of america , parents for safer air bags , and public citizen — jointly filed a petition . the petition states that separate phase - in schedules for cars and sport utility vehicles are feasible because some cars can already meet a 30 mph unbelted rigid barrier crash test , but sport utility vehicles have more difficulty in complying with this test due to their stiffer frame , which produces a harder crash pulse and requires a more aggressive air bag than passenger cars . specifically , the petition requests nhtsa to require the industry to meet a 30 mph unbelted rigid barrier test for passenger cars and a 25 mph test for sport utility vehicles , to be increased to 30 mph at a later date .