ii. ) in addition , we reviewed the regulation and spoke with hhs representatives responsible for its development . we performed our work in march 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the final medical privacy regulation requires that most providers obtain patient consent to use or disclose health information before engaging in treatment , payment , or health care operations . as defined in the regulation , health care operations include a variety of activities such as undertaking quality assessments and improvement initiatives , training future health care professionals , conducting medical reviews , and case management and care coordination programs . the consent form must alert patients to the provider's notice of privacy practices ( described in a separate document ) and notify them of their right to request restrictions on the use and disclosure of their information for routine health care purposes . providers are not required to treat patients who refuse to sign a consent form , nor are they required to agree to requested restrictions . the consent provision applies to all covered providers that have a direct treatment relationship with patients . the regulation also specifies several circumstances where such prior patient consent is not required . the privacy regulation does not require health plans to obtain written patient consent . this approach to patient consent for information disclosures differs from that in hhs' proposed privacy regulation , issued for public comment november 3 , 1999 . the proposed regulation would have permitted providers to use and disclose information for treatment , payment , and health care operations without written consent . at the time , hhs stated that the existing consent process had not adequately informed patients of how their medical records could be used . comments hhs received on this provision were mixed . some groups approved of this approach , saying it would ensure that covered entities could share information to provide effective clinical care and operate efficiently , while not creating administrative requirements that would add little to individual privacy . however , others wrote that individuals should be able to control to whom , and under what circumstances , their individually identifiable health information would be disclosed , even for routine treatment , payment , or health care operations . the extent to which the privacy regulation's consent requirement will be a departure from business as usual varies by type of provider . under current practices , physicians and hospitals generally obtain consent to use patient data for processing insurance claims , but they obtain consent substantially less often for treatment or health care operations . pharmacists , however , typically do not have consent procedures in place for any of the routine purposes included in the regulation . specifically: most , but not all , physicians get signed written consent to use patient data for health insurance payment . in addition , most provider organizations we interviewed told us that the privacy regulation's consent requirement will be a challenge to implement and may impede some health care operations . the american medical association ( ama ) , the bazelon center for mental health law , and the health privacy project ( hpp ) indicated that the consent process offers important benefits to patients .