we are not making any recommendations in this report . the department of defense had no comments on a draft of this report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committee and the secretary of defense . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . in addition , tatiana winger ( assistant director ) , kathryn ( emily ) bond , michael grogan , julie hadley , julia kennon , liam o'laughlin , raffaele ( ralph ) roffo , roxanna sun , and carmen yeung made key contributions to this report . summary of sections regarding commercial items requires dod to develop and begin implementation of a plan to train the acquisition workforce in the use of certain authorities for evaluating price reasonableness in procurements of commercial items and develop a cadre of experts within dod to provide advice to the acquisition workforce . department of defense ( dod ) actions as of may 2017 training: conferences addressing commercial item pricing occurring in 2014 , 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 industry day on contracting with dod november 2014 dod - wide pricing webinars week - long procurement contracting officer training for evaluating price reasonableness of commercial items according to defense procurement acquisition policy officials , the agency is coordinating with defense acquisition university to update training to be consistent with the dfars and dod guidebook for acquiring commercial items , both of which dod is working to finalize . cadre of experts: defense contract management agency created six commercial item centers of excellence . appendix: summary of recent national defense authorization act sections related to dod's acquisition of commercial items appendix: summary of recent national defense authorization act sections related to dod's acquisition of commercial items appendix: summary of recent national defense authorization act sections related to dod's acquisition of commercial items summary of sections regarding commercial items requires a contracting officer to consider recent prices paid by the government to determine price reasonableness of a commercial item if the officer is satisfied the prices previously paid are a valid reference for comparison , based on factors such as the quantities purchased by the government and how long ago the prices were paid . department of defense ( dod ) actions as of may 2017 proposed dfars rule ( case 2016-d006 ) would implement this provision when finalized . requires the secretary of defense to submit a report identifying the defense - unique law provisions that are applicable for commercial item procurements , at the prime contract and subcontract levels , to the congressional defense committees . dod issued “report to congress on defense - unique laws applicable to the procurement of commercial items and commercially available off - the - shelf items” in june 2016 . requires dod to issue guidance concerning market research and commercial items , to ensure acquisition officials comply with the legal requirements concerning preference for acquiring commercial items .