zones . an important feature of otss is the ability to develop zones . as shown in figure 7 , inclusion zones are geographic areas where an offender is scheduled to be , such as home or work ; exclusion zones are geographic areas where the offender is not permitted to visit , such as a victim's home , schools , or outside the state or county border . the draft standard calls for otss to configure zones in the shapes of circles , rectangles , and arbitrarily shaped polygons , as well as be able to have zones within zones . to what extent has nij collaborated with stakeholders in developing the ots standard ? to what extent have the ots standard and companion guide incorporated stakeholder needs and addressed potential challenges ? to assess the extent to which nij collaborated with stakeholders in developing the ots standard , we reviewed federal laws such as the national technology transfer and advancement act of 1995 . the act generally states , with certain exceptions , that all federal agencies and departments shall use technical standards that are developed or adopted by voluntary consensus standard bodies , using such technical standards as a means to carry out policy objectives or activities determined by the agencies and departments . in addition , we reviewed office of management and budget circular a - 119 , which establishes policies consistent with the act to improve the internal management of executive branch agencies . in addition , we reviewed nij procedures on the development and use of standards . we examined the ots standard development process nij has implemented by obtaining its records of activity and meeting with program officials involved in the development process . we compared nij's development process for the ots standard as applicable against the american national standard institute's ( ansi ) essential requirements , to understand whether nij's process was consistent with accepted practices . ansi is a well - established organization that accredits leading standard development organizations , such as underwriters laboratories incorporated , and determines approval of individual standards . we further looked at a guide to the project management body of knowledge's stakeholder and collaboration practices to assess whether nij had followed practices for effectively involving stakeholders . we reviewed the timing , duration , and level and nature of stakeholder involvement . we also interviewed individuals appointed by doj to serve on the advisory working group ( awg ) , which is charged with reviewing the standard . more specifically , we interviewed awg members from the following organizations: the american probation and parole association , american correctional association , national sheriffs' association , and the u.s. department of homeland security . additionally , we interviewed members of the special technical committee ( stc ) , which is charged with writing the standard and includes criminal justice practitioners from federal , state , and local levels of government as well as technical experts with experience in developing laboratory testing methods . given its role in federal standard development and level of technical expertise , we met with officials from the national institute for standards and technology to assess their interaction with nij , involvement in the development process , and their perspective on nij's process .