( see app . i for a list of related gao products. ) between january 2001 and november 2006 , numerous events led up to the failure of the coast guard's bridging strategy to convert the legacy 110-foot patrol boats into 123-foot patrol boats . in january 2001 , an independent study found that the 110-foot patrol boats based in south florida and puerto rico were experiencing severe hull corrosion and that their structural integrity was deteriorating rapidly . to address these issues , the coast guard's original ( 2002 ) deepwater plan included a strategy to convert all 49 of the 110-foot patrol boats into 123-foot patrol boats to strengthen the hulls . in 2004 , we recommended that the coast guard establish a total ownership cost baseline that could be used to periodically measure whether the deepwater system - of - systems acquisition approach is providing the government with increased efficiencies compared to what it would have cost without this approach . our recommendation was consistent with the cost baseline criteria set forth in the deepwater program management plan . the coast guard agreed with the recommendation at the time , but subsequently told us it does not plan to implement it . in our current work , we will explore the implication of the revised award term evaluation criteria and the coast guard's ability to measure the overarching goals of the acquisition strategy . establishing a solid baseline against which to measure progress in lowering total ownership cost is critical to holding the contractor accountable . the coast guard's original plan , set forth in the deepwater program management plan , was to establish as its baseline the dollar value of replacing assets under a traditional , asset - by - asset approach as the “upper limit for total ownership cost.” in practice , the coast guard decided to use the system integrator's estimated cost of $70.97 billion plus 10 percent ( in fiscal year 2002 dollars ) for the system - of - systems approach as the baseline . in 2004 , we recommended that the coast guard establish criteria to determine when the total ownership cost baseline should be adjusted and ensure that the reasons for any changes are documented . since then , the coast guard established a process that would require dhs approval for adjustments to the total ownership cost baseline . the deepwater program executive officer maintains authority to approve baseline revisions at the asset or domain level . however , depending on the severity of the change , these changes are also subject to review and approval by dhs . in november 2005 , the coast guard increased the total ownership cost baseline against which the contractor will be evaluated to $304 billion . deepwater officials stated that the adjustment was the result of incorporating the new homeland security mission requirements and revising dollar estimates to a current year basis . although the coast guard is required to provide information to dhs on causal factors and propose corrective action for a baseline breach of 8 percent or more , the 8 percent threshold has not been breached because the threshold is measured against total program costs and not on an asset basis .