nonsampling errors . because this was not a sample survey , there are no sampling errors . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce other types of errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , differences in how a particular question is interpreted , the sources of information available to respondents , or the types of people who do not respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we included steps at both the data collection and data analysis stages for the purpose of minimizing such nonsampling errors . these steps included ( 1 ) having survey specialists help develop the questionnaire , ( 2 ) pretesting the questionnaire with nahasda grantees , ( 3 ) using multiple reminders to encourage survey response , and ( 4 ) contacting respondents to follow up on obvious inconsistencies , errors , and incomplete answers . nonresponse analysis . because only 66 percent of the study population provided responses , bias from nonresponse may result . if the responses of those who did not respond would have differed from the responses of those who did on some survey questions , the numbers reported solely from those who did respond would be biased from excluding parts of the population with different characteristics or views . to limit this kind of error , we made multiple attempts to obtain the participation of as many nahasda grantees as possible . we performed an additional analysis to determine whether our survey respondents had characteristics that were significantly different from all grantees in the study population . to do this , we identified two grantee characteristics that were available for the entire study population — grantee location ( region ) and grant size . for these comparisons , we found little difference between the distribution of responses from the respondents and the actual population values . however , when comparing respondents to nonrespondents by grant size , we found that the survey respondents , on average , received much larger grants ; the median grant size was $717,686 for those who responded and $451,222 for those who did not . this suggests that grantees receiving large grant amounts were more likely to participate in our survey than others . for example , more than two - thirds of grantees with grants larger than $250,000 participated in the survey while only about half of the smaller grantees participated . respondents to the survey received about 80 percent of the grant amounts distributed in 2008 . we performed computer analyses to identify inconsistencies in responses and other indications of error . in addition , an independent analyst verified that the computer programs used to analyze the data were written correctly . to evaluate how nahasda program funds have allowed native american tribes to address their affordable housing needs , we reviewed nahasda legislation to identify housing activities that are eligible under the program . we reviewed hud performance data on the nahasda program , including its fiscal year 2008 nahasda report to congress and cumulative data on affordable housing units grantees built , acquired , and rehabilitated using ihbg funds during fiscal years 2003 through 2008 .