we disagree . we are not aware of any explicit statutory exemption that would prevent the application of this directive . while several provisions in the homeland security act would limit the range of management initiatives concerning the coast guard , none of them would appear to be applicable in this case . for example , the homeland security act requires the coast guard to be maintained as a distinct entity within the department . other limitations prevent the transfer of assets , alteration of missions , and changes in reporting relationships . the act also expressly provides that “the authorities , functions , and capabilities of the coast guard to perform its missions shall be maintained intact and without significant reduction after the transfer of the coast guard to the department.” we find nothing in the directive that contravenes these limitations . nothing in the document would reasonably appear to threaten the status of the coast guard as a distinct entity or otherwise impair its ability to perform statutory missions . we raised the question of statutory exemption with the dhs general counsel , who shared our assessment concerning the explicit statutory exemptions . he viewed the applicability of the management directive as a policy matter , noting that “the determination of whether the application of all or part of this would impact the [coast guard's] ability to perform its mission is not a legal matter and is more appropriately made by dhs policy officials.” we agree that dhs officials , with sufficient reasons , could make a policy decision that a particular management directive impacts the coast guard's ability to perform its missions . in this instance , however , we found no evidence that such a decision had been made . the directive also provides that the secret service is exempted by statute . as with the coast guard , we are unaware of any specific statutory exemption that would prevent the application of the directive . the homeland security act requires the secret service to be maintained as a distinct entity within the department . the 2005 homeland security appropriations act reiterates this requirement and imposes additional limitations on altering reporting relationships . given the nature of the management directive , we also conclude that there is no apparent reason to exempt the secret service from its application . dhs's principal organizations are , to a large extent , still functioning much as they did in premerger days with regard to acquisition - related functions . embedded within seven of the procurement organizations are , for the most part , the same contracting staffs that joined dhs from their former agencies . the eighth organization , procurement operations , created to meet the needs of the many dhs organizations that do not have colocated procurement support , has a direct reporting chain to the chief procurement officer . until recently , the chief procurement officer , whom dhs's top leadership delegated with the key responsibility of ensuring compliance with the department's acquisition regulation and policies , had only two staff members to carry out this duty . consequently , the department's acquisition oversight program relies extensively on self - assessments by personnel in each procurement organization .