these coordinators also support the reccwgs . oec and fema jointly provide training to first responders and other public safety officials to prepare them to act as communications unit leaders . oec also provides training for other specialized communications support roles . the communications unit is part of a standardized organizational emergency response structure called the incident command system . when a disaster or emergency occurs , the communications unit is responsible for managing the operational and technical aspects of communications . for example , one of the unit leader's tasks includes developing a plan to coordinate the radio frequencies used by first responders , to help ensure interoperability . the unit may also include a communications technician who provides the technical skills to implement the required equipment and systems . oec trained more than 8,000 individuals between 2007 and august 2017 to serve in communications unit positions , according to oec information . while stakeholders continue to face a range of emergency communications challenges , they are generally satisfied with dhs's technical assistance to help address them . specifically , nearly all the stakeholders we contacted ( 36 of 41 ) were generally satisfied with technical assistance from oec , fema , or both . in addition , in 2016 we reported that all states had received oec technical assistance and that almost all were satisfied with the support they received from oec . when asked about the general topic of dhs technical assistance , more than half ( 25 of 41 ) of stakeholders we interviewed said that training for communications unit positions was useful in advancing emergency communications capabilities in their jurisdictions . oec and fema also employ a “train - the - trainer” approach for the communications unit - leader course . houston - area stakeholders told us that over 1,000 local personnel across the state had received communications unit training and that the area now has a large number of local trainers . five stakeholders we interviewed for our houston case study praised this training and said it was critical in preparing communications personnel to respond to hurricane harvey . such purchases can result in emergency communications challenges . the leader of one reccwg told us that due to consistent budget shortfalls over the past several years , one state in the region has deferred maintenance of communications infrastructure . however , a stakeholder from the los angeles area told us that while having the communications unit train itself was useful , it was insufficient without opportunities to practice the skills in real - life situations , a challenge that other stakeholders also noted in a recent reccwg annual report . based on feedback from state and local personnel , oec is assisting states with establishing policies and procedures for their communications unit resources , including a process to demonstrate skills required for these specialized positions . together to test equipment and actual response procedures . four stakeholders told us that oec adapted technical assistance offerings to the needs of their jurisdictions . according to dhs's interoperability continuum , implementing effective exercise programs to practice communications interoperability is essential for ensuring that the technology works and that first responders are able to effectively communicate .