marshal . according to fps officials , since 2010 , it has provided training on how guards should respond during an active - shooter incident to guards as part of the 8-hour fps - provided orientation training guards receive . fps officials were not able to specify how much time is devoted to this training , but said that it is a small portion of the 2-hour special situations in addition , officials stated that guards hired before 2010 should training.have received this information during guard - company - provided training on the guards' post orders ( which outline the duties and responsibilities associated with each guard post and include information on responding to an active - shooter situation ) during basic and refresher training . however , when we asked contract guard company officials if their guards had received training on how guards should respond during active - shooter incidents , responses varied . for example , of the 16 contract guard companies we interviewed about this topic: eight contract guard company officials stated that their guards have received active - shooter scenario training during orientation , five guard company officials stated that fps has not provided active - shooter scenario training to their guards , and three guard companies stated that fps had not provided active - shooter scenario training to their guards during the fps - provided orientation training , but that the topic was covered in one of the following ways: during guard company - provided basic training or refresher training , fps provided on - the - job instruction on the topic during post fps provided a link to an active - shooter training video , which the company shows its guards . the six agencies we reviewed — state , the holocaust museum , nasa , pfpa , the kennedy center , and doe — also recognize this threat and five of them require active - shooter response training for their contract guards . according to officials at doe , the agency is in the process of requiring guards to complete active - shooter response training to ensure they are capable of addressing this threat and protecting facility occupants . similarly , holocaust museum officials stated that they require this training because current trends in law enforcement warrant active - shooter response training for guards . in may 2013 , an fps official stated that the agency is collaborating with its guard companies to develop a standardized national lesson plan for guards and revising the security guard information manual ( sgim ) . fps officials stated that the lesson plan being developed is meant to standardize the training guards receive . however , according to the official , fps has not yet decided whether the national lesson plan will specify countermeasures necessary to mitigate threats from active shooters . fps does not have a timeline for developing or implementing a national lesson plan for guards . until it develops one , some guards may continue to go without training on how guards should respond to incidents at federal facilities involving an active shooter .