gao - 02-617 . washington , d.c.: july 1 , 2002 . a subset of these objectives is the safeguarding of assets . internal control should be designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention of or prompt detection of unauthorized acquisition , use , or disposition of an agency's assets . effective and efficient internal control activities help ensure that an agency's control objectives are accomplished . the control activities are the policies , procedures , techniques , and mechanisms that enforce management's directives , such as the process of adhering to dod requirements for receipt of government - furnished material and issuance of quarterly government - furnished material status reports . dod annually ships inventory valued at billions of dollars to various locations around the world . for years , dod has had difficulty tracking this inventory from origin to destination . the accountability problem with shipped inventory is part of a more global issue . since at least 1990 , we have considered dod's inventory management to be a high - risk area because dod's inventory management procedures are ineffective . the lack of adequate controls over shipped inventory and the resulting vulnerability to undetected loss or theft have been major areas of concern . in march 1999 , we reported that significant weaknesses existed at all levels of the navy's shipped inventory management structure , leading to potential theft or undetected losses of items and demonstrating inefficient and ineffective logistics management practices . we concluded that these weaknesses and the problems they created were primarily a result of the navy not following its own procedures regarding controls over shipped inventory . in following up with the navy , we found that the navy had implemented many of our recommendations that have improved the accountability over its shipped inventory . according to naval inventory control point officials , at least 75 percent of their shipped inventory discrepancies have been resolved . also , according to a june 2003 dod office of the inspector general report , the navy had taken actions to improve its procedures and controls to account for items repaired at commercial repair facilities . however , the dod office of the inspector general found that additional improvements were needed to improve the monitoring and oversight of shipped inventory . the naval inventory control point and its repair contractors are not following dod inventory management control procedures governing the accountability for and visibility of government - furnished material shipped to its repair contractors . as a result , this inventory is vulnerable to loss or theft . first , the naval inventory control point is not following a dod procedure that requires repair contractors to acknowledge receipt of government - furnished material that has been shipped to them from the navy's supply system . consequently , the naval inventory control point is not following another dod procedure that requires it to follow up with its repair contractors that have not confirmed receipt of shipped material . additionally , the naval inventory control point is not following dod and navy procedures that require quarterly reports on the status of government - furnished material shipped to navy repair contractors be provided to the defense contract management agency .