orientation of exam tables . in exam rooms where gynecological exams are conducted , only one of the nine vamcs and two of the eight cbocs we visited were fully compliant with va's policy requiring exam tables to face away from the door . in many clinical settings that were not fully compliant at the remaining facilities , we observed that exam tables were oriented with the foot of the table facing the door , and in two cbocs where exam tables were not properly oriented , there was no privacy curtain to help assure visual privacy during women veterans' exams . at one of these cbocs , a noncompliant exam room was also located within view of a mixed - gender waiting room . figure 1 shows the correct and incorrect orientation of exam tables in two gynecological exam rooms at two va medical facilities . in one mixed - gender inpatient medical / surgical unit , two mixed - gender residential units , and one all - female residential unit , women veterans were not guaranteed access to a private bathing facility and may have had to use a shared or congregate facility . in two of these four settings , access to the shared restroom was not restricted by a lock or a keycard system , raising concerns about the possibility of intrusion by male patients or staff while a woman veteran is showering or using the restroom . availability of sanitary products in public restrooms . at seven of the nine vamcs and all 10 of the cbocs we visited , we did not find sanitary napkins or tampons available in dispensers in any of the public restrooms . va has not set a deadline by which all vamcs and cbocs are required to implement va's new comprehensive primary care initiative for women veterans , which would allow women veterans to obtain both primary care and basic gender - specific services from one provider at one site . officials at the va medical facilities we visited since the comprehensive primary care for women veterans initiative was introduced reported that they were at various stages of implementing the new initiative . officials at 6 of the 7 vamcs and 6 of the 8 cbocs we visited since november 2008 — when va adopted this initiative — reported that they had at least one provider who could deliver comprehensive primary care services to women veterans . however , some of the medical facilities we visited reported that they were not routinely assigning women veterans to comprehensive primary care providers . officials at some medical facilities we visited were unclear about the steps needed to implement va's new policy on comprehensive primary care for women veterans . for example , at one vamc , primary care was offered in a mixed - gender primary care clinic and basic gender - specific services were offered by a separate appointment in the gynecology clinic , sometimes on the same day . the new comprehensive primary care initiative would require both primary care and basic gender specific services to be available on the same day , during the same appointment .