gsa did not provide comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the director of the bureau of engraving and printing , the secretary of the treasury , the chair of the federal reserve board , and the administrator of the general services administration . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the individual named above , john w. shumann ( assistant director ) ; martha chow ( analyst in charge ) ; amy abramowitz ; lacey coppage ; delwen jones ; jennifer leotta ; josh ormond ; and tomas wind made key contributions to this report . the annual cost of these facilities is $91.7 million . while , not all of the employees currently in leased space could move into a renovated main building , the main building's 530,000 square feet could provide opportunities to reduce leasing costs . however , because these potential renovations and staff moves are not likely to occur for several years , treasury officials told us that they are not able to determine either the costs or benefits of moving treasury staff to the main building . hybrid: bep's revolving fund would pay for the renovation of one - third of the main building that would serve as bep's administrative office and a future visitors' center . this step would leave the remaining two - thirds to be renovated to a “warm lit shell” to allow others to occupy the building . at this time , treasury does not know what entity or account would pay for the renovation of the remaining two - thirds because , according to treasury officials , they have not determined what the use of the balance of the main building would be , including what entity would fund any modifications needed for new occupants . this continued strength in the demand of cash has several sources . cash can be seen as a hedge against uncertainties , such as natural disasters or political or economic turmoil , and also has advantages related to privacy , anonymity , and personal data security . moreover , according to the federal deposit insurance corporation , approximately 25 percent of u.s. households have limited access to the products and services of the banking industry , and therefore , these “unbanked” and “underbanked” populations , who may not have many alternative means of payment , rely largely on cash . federal reserve and treasury officials we spoke with do not believe that the use of cash in the u.s. will decline in any significant way over the next decade .