gao - 07-53 . washington , d.c.: october 13 , 2006 . improper payments: federal and state coordination needed to report national improper payment estimates on federal programs . gao - 06-347 . washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2006 . fns has made good use of ebt transaction data . however , fns has not conducted the analyses to identify high risk areas and to target their compliance - monitoring resources to the areas of highest risk . for example , our analysis of fns's database of retailers showed that of the 9,808 stores permanently disqualified from the food stamp program , about 35 percent were in just 4 states: new york , illinois , texas , and florida , yet about 26 percent of food stamp recipients lived in those states . however , fns headquarters officials did not know the number of program specialists in the field offices in these states who devote a portion of their time to monitoring food stamp transactions and initiating paper cases . in addition , some retailers and store locations have a history of program violations that lead up to permanent disqualifications , but fns did not have a system in place to ensure these stores were quickly targeted for heightened attention . our analysis showed that , of the 9,808 stores that had been permanently disqualified from the program , about 90 percent were disqualified for their first detected offense . however , 9.4 percent of the disqualified retailers had shown early indications of problems before being disqualified . about 4.3 percent of these retailers had received a civil money penalty , 4.3 percent had received a warning letter for program violations , and 0.8 percent had received a temporary disqualification . most of these stores were small and may present a higher risk of future trafficking than others , yet fns does not necessarily target them for speedy attention . further , some store locations may be at risk of trafficking because a series of different owners had trafficked there . after an owner was disqualified , field office officials told us the store would reopen under new owners who continued to traffic with the store's clientele . as table 2 shows , our analysis of fns's database of retailers found that about 174 , or 1.8 percent , of the store addresses had a series of different owners over time who had been permanently disqualified for trafficking at that same location , totaling 369 separate disqualifications . in one case , a store in the district of columbia had 10 different owners who were each disqualified for trafficking , consuming fns's limited compliance - monitoring resources . our analysis of the data on these stores with multiple disqualified owners indicates that fns officials found this type of trafficking in a handful of cities and states . almost 60 percent of repeat store locations were in 6 states , and 44 percent were in 8 cities , often concentrated in small areas . for example , 14 repeat store locations were clustered in downtown areas of both brooklyn and baltimore . washington , d.c.: february 22 , 2002 . executive guide: strategies to manage improper payments: learning from public and private sector organizations . gao - 02-69g .