fda then reviews the amendment . fda can issue additional letters indicating that information is deficient and review additional amendments until fda determines that it has sufficient information to determine whether to approve or deny the application . for example , if fda determines that a manufacturer's amendment to an approvable letter requesting minor corrections or clarifications does not address all of fda's questions , then fda can issue another approvable letter pending minor corrections or clarifications or a not approvable letter . under the 510 ( k ) review process , fda reviews applications to market a device that may be substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device that was not subject to premarket approval ( see fig . fda staff conduct a scientific review of the application . when a 510 ( k ) application lacks information necessary for fda to reach a decision , the agency may issue an “additional information” letter that indicates that the information is insufficient . the manufacturer may then submit additional information . once fda has obtained sufficient information from the manufacturer , fda may make one of three decisions: fda may decide that ( 1 ) the device is substantially equivalent and therefore may be marketed , ( 2 ) the device is not substantially equivalent and may not be marketed , or ( 3 ) a 510 ( k ) application was not required because the product is not regulated as a device or the device is exempt from the requirements for premarket notification . ( see fig . if fda determines that it needs significant additional information to complete its scientific review , fda issues a “major deficiency letter” to the manufacturer identifying the information that is required . the manufacturer can respond to fda's request by submitting an amendment to the original application . fda then proceeds with its review of the amended application . fda can issue additional major deficiency letters and review additional amendments until fda determines that it has sufficient information to make a decision . as part of its review , fda may refer applications to an external advisory committee for evaluation . fda takes this step when a device is the first of its kind or when the agency believes it would be useful to have independent expertise and technical assistance to properly evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the device . for applications referred to an advisory committee , the committee provides input to fda on the safety and effectiveness of the devices . for example , one of fda's 2005 performance goals for expedited pmas was to take action within 170 days for 70 percent of amendments containing complete responses to a major deficiency or not approvable letter . as of march 31 , 2005 , fda had taken action within 170 days on two of two such amendments ( 100 percent ) to applications in the fiscal year 2003 cohort and four of five ( 80 percent ) in the fiscal year 2004 cohort and had received no such amendments for applications in the fiscal year 2005 cohort . taking the committee's input into consideration , fda then makes a decision . fda may make one of five decisions . nonpriority blas are considered standard blas .