the fee was not negotiated . in fact , it applied to all renovations orders regardless of size or complexity of work and regardless of the extent of washington gas' role in individual projects . washington gas increased its fee at the beginning of fiscal year 2001 from 20 to 25 percent because the school system was requesting additional work and larger projects . this increase was also not negotiated , and the 25-percent fee was applied as a flat rate to all projects . the school system's contracting officer was unaware that the fee had been raised until we notified her . the then - chief facilities officer raised concern about the fee with washington gas and requested that it be lowered . however , no action was taken . lastly , for much of the boiler work , the school system paid a fee to a subsidiary of washington gas ( american combustion industries , inc. ) , in addition to the 25-percent fee charged by washington gas . in some cases , as a result of this situation the school system paid fees of up to 50 percent — with half going to washington gas and half to its subsidiary . because the school system failed to use competitive procedures , neglected to prepare reliable cost estimates and pricing analyses , and failed to negotiate fees , it had no way of knowing whether prices were fair and reasonable . in fact , the school system has paid washington gas a total of $6 million in fees for very limited program management services . for the most part , only 4 employees at washington gas worked on school renovation - related efforts . one employee served as a liaison with the school system ; another prepared the listings of work to be completed and informed the subcontractor to begin work ; a third inspected the work ; and a fourth ensured that the subcontractors were paid . further , on many projects , washington gas did not provide all of the services that , according to washington gas officials , formed the basis for its fee . for example , washington gas collected $74,448 in fees for a $297,795 parking lot and playground renovation project at hendley elementary school . for its 25-percent fee , washington gas just prepared the listing of renovation work to be completed , told the subcontractor to begin work , inspected the work , and paid the subcontractor . facilities staff took on duties normally belonging to the prime contractor and contracting officer without any authority to do so . specifically , school system facility staff who did not have contracting authority were intimately involved in selecting subcontractors , approving proposed prices , making changes to the work , assuring the quality of the work performed , and approving invoices for payment . for example: the prime contractor normally selects subcontractors , approves their prices , and defines their scopes of work . in this case , however , the school system facilities staff — not washington gas , the prime contractor — solicited and approved subcontractor proposals . at times , these proposals were vague and broad in scope , making it difficult to determine how prices were established and approved .