smith . these funds were permanently sequestered . funds from the health resources and services account related to loan programs were temporarily sequestered because they are financed through a revolving fund supported by collections . these funds became available again in fiscal year 2015 as a “pop up” . fsa officials echoed this concern . the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) provides services to underserved and vulnerable communities in need of health care . according to hrsa , sequestration reductions in fiscal year 2014 to the health centers and workforce programs prevented an expansion of services to an estimated 365,000 new patients . for example , in the case of the build america bonds , which are issued by state and local governments , irs officials said they do not have a system to track whether bond issuers canceled projects or refinanced them due to sequestration reductions . a senior government official from one state that issued babs , said that , while sequestration did not lead to the cancelation of any infrastructure projects , the reductions had a negative effect on the state's budget as a whole . moreover , it affected his perspective on the reliability of federally subsidized bond programs . according to treasury officials , in addition to the $125 million reduction to comply with the sequestration order , additional amounts in the tff were rescinded and canceled , which made it difficult to isolate the specific effects from sequestration alone . to accomplish our third objective , we reviewed relevant literature and the government - wide federal budget data described above that was used for our first objective . in addition , we reviewed relevant legislation , executive memoranda , omb guidance and federal standards for internal control to identify the criteria used in our analysis . also , to inform our analysis , we interviewed a nongeneralizable selection of budget specialists with a broad range of agency , congressional , and academic experiences including current and former congressional staffers and agency officials to obtain their perspective on the implications of sequestration . each selected specialist had at least 15 years of experience with extensive backgrounds in federal budget and policy issues and served in a variety of positions across the federal government and academia . while the views from these selected specialists are not generalizable nor do they represent the full range of possible views on sequestration , they provided insight and perspectives about sequestration . we conducted this performance audit from february 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as part of our review , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of six accounts and examined how the agencies responsible for managing those accounts reported implementing sequestration procedures in fiscal year 2014 . bbedca requires cuts totaling $109.3 billion in each year through fiscal year 2021 .