we are not making recommendations in this report . all osa aircraft are military variants of commercial aircraft . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; the secretaries of the military departments , and the commandant of the marine corps ; the commander of the united states transportation command ; and other interested parties . the report is also available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5257 or merrittz@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . the department of defense ( dod ) defines an aircraft mishap as an event resulting in death , injury , illness or property damage . dod guidance defines four categories or classes of mishaps according to severity: class a: mishap resulted in a fatality , a permanent total disability , damage equal to or greater than $2 million , or a destroyed aircraft . class b: mishap resulted in a permanent partial disability , damage equal or greater than $500,000 , but less than $2 million , or hospitalization for inpatient care of three or more individuals ( not including observation or diagnostic care ) . class c: mishap resulted in a nonfatal injury or occupational illness that caused loss of one or more days from work not including the day or shift it occurred , or damage equal or greater to $50,000 , but less than $500,000 . class d: mishap resulted in a recordable injury or illness not otherwise classified as class a , b , or c , or damage equal or greater to $20,000 , but less than $50,000 . while any reportable mishap is , by definition , a matter of concern , the rate of mishaps per flight ( or sortie ) is low for osa aircraft . complete historical flight data is not available for the osa fleet . however , a calculation based on an extrapolation that uses the average sortie numbers from the 2016 osa validation process analysis would yield a rate of 7 mishaps for every 10,000 sorties . furthermore , dod classifies its class a and b mishaps as its serious mishaps , and these mishaps accounted for 22 of the 174 total osa mishaps from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 . see table 9 for the complete mishap data for that period . appendix ii: information on maintenance of operational support airlift ( osa ) based on our interviews with service maintenance officials and analysis of service maintenance data , we found that: contractors perform almost all executive and nonexecutive osa aircraft maintenance , including most organizational - level and depot - level maintenance . in some instances , one contract covers aircraft from more than one service .