ii . however , agencies with more limited roles in biosurveillance , such as the biosurveillance support agencies and information consumers , had more favorable views on nbic's products and activities . for example , as also illustrated by figure 2 , 5 of the 8 biosurveillance support agencies and information consumers stated that nbic's products and activities help their agencies identify potential or ongoing biological events ( i.e. , perception ) to a moderate extent . to what extent is nbic implementing its roles as a biosurveillance integrator ? what are options for improving federal biosurveillance integration , and what are their benefits and limitations ? to determine the extent to which nbic is implementing its role as a biosurveillance integrator , we conducted structured interviews with 19 federal departments and their component agencies across 13 of the 14 departments and agencies that compose the national biosurveillance integration system ( nbis ) — the federal partners that nbic is responsible for coordinating because they have missions and resources that can contribute to earlier detection and shared situational awareness for biological events of national significance . although nbic has interaction with other stakeholders , we selected these 19 federal agencies based on their biosurveillance roles and responsibilities and because they were federal departments or components within federal departments that have signed the nbic advisory board charter — signifying their participation in the nbis . prior to conducting our structured interviews , we provided a list of these agencies to nbic and senior nbic officials agreed that the agencies we identified represented the partners with which the center had the most interaction and collaboration . we discussed with these nbis partners the extent to which nbic has enhanced the national biosurveillance capability by carrying out its national integrator roles and any challenges the center has faced in doing so , including the extent to which nbic's products and activities enhance the agency's situational awareness of biological events . within these agencies , we interviewed officials who serve on nbic's advisory board or its interagency working group , as well as other relevant officials that regularly interact with nbic , review the center's products , or participate in the center's activities . as part of this review , we did not interview or survey nbic's nonfederal stakeholders , such as state , local , tribal , or territorial agencies . we also conducted a web - based survey of the 19 agencies to identify the federal agencies from which they obtain information that contributes to their agency's situational awareness of biological events , the methods through which they share information from nbic , and the extent to which they participate in nbic activities . we obtained a 100 percent response rate on this survey . in the survey , we asked each agency whether it obtains information from each of the other agencies in our population , as well as which types of information it obtains from them ( perception - , comprehension - , or projection - related information ) . we performed a network analysis of these survey data , which is a quantitative and graphical technique for identifying the underlying patterns in a complex system of relationships among entities of interest .