fees . a card program could charge an enrollment fee of no more than $25 to each medicare beneficiary . coverage . each card program would provide a discount for at least one brand name or generic prescription drug from each therapeutic class of drugs ( specified in the final rule ) commonly needed by medicare beneficiaries . cms said it anticipated periodically modifying the therapeutic classes to keep them up to date with medicare beneficiaries' use of drugs and with changes in the pharmaceutical marketplace , including newly approved drugs . advertised discounts . the discount that a beneficiary would receive by purchasing drugs with a medicare - endorsed prescription drug card must be advertised in dollars , not as a percentage . cms said it anticipated working with beneficiaries and the pharmaceutical industry to create a means to compare prices for drugs among all medicare - endorsed prescription drug cards . cms stated that it would give a special designation to up to 10 percent of cards that offered the deepest discounts to beneficiaries . negotiation of discounts . medicare - endorsed cards would require card administrators to negotiate with pharmaceutical manufacturers to provide lower prices to retail pharmacies for drugs purchased by cardholders . discount card administrators would have to ensure that a “substantial” share of the lower prices was passed on to beneficiaries , either indirectly , through retail pharmacies , or directly . information for beneficiaries . enrollment fees , the availability of patient management services , such as drug interaction warnings , and information about the generic equivalent of brand name drugs for each medicare - endorsed card would be included on cms's web site and in the documents that contain card price comparisons developed by cms . pbm - administered drug discount cards differ from pharmaceutical - manufacturer - sponsored cards with respect to eligibility , the range of drugs they cover , the extent to which the retail pharmacy is paid for all or part of the difference between the price a person pays without a discount card and the discount card price for a particular drug , and the prices available with a card . the discount card programs administered by pbms are available to any adult , while the pharmaceutical manufacturers' cards are available only to medicare - eligible individuals and couples with incomes below a certain level who do not have prescription drug coverage . each pbm - administered card covers most outpatient prescription drugs , while the cards sponsored by pharmaceutical manufacturers generally provide discounts only on the outpatient prescription drugs that company produces . pbm - administered discount cards specify that the cardholder's price will be the lower of a percentage below a commonly used reference price or the pharmacy's usual price ( generally referred to as the usual and customary price ) . the typical card sponsored by a pharmaceutical manufacturer offers cardholders either a price that is a specified percentage off a list price or a fixed price for a specified quantity of each covered drug . ( see appendix i for selected characteristics of the drug card programs that we examined. ) the eligibility requirements for a card generally depend on whether it is administered by a pbm or sponsored by a pharmaceutical manufacturer .