this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity , by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . irs policy requires the use of encryption for transferring sensitive but unclassified information between irs facilities . the national security agency also recommends disabling protocols that do not encrypt information transmitted across the network , such as user id and password combinations . irs did not consistently apply encryption to protect sensitive data traversing its network . for example , at one site , irs was using an unencrypted protocol to manage network devices on a local server . in addition , the procurement application and the unix servers we reviewed at another site were using unencrypted protocols . therefore , all information , including user id and password information , was being sent across the network in clear text . these weaknesses could allow an attacker to view information and use that knowledge to gain access to financial and system data being transmitted over the network . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail , or logs of system activity , that they can use to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor users' activities . the way in which organizations configure system or security software determines the nature and extent of information that can be provided by the audit trail . to be effective , organizations should configure their software to collect and maintain audit trails that are sufficient to track security - relevant events . the internal revenue manual requires that auditable events be captured and audit logs be used to review what occurred after an event , for periodic reviews , and for real - time analysis . in addition , the manual requires that audit logs be maintained and archived in a way that allows for efficient and effective retrieval , viewing , and analysis , and that the logs be protected from corruption , alteration , or deletion . irs did not consistently audit and monitor security - relevant system activity on its applications . according to irs officials , irs did not capture auditable events for its procurement application as a result of system performance issues . therefore , no audit reports were being reviewed by managers for this application . in addition , irs was unable to effectively monitor activity for its administrative financial system because the volume of the information in the log made it difficult for irs officials to systematically analyze targeted activities and security - relevant events or archive logs . as a result , unauthorized access could go undetected , and the agency's ability to trace or recreate events in the event of a system modification or disruption could be diminished .