facilitated resolution meetings . facilitators are used to help parties resolve a dispute during a resolution meeting . michigan reported that resolution meetings are facilitated by special education attorneys and help encourage parties to resolve a dispute before it goes to a due process hearing . parent - to - parent assistance . what are the views of stakeholders regarding the value of alternative methods for resolving disputes ? how do education's performance measures related to dispute resolution compare to leading practices in performance measurement ? to describe the recent trends in methods used to resolve idea disputes , we analyzed data collected by education and compiled by the national center on dispute resolution in special education operated by the consortium for appropriate dispute resolution in special education ( cadre ) for all states , the district of columbia , and u.s. territories from school year 2004-05 through 2011-12 — the most recent data available at the time we did our work . we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as education's policies , procedures and guidance to gain an understanding of requirements related to dispute resolution . we assessed the reliability of dispute resolution data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we supplemented trend data with information on dispute resolution that we collected in a web - based , self - administered survey of special education directors ( or other officials performing that role ) in all states and u.s. territories ( 60 entities in total ) .the questionnaire in consultation with subject matter specialists , special education stakeholders , and state special education directors , which we selected for their knowledge of special education dispute resolution . for example , we consulted two organizations that collaborated on a prior survey of state directors of special education on dispute resolution . survey data collection took place from late 2013 through january 2014 and we obtained a 100 percent response rate . we designed and tested to describe the views of stakeholders regarding the value of alternative methods for resolving disputes , we collected responses in a survey of state and territory special education directors and conducted other activities . we asked survey questions about the perceived importance of alternative methods for resolving disputes as well as challenges faced and assistance received in implementing these methods . in addition to states' views on alternative dispute resolution , we also collected information from national organizations and subject matter specialists in special education , including organizations representing states , school districts , parents , and students , which we selected based on their knowledge of special education dispute resolution . to obtain the perspective of parents of children with disabilities , we gathered the perspectives of organizations representing the views and rights of these parents .