exception . employed physicians are rewarded for meeting certain clinical outcome quality measures , such as diabetes glucose measures and pediatric immunizations , as well as patient satisfaction measures . the program only includes the hospital's employed physicians , who constitute less than 10 percent of the physicians who provide services at the hospital . as a result , this financial incentive program does not align incentives between the health system and independent physicians who have privileges at the hospital . to incentivize quality improvement on a broader scale , hospital officials told us they were able to use another stark law exception to implement a separate financial incentive program to include independent physicians . specifically , because the health system had a health plan component , the health system was able to use the physician incentive plan exception in creating a financial incentive program for independent physicians to reward them for meeting a separate set of quality measures — the healthcare effectiveness data information set ( hedis ) . the physician incentive plan exception permits financial incentive plans that are administered and paid through health plans under certain conditions . hospitals or health systems without a health plan component would have to design a financial incentive program to fit into other exceptions to include independent physicians . additionally , operating multiple financial incentive programs covering different populations of physicians may create potential inefficiencies through redundancy or conflicting program objectives . in addition , most of the legal experts we spoke with told us that it is difficult for health systems to navigate the stark law , and one legal expert told us that as a result health systems have terminated existing financial incentive programs or refrained from starting new programs . some legal experts also told us that the requirements for complying with the stark exceptions are difficult to apply when crafting financial incentive programs . in particular , they told us it is challenging to establish whether incentive payments meet the stark fair market value exception , which in part requires that compensation be consistent with fair market value of services provided . one legal expert we spoke with noted that the stark law's fair market value exception potentially applies to payments from hospitals to physicians . for salary , the fair market value exception can be satisfied by using published surveys of wages to determine the fair market value of services provided . however , according to this legal expert , the exception becomes more difficult to apply when trying to determine the fair market value in connection with incentive payments , separate from compensation , for meeting performance goals . specifically , some legal experts told us that the exception is unclear about how to measure the fair market value of services when those services involve meeting a clinically based outcome measure for a financial incentive program to improve quality . additionally , it would be difficult to calculate the value of services not provided as a result of the physician providing higher quality care leading to better health outcomes .