we found examples of both . for example , we examined a selected sample of 14 v&v data anomalies at doe sites in new mexico . gsa flagged the buildings for being very small — office buildings less than 400 square feet and warehouses less than 64 square feet — and found that the information in the public database was correct . figure 3 illustrates how such information flagged as being questionable , is actually correct according to gsa's reporting rules for agencies , which specify data categories , such as the types of buildings gsa considers to be warehouses . specifically , gsa flagged assets at doe's los alamos and sandia national laboratories because their square footage fell below certain amounts . but , in reality , these assets met gsa's criteria for offices and warehouses despite being small . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . costs related to the everyday functions of an asset code to identify an installation ( i.e . buildings , structures , land or any combination of these ) code to identify a part of an installation ( i.e . buildings , structures , land or any combination of these ) building name or the name of an entire installation ( such as an agency campus ) total number of full and part time federal employees total number of full and part time contract employees identifies whether an asset is part of a field office ( any location that is not the headquarters location for the agency ) . in addition to the contact named above , keith cunningham ( assistant director ) , lynn filla - clark ( analyst - in - charge ) , melissa bodeau , george depaoli , james duke , rami khalfani , terence lam , john mingus , joshua ormond , crystal wesco , and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report . we also found instances where an agency verified information as correct that was incorrect . figure 4 illustrates examples data validated as correct that was actually erroneous . specifically , an agency erroneously reported water towers and antenna arrays as office buildings . staff responsible for managing the v&v process for their agency's assets said that they did not always consult the personnel with the best knowledge of the assets in resolving anomalies . instead , they relied on their own judgment when determining whether to forward the anomalies to asset managers to ultimately check the data and correct any errors . this resulted in some errors going uncorrected . thresholds — the points at which gsa flags data as anomalies — lead to a large number of data elements flagged , which can challenge the resources of affected agencies . officials at two of our selected agencies said that the number of anomalies that the v&v process produces annually overwhelms their ability to validate the data . the large number of unresolved v&v anomalies appears to support this conclusion .