staffing rating . nursing homes self - report staffing hours for a 2-week period at the time of the routine survey . cms converts the reported point - in - time staffing hours for nursing staff — registered nurses , licensed practical nurses , and certified nursing assistants — into measures that indicate the number of registered nurse and total nursing hours per resident per day . we define key methodological decisions as those that at least six members of cms's technical expert panel recalled as eliciting the most intense review and discussion during the development of the five - star system . according to the panel experts , one key methodological decision was how to combine the component ratings to create an overall rating . the other two key methodological decisions pertain to how to create ratings that account for variation in the type of care provided across nursing homes . specifically , the second key methodological decision the experts recalled was whether to exclude hospital - based nursing homes or set up separate ratings for hospital - based and freestanding nursing homes.experts recalled was whether the staffing rating should be based on nursing staffing levels that are adjusted to reflect resident acuity . the third key methodological decision the how to combine the component ratings to create an overall rating . one key methodological decision that cms made was deciding how to best combine the health inspection , quality measure , and staffing component ratings to create an overall rating . technical expert panel members told us that they discussed how much weight should be assigned to each component when combining the component ratings to calculate the overall rating . one technical expert panel member told us that , in the end , the members generally agreed to assign more weight to the health inspection and staffing components and less weight to the quality measure component , which reflects differences in the perceived validity and reliability of the data used to calculate these components . consistent with the technical expert panel's proposal , cms decided to assign overall ratings to each nursing home by starting with the health inspection rating , then adding or subtracting stars if the nursing home's staffing or quality measure rating was particularly high or low , with a minimum and maximum rating of one and five stars , respectively . whether to exclude hospital - based nursing homes or set up separate ratings for hospital - based and freestanding nursing homes . another key methodological decision that cms made was whether to exclude nursing homes that are hospital - based from the five - star system or to set up separate ratings for hospital - based and freestanding nursing homes . cms's five - star system contractor stated that hospital - based facilities may typically provide a different type of care than freestanding facilities . that is , hospital - based facilities may provide care to more acute residents who require more extensive services than freestanding facilities . however , one senior cms official told us that some hospital - based and freestanding facilities may provide care to similar types of residents .