section 73 ( 22 u.s.c . ยง 2797b ) : under this section , subject to exceptions , the president shall impose sanctions when the president determines that a foreign persons have knowingly exported , transferred , or otherwise engaged in the trade of missile equipment or technology controlled under the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) that contributes to the acquisition , design , development , or production of missiles in a country that is not an mtcr adherent . the data filed into aes includes the recipient country . until recently , filers of export data designated the recipient country by choosing a two - letter international standard country code . data filers also designate the type of good being exported from a list of more than 8,000 internationally harmonized commodity codes . according to these statistics , the united states exported worldwide nearly $1.3 trillion during 2008 . u.s. exports to iran are severely restricted by u.s. laws and regulations . ยง 2798 ) : under this section , the president is required to sanction , subject to certain exceptions , foreign persons the president determines to have knowingly and materially contributed , through the export of certain goods or technology or any other transaction not already subject to sanctions under the export administration act , to the efforts of certain foreign countries to use , develop , produce , stockpile , or otherwise acquire chemical or biological weapons . the sanctions are a ban on u.s. government procurement from the foreign person and a ban on imports into the united states from the foreign person for at least 12 months . after a year of imposing the sanctions , the president may waive the sanctions by certifying to congress that doing so is important to the national security interests of the united states . export administration act portions of this act require the president to sanction foreign persons that are determined to have ( 1 ) provided to certain countries missile equipment or technology or ( 2 ) contributed to certain countries' acquisition of chemical or biological weapons . section 11b ( 50 app . ยง 2410b ) : subject to certain exceptions , the president shall impose sanctions when the president determines that a foreign person has knowingly exported , transferred , or otherwise engaged in the trade of any mtcr equipment or technology that contributes to the design , development , or production of missiles in a non - mtcr country . the section also calls for sanctions on persons who have conspired or attempted to engage in or facilitated such export , transfer , or trade . the president shall also impose sanctions under this act if the president makes a determination with respect to a foreign person under section 73 ( a ) of the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c . ยง 2797b ( a ) ) ( discussed above ) . depending on circumstances specified in this section , sanctions could include a 2-year denial of specified licenses for the transfer to the sanctioned person of aeca - controlled missile equipment or technology and a 2-year ban on imports into the united states of products produced by the foreign person .