aoc is working to correct these weaknesses . to further improve financial management , aoc is developing an agencywide internal control framework and a cost accounting system , which are essential to improving accountability across all aoc operations . the internal control framework initiative is scheduled to be implemented by june 30 , 2006 , while the cost accounting system is scheduled to be implemented by september 30 , 2006 . however , this schedule is likely to be delayed by a lack of funding and qualified staffing resources . at the beginning of fiscal year 2006 , aoc requested the contractors leading these initiatives to significantly scale back their development efforts , citing a lack of fiscal year 2006 funding resources . while aoc has also made progress in financial management and it management , substantial work remains to fulfill recommendations related to these areas , particularly in financial management . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . under the congressional mandate to monitor the architect of the capitol's ( aoc ) progress , we evaluated aoc's response to 54 recommendations in seven areas: strategic management , human capital management , project management , worker safety , recycling , financial management , and information technology ( it ) management . we provided briefings on our work in september 2005 . appendix iv lists all 54 recommendations and details aoc's progress on each recommendation . appendix iv also includes the most recent recommendations resulting from our review of aoc's project management and facilities management . aoc has implemented 21 of 54 recommendations and is making progress primarily in the areas of strategic management , human capital management , project management ( discussed in detail in app . ii ) , worker safety , and recycling , although work remains in all of these areas . however , aoc still needs to improve communication with external stakeholders . for example , aoc has not fully implemented protocols to establish and clarify service and expectation levels with congressional stakeholders . without such protocols , neither aoc nor congressional stakeholders can be assured that agency efforts and resources are targeted to their highest priorities . the acting chief operating officer ( coo ) recognizes the importance of communication with congressional members and staff . since october 2005 , the acting coo has been meeting regularly with congressional stakeholders , including appropriations committee staff , and is developing further strategies to improve communication with congressional stakeholders . aoc is also in the process of hiring a director of congressional and external relations who will be responsible for developing and maintaining positive relations with congressional members and staff . in addition , aoc has not developed a comprehensive set of outcome - based and performance - based measures that would enable aoc and congress to assess aoc's progress . aoc has developed a document — the “aoc dashboard” — that includes several high - level indicators to track performance for each of its strategic goals as well as a target goal for each indicator . the dashboard is a positive step that needs further development as aoc revises its goals and objectives and assign measures to each area in fiscal year 2006 .