wages . responses to our american samoa large - employer questionnaire indicate that the hourly wages of about three - quarters of private sector workers employed by respondents were low enough to be affected by the first $.50 minimum wage increase , in july 2007 . from 2007 to 2009 , as a result of the first three wage increases , median hourly wages rose by almost $1.50 ( 44 percent ) among tuna canning workers employed by questionnaire respondents , compared with $1.00 ( 25 percent ) among other private sector respondents' employees . in addition , the 2007 through 2009 wage increases narrowed the wage gap between the lowest and highest paid employees of questionnaire respondents by 37 percent . like for the funeral yesterday , we are required to contribute a lot of money , such as $100 per person . we will have to ask people at work if they can share money . right now , if someone at work has a coffee , we all share it.” workers said purchasing power has decreased because wages rose less than prices . “prices have gone up , stretching incomes.” “we still can't afford things with the raise , because the cost of living is going up more.” cannery workers generally oppose future minimum wage increases , although the higher wage is welcomed by some . “they should stop increasing wages . it's enough — we should stop right now . everyone wants the minimum wage to stop right now.” “we are begging — we don't want the $.50.” “i don't support any more increases in the minimum wage and don't support petitions to reduce it to the first $.50 increase level . because going back to the initial increase when cost of living is so high doesn't make sense , unless there is a system to reduce the cost of living . i support leaving the minimum wage as is , with no increase or decrease.” non - cannery - workers expressed varying views about the future minimum wage increases . “it has to happen . the cost of living will go up whether you have the raise or not . i support the minimum wage because of this.” “the person who goes from $4 to $7.25 won't come out ahead , because everything they purchase will cost more , decreasing buying power.” “with the prospect of losing the canneries , it is not good in the short term . but it is positive in the long term: 10 to 15 years from now . the economy will have to adjust . it will not be in a poverty state . it will be painful , but it has to happen. in the cnmi , the first minimum wage increase raised wages for about a third of workers of private sector employers that responded to gao's questionnaire . based on june 2009 wage data from our questionnaire , the future minimum wage increases would affect the wages of 82 percent of those private sector workers by 2015 . cnmi government data show that following the 2007 wage increase , employment continued an existing downward trend largely reflecting the garment factory closures .