some of these technical challenges are discussed below . the overall fcs capabilities are heavily dependent on a high quality of service — good information , delivered fast and reliable — from the network . however , the army is proceeding with development of the entire fcs system of systems before demonstrating that the network will deliver as expected . many developmental efforts will need to be successful for the network to perform as expected . for each effort , a product — whether software or hardware — must first be delivered and then demonstrated individually and collectively . the success of these efforts is essential to the high quality of service the network must provide to each unit of action . in some cases , an individual technology may be a linchpin — that is , if it does not work , the network's performance may be unacceptable . in other cases , lower than expected performance across a number of individual technologies could collectively degrade network performance below acceptable levels . some key challenges are highlighted below: system of systems common operating environment is a software layer that enables interoperability with external systems and manages the distribution of information and software applications across the distributed network of fcs systems . the concept has a number of progressive features . for example , it provides an architecture within which individual systems will be designed — an improvement over designing systems independently and making them interoperable after the fact . a decade after the cold war ended , the army recognized that its combat force was not well suited to perform the operations it faces today and is likely to face in the future . the army's heavy forces had the necessary firepower but required extensive support and too much time to deploy . its light forces could deploy rapidly but lacked firepower . to address this mismatch , the army decided to radically transform itself into a new “future force.” the army expects the future force to be organized , manned , equipped , and trained for prompt and sustained land combat , requiring a responsive , technologically advanced , and versatile force . as a result , the program initiated a series of trade studies to examine and reassess bandwidth requirements of various fcs assets . the results of these studies may have a dramatic effect on the fcs network . these qualities are intended to ensure the future force's long - term dominance over evolving , sophisticated threats . the future force will be offensively oriented and will employ revolutionary operational concepts , enabled by new technology . this effort will also require new updated joint tactical radio system hardware and new antennas in addition to a new waveform . sophisticated attackers could compromise the security of the fcs network , which is critical to the success of the system of systems concept . such an attack could degrade the systems' war - fighting ability and jeopardize the security of army soldiers . the army is developing specialized protection techniques as there is only limited commercial or government software currently available that will adequately protect a mobile network like the one proposed for fcs . fcs increment 1 includes four classes of uavs that cover increasing areas of responsibility .