assistance . while the biggert - waters act eliminated subsidies for severe repetitive loss properties and for prospective policyholders who refuse to accept any offer for mitigation assistance ( including an offer to relocate ) following a major disaster , properties not built to meet a community's flood resistant requirements or in the highest - risk zones could face more severe damages in the event of a flood . insurance industry stakeholders agreed that mitigation could be used to reduce future financial risk for nfip . stakeholders we spoke to for this report also commented that since such mitigation measures often are done at the community level , offering community - based policies could help encourage more mitigation . this is consistent with our prior work in which local officials generally support increased mitigation efforts.incorporating community - based flood insurance into nfip could help leverage community resources for mitigation projects that would benefit the entire community , rather than individual structures . for example , floodplain mangers noted that with a community - based policy , the local unit of government could assess fees on all properties benefitting from community mitigation measures . in addition , because the premium rate would be on a community versus structure basis , the community , not the property owner , generally would make development or neighborhood - type decisions that either increased or decreased risk in the community . industry stakeholders also commented that disadvantages associated with mitigation as an option to reduce the financial impact of the subsidized policies include the expense to nfip , taxpayers , and communities . for example , implementing mitigation measures for tens of thousands of properties that continue to receive subsidized rates could take a number of years to complete , which could have an on - going risk to nfip's financial health . we have previously reported that increasing mitigation would be costly and require increased funding . furthermore , we found in our past and current work that buyouts and relocations would be more costly in certain areas of the country and in some cases the cost for mitigating older structures might be prohibitive . the effectiveness of mitigation efforts could be limited by fema's reliance on local communities with varying resources . for example , not all communities have the staff or resources to fully carry out mitigation , meet cost - sharing requirements , and enforce compliance . as we reported in 2008 , even when federal funds are made available to a community and property owners are interested in mitigating their properties , property owners still may have to pay a portion of the mitigation expenses , which could discourage participation in mitigation efforts . in interviews for this report , stakeholders said that mitigation was expensive and that as premiums are increased to full - risk rates , some means of assistance would be helpful for policyholders who may have difficulty paying for mitigation efforts . mitigation costs would have to be weighed against mitigation benefits ( possible savings from a decrease in flood damage ) .