nebr . ga. tex . while the pher grants were critical to state and local jurisdictions , officials from state and local jurisdictions reported experiencing challenges with the administrative requirements of the pher grants . astho reported that state officials found the need to submit multiple applications for the various phases of the grant , and the time spent waiting for approvals , to be time consuming during the response . additionally , the different limitations on the use of funds in each phase made it difficult for states to plan and manage their response activities . some of the local officials we interviewed reported that the specific spending requirements of the pher funding were heavily weighted toward vaccination activities and that funds were neither flexible nor sufficient enough to address epidemiology and laboratory expenses . officials from washington's department of health , for example , echoed this concern and told us that some local health jurisdictions in the state did not have enough funding for surveillance and laboratory expenses , but had more than enough designated for vaccination activities . almost half of states applied for the last phase of funding — and 15 states received the funds — which were available in early 2010 for targeting special , hard - to - reach populations for vaccination . in most cases , the states were not eligible for these funds because they had sufficient funds left over from the previous three phases to conduct vaccination outreach to hard - to - reach , high - risk populations . cdc officials who worked on the pher grant program said they were aware of the challenges that states faced with the grant process and were working on addressing some of these challenges in preparation for the next public health emergency . to reduce the time that it takes for funding to reach the states , cdc officials identified ways to save time for various procedures , such as preparing draft grant guidance in advance of public health emergencies . additionally , cdc officials told us that they are working with astho to help states be better prepared to quickly use federal funding that might become available in an emergency situation . for example , cdc officials noted that states with independent local health jurisdictions could establish draft contracts with these local health jurisdictions so that funding could flow more quickly down to the local level . in addition to these measures , cdc officials are working with their general counsel's office to look at any authorities that they may have to move funds through existing cooperative agreements in an emergency . cdc officials also agreed that the phases of the pher grants were heavily weighted toward vaccination , but noted that they made that decision because of the anticipation that the vaccination campaign would be the largest component of the public health response . in august 2010 , the state and local jurisdictions received a no - cost extension that allows them to spend the pher grant funds through july 2011 . cdc expects to have detailed data regarding the ways that states spent these funds after the grant program expires .