the department concurred with this recommendation . the effectiveness of the army's cdrt process is also inhibited by the lack of a system to track , monitor , and manage this equipment , which , in turn , may be attributed to the absence of a single focal point with the appropriate authority to oversee the fielding and disposition of tactical nonstandard equipment . as stated above , to qualify as a candidate for consideration in the cdrt process , a piece of tactical nonstandard equipment must first be nominated . but without a system or entity responsible for tracking , monitoring , and managing all items of tactical nonstandard equipment in its inventory , some capabilities in the centcom theater may not be nominated and , therefore , never considered by the cdrt community of interest . according to federal best practices reported in gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , management is responsible for developing detailed policies , procedures , and practices to help program managers achieve desired results through effective stewardship of public resources . to this end , in march 2011 we reported that dod lacks visibility over the full range of its urgent needs efforts — one of the methods though which tactical nonstandard equipment is obtained and fielded — including tracking the solutions developed in response to those needs . additionally , we found that dod does not have a senior - level focal point to lead the department's efforts to fulfill validated urgent needs requirements . accordingly , we recommended that dod designate a focal point to lead the department's urgent needs efforts and that dod and its components , like the army , develop processes and requirements to ensure tools and mechanisms are used to track , monitor , and manage the status of urgent needs . dod concurred with our recommendation and stated that it would develop baseline policies that would guide the services' own processes in tracking urgent needs and that the director of the joint rapid acquisition cell would serve as the dod focal point . in april 2010 the vice chief of staff of the army issued a memorandum calling for the development of a rapid acquisition / rapid equipping common operating picture and collaboration tool , as a means to increase the efficiency and transparency of army urgent needs processes . as of april 2011 , however , army officials stated that the system directed by the vice chief of staff had yet to be deployed due to a lack of agreement over information sharing and over who would be responsible for the system . because army officials have repeatedly stressed that they do not have visibility over the entire universe of tactical nonstandard equipment in the centcom theater and consider only those capabilities that have been nominated , in the absence of a common operating picture and a single focal point responsible for tracking , monitoring , and managing army tactical nonstandard equipment it is possible that a piece of nonstandard equipment may exist in the centcom theater that is either more effective , less expensive , or both , than a comparable piece of equipment that has been considered by the cdrt community of interest .