pub . 111-22 , sec . 204 ( d ) , codified at 12 u.s.c . § 1823 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( g ) ( ii ) . the agencies believe this confirms the fdic's authority to provide assistance to bank holding companies under tlgp because congress did not simultaneously amend the exception to explicitly prohibit such assistance going forward . we agree the amendment provides some support for the agencies' position under a general tenet of statutory construction that congressional awareness of an agency's practice in implementing a statute , without striking down that practice , indicates congressional acquiescence in the agency's interpretation . second , the agencies maintain that their interpretation of any ambiguous aspects of the systemic risk exception warrants substantial deference under the supreme court's decision in chevron u.s.a. v. natural resources defense council , 467 u.s. 837 ( 1984 ) , and related cases . under chevron , when the meaning of a statute is unclear , either because the statute is silent on an issue or the language is ambiguous , an interpretation by an agency charged with the statute's administration warrants substantial deference provided the interpretation is reasonable , even if it is not the only interpretation or the best interpretation . whether and to what extent deference is warranted depends on factors including the agency's specialized expertise in implementing the statute , whether the agency's interpretation has been subjected to public scrutiny through public notice - and - comment rulemaking , and whether its interpretation is consistent with its previous pronouncements . united states v. mead corp. , 533 u.s. 218 , 227-29 ( 2001 ) ( citations omitted ) . under mead , chevron deference is warranted where the interpretation is made as part of an agency rulemaking or other agency action that congress intended to carry the force of law , and , even if chevron deference is not warranted , lesser deference is warranted under skidmore v. swift , 323 u.s. 134 ( 1944 ) , if the agency's interpretation is “persuasive” based on factors such as the thoroughness and validity of the agency's reasoning , the consistency of its interpretation over time , and the formality of its action . we believe these deference principles have some force as applied to the systemic risk exception and tlgp . congress did not explicitly address whether fdic may provide systemic risk relief directly to bank holding companies or healthy open banks , and a court arguably could find that the statute's authorization of “other action or assistance under this section” is ambiguous . if it did , we believe the agencies' reading might merit at least some degree of deference . congress charged these three financial regulatory agencies with implementing the systemic risk exception , and charged fdic with implementing other provisions of the fdi act related to this exception . the agencies interpreted the exception to authorize assistance to holding companies , other bank affiliates , and non - troubled banks as part of the systemic risk determination , and fdic exercised its general rulemaking authority to issue regulations establishing tlgp , including regulations providing for assistance to these entities . according to the agencies , their interpretation of what “other action or .