resolution . intended to accommodate existing treatment streams and new treatment streams . returns will be routed systemically to the best treatment stream , opened into the treatment stream's inventory and , if applicable , the system will send an initial contact letter to the taxpayer . prevention . in addition to the individual named above , the following staff made key contributions to this report: sabine paul , assistant director ; chris businsky ; mary evans ; rebecca eyler , nancy glover , james macaulay ; paul middleton ; bradley roach ; and karl seifert . intended to automatically integrate the results of each return's resolution into the detection models . the results can be used to help target education and outreach efforts to taxpayers and preparers on how to avoid unintentional noncompliance . the system is also intended to allow analysis and identification of fraud and noncompliance not identified by the predictive detection models . there are a number of approaches that can be utilized by an investment . irs's enterprise lifecycle methodology includes the following approaches: waterfall , planned maintenance , iterative , and managed services . waterfall is a sequential development of a solution with planned reviews and formal approvals required before continuation of work . the planned maintenance approach manages change in an organized manner , minimizes the disruption caused by frequent system changes , and increases the efficiency and effectiveness of the system change process . additionally , the iterative approach is an adaptive development approach in which projects start with a conceptual vision of the solution and end with deployment , with repeated cycles of requirements discovery , development , and testing in between . finally , the managed services approach is designed to capitalize on the benefits of managed services provided by either an outside service , internal business processes , and / or existing infrastructure service provider . this provides useful information on the requirements of how a project is to progress through the life cycle . contract type: for purposes of this report , this can be broken down into two categories . the irs.gov investment consists of a public user portal — irs.gov , a registered user portal , and an employee user portal . the key goals of the program include simplifying and transforming the user web experience , consolidating and advancing irs web technology to industry standards , implementing a high - performing contract structure and terms , and marketing competitive costs throughout the program's life cycle . actual spent to date: $560.118 million current life - cycle phase: mixed ( development , modernization and enhancement , and operations and maintenance ) provide a cost effective and affordable program cost structure ; and transition successfully from the old programs to the new program . the modernized e - file ( mef ) investment is the primary system to receive and process all tax returns submitted electronically . when mef receives an electronic tax return , the system determines if it satisfies the acceptance rules required for further processing . mef is intended to benefit the tax preparation community and enables the irs to answer questions quickly and helps to resolve issues .