selecting it investments . successful organizations identify , use , and store comprehensive data — including a business case that defines the life cycle cost estimate and benefits to be realized — in order to support investment decision making . reselecting ongoing projects is an important part of this critical process ; if a project is not meeting established goals and objectives , the organization must make a decision on whether or not to continue to fund it . controlling it investments . organizations should have a documented , well - defined process for overseeing ongoing investments once they have been selected . effective investment oversight and evaluation involves , among other things , ( 1 ) comparing actual performance against cost and schedule estimates ; and ( 2 ) assessing whether projects are meeting expectations against developmental milestones using predefined criteria and decision gates , and taking corrective actions when expectations are not being met . reviewing it investments after deployment . once the project has transitioned from the development phase to the operations and maintenance phase , organizations should conduct a post - implementation review to compare actual investment results with decision makers' expectations for cost , schedule , performance , and mission improvement outcomes . the lessons learned from these reviews can be used to modify future investment management decision making . in 2013 , usda issued updated policies and guidance that are generally consistent with these practices . of five key practices in executive - level it governance , fsa partially implemented two practices and did not implement three practices . specifically , fsa partially implemented steps to institute a governance board . it established a governance structure and process for midas ; however , its governance process was ineffective in preventing midas from falling short of expectations . specifically , fsa did not implement key steps for selecting and controlling investments , including establishing a comprehensive business case or life cycle cost estimate and comparing actual performance against estimates . also , fsa partially implemented post - implementation review practices . the agency tasked a contractor with assessing the results and lessons learned from portions of midas that were implemented ; however , it did not conduct a comprehensive review of the lessons learned on the program as a whole . table 5 identifies the extent to which usda and fsa implemented key executive governance practices for midas . the governance of midas was ineffective , in part , because usda's office of the cio did not ensure that midas followed its policies and guidance for it governance . in 2011 , we reported that governance boards had not been reviewing midas at key decision points using criteria defined in department guidance and recommended that the department and agency collaborate to document how the department is meeting its policy for it investment management for midas , to include investment reviews.not address it while midas was in development . according to fsa officials , usda did not have guidance for it governance providing defined decision gates with standard criteria and documentation while the department agreed with our recommendation , it did requirements .