missouri . the pharmacy board in missouri has taken a different approach from other states: it is in the process of implementing random batch testing of compounded drugs . no other state has random testing , according to an nabp official . random testing will include both sterile and nonsterile compounded drugs and the board plans on testing compounded drugs for safety , quality , and potency . a missouri pharmacy board official said testing will include random samples of compounded drugs in stock in pharmacies in anticipation of regular prescriptions , random selection of prescriptions that were just prepared , and testing of compounded drugs obtained by undercover investigators posing as patients . the official added that random testing will help to ensure the safety and quality of compounded drugs and is also intended to serve as a deterrent for anyone who might consider purposely tampering with compounded prescriptions . north carolina . north carolina is the only state in the country that requires mandatory adverse event reporting involving prescription drugs , including compounded drugs , according to an napb official . regulations in north carolina require pharmacy managers to report information to the pharmacy board that suggests a probability that prescription drugs caused or contributed to the death of a patient . this reporting system , which does not extend to incidents of illness or injury , allows the board to investigate all prescription - drug - related deaths and determine whether an investigation is warranted . vermont . the pharmacy board in vermont overhauled the state's pharmacy rules in august 2003 to address changes in pharmacy practice , including the increase in internet and mail - order pharmacies , according to the pharmacy board chairman . for example , the chairman reported that prior to the adoption of the new rules , vermont had no definition of out - of - state pharmacies and no requirements for these pharmacies to have a vermont license to do business in the state . the board chairman said that the new rule requiring licensing for out - of - state pharmacies would provide a mechanism to monitor pharmacies that ship prescription drugs , including compounded drugs , into the state . in addition , he added that the board revised the rules for compounding sterile drugs by including specifics on facilities , equipment , and quality assurance measures . wyoming . prior to march 2003 , wyoming did not have state laws or rules that established specific guidelines for drug compounding , aside from a definition of drug compounding , according to a pharmacy board official . the new rules include requirements for facilities , equipment , labeling , and record keeping for compounded drugs , as well as a specific section on compounding sterile drugs . in addition , under the new rules , the official added that pharmacy technicians - in - training are no longer allowed to prepare compounded drugs , including sterile products , which is a more complex procedure requiring special equipment to ensure patient safety .