central to this initiative is the part . omb developed part as a diagnostic tool meant to provide a consistent approach to evaluating federal programs and applied it in formulating the president's fiscal year 2004 budget request . part covers four broad topics for all “programs” selected for review: ( 1 ) program purpose and design , ( 2 ) strategic planning , ( 3 ) program management , and ( 4 ) program results ( i.e. , whether a program is meeting its long - term and annual goals ) as well as additional questions that are specific to one of seven mechanisms or approaches used to deliver the program . gpra expanded the supply of performance information generated by federal agencies , although as the part assessments demonstrate , more must be done to develop credible performance information . however , improving the supply of performance information is in and of itself insufficient to sustain performance management and achieve real improvements in management and program results . rather , it needs to be accompanied by a demand for that information by decision makers and managers alike . part may mark a new chapter in performance - based budgeting by more successfully stimulating demand for this information — that is , using the performance information generated through gpra's planning and reporting processes to more directly feed into executive branch budgetary decisions . my statement today focuses on six points: part helped structure omb's use of performance information for its internal program and budget analysis , made the use of this information more transparent , and stimulated agency interest in budget and performance integration . moreover , it illustrated the potential to build on gpra's foundation to more actively promote the use of performance information in budget decisions . much of the potential value of part lies in the related program recommendations and associated improvements , but follow through will require sustained commitment by agencies and omb . omb's efforts in developing part have been considerable , but diagnosing problems and applying ratings are the beginning not the end of part's ambitious agenda . identifying solutions , implementing changes , and providing oversight takes time , and omb needs to be mindful of this as it considers the capacity and workload issues in the part . as is to be expected in the first year of any reform , part is a work in progress and we noted in our report where omb might make improvements . any tool that is sophisticated enough to take into account the complexity of the u.s. government will require some exercise of judgment . therefore it is not surprising that we found some inconsistencies in omb staff interpreting and applying part . in fact , these processes already reflect gpra's influence . part was designed for and is used in the executive branch budget preparation and review process . thus , strategic human capital management is at the heart of government transformation . high - performing organizations strengthen the alignment of their gpra strategic and performance goals with their daily operations . in that regard , performance management systems can be a vital — but currently largely unused tool — to align an organization's operations with individual day - to - day activities .