legislation has been proposed to increase the resource limit . advocacy group officials have also said that the application may be too complex for many elderly and disabled beneficiaries to understand and complete without the assistance of a third party . ssa headquarters officials told us they worked with various focus groups to develop the subsidy application and that they have revised the application several times to address such concerns , but that much of the information that applicants may view as complex is required by the mma . the success of ssa's efforts is uncertain because no reliable data exist on the total number of individuals potentially eligible for the subsidy . using available estimates of the potentially eligible population , ssa approved 32 to 39 percent of the eligible population who were not automatically deemed by cms for the subsidy . according to these estimates by cms , the congressional budget office , and other entities , about 3.4 million to 4.7 million individuals are eligible for the subsidy , but have not yet enrolled ( see table 1. ) in developing these estimates , however , these entities faced the same data limitations as ssa in identifying potentially eligible individuals . ssa officials said that it is unfair to judge the success of its outreach efforts for the subsidy in relation to the estimates of the total eligible population , given the limitations in identifying it . ssa officials stated that their efforts have been successful in meeting their outreach goals . in fact , after almost 2 years of implementation efforts , ssa's participation rate compares favorably to that of the food stamp program , which had a participation rate of 31 percent after its second year of implementation . the low - income subsidy participation rate compares less favorably , however , to that of the supplemental security income program , which had a participation rate of approximately 50 percent among the aged a year after the program began . ssa officials noted that the ssi participation rate included individuals who were automatically transferred from state government programs to ssi , which is somewhat similar to the “deemed” population that was automatically transferred to the low - income subsidy . ssa has collected data and established some goals to monitor its progress in implementing and administering the subsidy benefit , but still lacks data and measurable goals in some key areas . to enable agencies to identify areas in need of improvement , gao internal control standards state that agencies should establish and monitor performance measures and indicators . accordingly , agencies should compare actual performance data against expected goals and analyze the differences . ssa monitors various aspects of its determination process , such as the number of applications received and their outcomes and length of processing , but did not establish a performance goal for processing times until march 2007 . ssa largely relies on an automated process to determine individuals' eligibility for the subsidy . income and resource data provided by the applicant are electronically compared to income data provided by irs and other agencies to determine if the individual meets income and resource requirements . ssa field office staff follow up with individuals in cases where there are conflicting data or questions .