gao - 10-645 . although the white house developed the national strategy for biosurveillance in july 2012 , this strategy does not include information that identifies resource and investment needs as we previously recommended . in june 2010 , we found that there was no integrated approach to help ensure an effective national biosurveillance capability and to provide a framework to help identify and prioritize investments . without a unifying framework ; structure ; and an entity with the authority , resources , time , and responsibility for guiding its implementation , we concluded that it would be very difficult to create an integrated approach to building and sustaining a national biosurveillance capability . national and agency strategies note that coordination is important because a national biosurveillance capability relies on the ability of a complex interagency and intergovernmental network to work together and meet an ever - evolving threat . specifically , we found there was neither a comprehensive national strategy nor a designated focal point with the authority and resources to guide the effort to develop a national biosurveillance capability . we have previously found that developing effective national strategies and establishing a focal point with sufficient responsibility , authority , and resources can help ensure successful implementation of complex interagency and intergovernmental undertakings , such as providing a national biosurveillance capability . we made two recommendations to the white house's homeland security council , which has taken some actions to address them , as shown in table 2 . the national strategy for biosurveillance also does not address issues we raised related to state and local biosurveillance efforts , and that we previously recommended . in october 2011 , we reported that nonfederal capabilities should also be considered in creating a national because the resources that constitute a biosurveillance strategy.national biosurveillance capability are largely owned by nonfederal entities , a national strategy that considers how to strengthen and leverage nonfederal partners could improve efforts to build and maintain a national biosurveillance capability . moreover , efforts to build the capability would benefit from a framework that facilitates assessment of nonfederal jurisdictions' baseline capabilities and critical gaps across the entire biosurveillance enterprise . in 2011 , we found that although the federal government did provide some resources to help control disease in humans and animals in tribal and insular areas , there were no specific efforts to ensure that states and local agencies can contribute to the national biosurveillance capability . in addition , we noted that the federal government had not conducted a comprehensive assessment of state and local jurisdictions' ability to contribute to a national biosurveillance capability . while the size , variability , and complexity of the biosurveillance enterprise makes an assessment difficult , we concluded that the federal government would lack key information about the baseline status , strengths , weaknesses , and gaps across the biosurveillance enterprise until it conducts an assessment of nonfederal biosurveillance capabilities .