no marine or uscg assets are in this region . cbp's operational areas include approximately 200 miles of the arizona / mexico border , while ice's area includes the entire 363-mile arizona / mexico border . as of november 2004 , the agencies had fixed wing aircraft and helicopters to cover this area . challenges in the area include covering the large desert areas on the u.s. border with mexico under extreme high and low temperatures . to meet these challenges , aircraft need to be able to operate in desert areas , to fly low to track migrants , and to be able to transport agents to key locations to conduct foot patrols . dhs's border and transportation security directorate initiated a major enforcement coordination effort in the tucson region — the arizona border control initiative — to help detect and deter terrorist activities and cross - border illegal trafficking of people and drugs in the tucson border region . cbp , ice , and other agencies combined their efforts and assets to help carry out this initiative , which was conducted from march to september 2004 . cbp's border patrol personnel were significantly increased to help conduct this initiative . fiscal year 2005 appropriations language also generally prohibits cbp from transferring aircraft or related equipment to agencies outside dhs without the prior approval of the house and senate appropriations committees but does not prohibit sharing within dhs . the department of homeland security plays a critical role in strengthening efforts by the united states to combat terrorist threats , in part by coordinating a vast array of resources that protect our borders . one of the ongoing challenges facing the department is balancing the need for a department - level coordinated , integrated approach to implementing border security while supporting the efforts of agencies with border security responsibilities , including the united states coast guard , customs and border protection , and immigration and customs enforcement , as they fulfill their missions in the field . part of this challenge involves determining how agency air and marine assets can best be coordinated locally to optimize their effectiveness while avoiding duplication of efforts and resources . the department has begun to address this challenge by identifying opportunities for the border security agencies to improve the efficient use of their air and marine assets - - airplanes , helicopters , and boats - - and proposing broad plans and time frames for further analysis and development of implementation plans . in order to maximize operational and cost efficiencies in the use of assets for border security , it is important to clarify how field units should work together and under what circumstances . this clarification will help ensure that the mix of services at the nation's borders and the enforcement of border security are carried out in an efficient and integrated fashion , as stated in dhs's 2004 strategic plan . local unit officials said the degree of coordination varied . in all locations , unit officials told us that while they coordinate the use of their assets , they would not physically share or turn over control of an asset to another agency .