we found some discrepancies . these discrepancies may explain , in part , the differential findings regarding the impact of wire - based competition reported by fcc , which found a nearly 7 percent reduction in cable rates , and our finding of a 15 percent reduction in cable rates . because the congress and fcc use this information in their monitoring and oversight of the cable industry , the lack of reliable information in fcc's report on these two issues — factors underlying cable rate increases and the effect of competition — may compromise the ability of the congress and fcc to fulfill these roles . additionally , the potential for this information to be used in debate regarding important policy decisions , such as media consolidation , also necessitates reliable information in fcc's report . as a result , we recommended that the chairman of fcc improve the reliability , consistency , and relevance of information on cable rates and competition in the subscription video industry by ( 1 ) taking immediate steps to improve its cable rate survey and ( 2 ) reviewing the commission's process for maintaining the classification of effective competition . in commenting on our report , fcc agreed to make changes to its annual cable rate survey in an attempt to obtain more accurate information , but questioned , on a cost / benefit basis , the utility of revising its process to keep the classification of effective competition in franchises up to date . we recognize that there are costs associated with fcc's cable rate survey , and we recommend that fcc examine whether cost - effective alternative processes exist that would enhance the accuracy of its effective competition designations . increases in expenditures on cable programming contribute to higher cable rates . a majority of cable operators and cable networks , and all financial analysts that we interviewed told us that high programming costs contributed to rising cable rates . on the basis of financial data supplied to us by 9 cable operators , we found that these operators' yearly programming expenses , on a per - subscriber basis , increased from $122 in 1999 to $180 in 2002 — a 48 percent increase . almost all of the cable operators we interviewed cited sports programming as a major contributor to higher programming costs . on the basis of our analysis of kagan world media data , the average license fees for a cable network that shows almost exclusively sports - related programming increased by 59 percent , compared to approximately 26 percent for 72 nonsports networks , in the 3 years between 1999 and 2002 . further , the average license fees for the sports networks were substantially higher than the average for the nonsports networks ( see fig . the cable network executives we interviewed cited several reasons for increasing programming costs . we were told that competition among networks to produce and show content that will attract viewers has become more intense . this competition , we were told , has bid up the cost of key inputs ( such as talented writers and producers ) and has sparked more investment in programming .