med . reporting to the under secretary of state for management , med ensures that u.s. government employees and their families who are assigned to diplomatic posts have access to healthcare and advises state management about health issues around the world . the u.s. embassy in havana has a medical unit , including u.s. direct - hire and locally hired staff . med approves requests to medically evacuate u.s. personnel and family members from diplomatic posts . other state entities . other state entities provide support to the u.s. embassy in havana on specific issues . for example , cms , within state's executive secretariat , gathers , assesses , and disseminates information to state senior management about events that threaten the security of u.s. missions and their personnel . the office of foreign missions , which reports to the under secretary of state for management , seeks fair treatment for u.s. personnel abroad while ensuring that foreign diplomats based in the united states receive the same treatment that their respective governments provide to u.s. personnel abroad in return . although m / pri is responsible for initiating and leading state's arb incident vetting process , state's arb policy does not define how m / pri should become aware of incidents that may involve injury , loss of life , or destruction of property . regarding cuba , the u.s. embassy and several state entities responded to incidents that were later associated with various injuries in early 2017 . as of june 2018 , state officials remained uncertain of the cause or perpetrator of the incidents and injuries . m / pri officials said they did not know about the incidents in cuba until august 2017 , when the media began to report on the incidents . although m / pri is responsible for initiating and leading the arb incident vetting process , state's polices do not define responsibilities for internal communication to m / pri of incidents that may involve injury , loss of life , or destruction of property . according to the fam , m / pri and the permanent coordinating committee are responsible for evaluating whether incidents meet the arb statute criteria . however , m / pri can only initiate the process after it is made aware of potentially qualifying incidents , and the fam does not outline how m / pri should be notified of these types of incidents or which , if any , state entities are responsible for notifying m / pri . in contrast , the fam outlines other specific reporting responsibilities for regional security officers . according to state officials and our analysis , state's fam and foreign affairs handbooks do not establish a policy , procedure , or process for internal communication of such incidents to m / pri . in 2006 , the under secretary of state for management issued a cable requiring u.s. diplomatic posts to report potential arb incidents directly to m / pri . however , the cable did not identify who at post was responsible for reporting , and instructed posts to report to an individual who is no longer in m / pri . moreover , state officials we met with were unaware of the cable .