dod does not have visibility over total costs . dod cannot readily identify the cost of its departmentwide urgent needs efforts . based on the information submitted to us in response to our data request , the total funding for the fulfillment of urgent needs is at least $76.9 billion from fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2010 . because dod does not have visibility over all urgent needs efforts and costs , it is not fully able to identify the need for key process improvements and adjust program and budgetary priorities accordingly . dod does not have a comprehensive tracking system . dod cannot readily identify the totality of its urgent needs efforts as well as the cost of such efforts because it has limited visibility over all urgent needs submitted by warfighters — both from joint and service - specific sources . specifically , dod and the services have disparate ways of tracking urgent needs ; some have formal databases to input information while others use more informal methods such as e - mailing to solicit feedback . for example , the joint chiefs of staff and each of the military services utilize electronic databases to track capability solutions as they move through the urgent needs process . however , more than a third of the entities involved in the process did not collect or provide the necessary information for the joint or service - based systems to track those solutions . moreover , there was confusion over whose role it was to collect and input data into these tracking systems . dod does not have a universal set of metrics . the following summarizes these key findings . our analysis found that the feedback mechanisms across dod , the joint staff , the military services , jieddo , and the special operations command are varied and fragmented . in april 2010 , we recommended that dod develop an established , formal feedback mechanism or channel for the military services to provide feedback to the joint chiefs of staff and joint rapid acquisition cell on how well fielded solutions met urgent needs . the department concurred with the recommendation and stated that it would develop new dod policy and that the joint chiefs of staff would update the chairman's instruction to establish requirements for oversight and management of the fulfillment of urgent needs . however , the majority of dod urgent needs entities we surveyed for our march 2011 report said that they do not collect all the data needed to determine how well these solutions are performing . additionally , in april 2010 , we also recommended that dod develop and implement standards for accurately tracking and documenting key process milestones such as funding , acquisition , fielding , and assessment , and for updating data - management systems to create activity reports to facilitate management review and external oversight of the process . dod agreed with these recommendations and noted actions it planned to take to address them . however , our current analysis found that the department lacked a method or metric to track the status of a validated urgent requirement across the services and dod components , such as whether a requirement currently in development could be applicable to another service .