gao . results oriented government: practices that can help enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies . gao - 06-15 . too much sun ? emerging challenges presented by california and federal open meeting legislation to public policy consensus - building processes . sacramento , calif.: center for collaborative policy , 2003 . see esp . chap . 6 , “findings.” brick , philip , donald snow , and sarah van de wetering , eds . across the great divide: explorations in collaborative conservation and the american west . washington , d.c.: island press , 2001 . brody , samuel d. “implementing the principles of ecosystem management through local land use planning.” population and environment , vol . brody , samuel d. “measuring the effects of stakeholder participation on the quality of local plans based on the principles of collaborative ecosystem management.” journal of planning education and research , vol . brody , samuel d. , sean b . cash , jennifer dyke , and sara thornton . “motivations for the forestry industry to participate in collaborative ecosystem management initiatives.” forest policy and economics , vol . brunner , ronald d. , and tim w. clark . “a practice - based approach to ecosystem management.” conservation biology , vol . brunner , ronald d. , christine h. colburn , christina m. cromley , roberta a. klein , and elizabeth a. olson . finding common ground: governance and natural resources in the american west . new haven , conn.: yale university press , 2002 . brunner , ronald d. , toddi a. steelman , lindy coe - juell , christina m. cromley , christine m. edwards , and donna w. tucker . adaptive governance: integrating science , policy , and decision making . new york: columbia university press , 2005 . bryan , todd a . “tragedy averted: the promise of collaboration.” society and natural resources , vol . burns , sam . “a civic conversation about public lands: developing community governance.” journal of sustainable forestry , vol . center for collaborative policy . “conditions needed to sustain a collaborative policy process.” http: / / www.csus.edu / ccp / collaborative / sustain.htm ( last accessed jan. 23 , 2008 ) . cheng , antony s. , and steven e. daniels . “examining the interaction between geographic scale and ways of knowing in ecosystem management: a case study of place - based collaborative planning.” forest science , vol . cheng , antony s. , and katherine m. mattor . “why won't they come ? stakeholder perspectives on collaborative national forest planning by participation level.” environmental management , vol . clagett , matthew patrick . “environmental adr and negotiated rule and policy making: criticisms of the institute for environmental conflict resolution and the environmental protection agency.” tulane environmental law journal , vol . coggins , george cameron . “‘devolution' in federal land law: abdication by any other name…” hastings west - northwest journal of environmental law and policy , vol . coggins , george cameron . “of californicators , quislings and crazies: some perils of devolved collaboration.” chronicle of community , vol . coggins , george cameron . “regulating federal natural resources: a summary case against devolved collaboration.” ecology law quarterly , vol .