this information is contained in appendix i . to identify german actions and plans and how they may affect u.s. cases , we met with german government officials , judges , and lawyers in seven cities in germany during november 2000 . we also interviewed department of state officials in headquarters and in germany . in addition , we reviewed the status and outcome of the 43 u.s. cases that had been opened after german authorities began changing their handling of hague convention cases in july 1999 . more details about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix ii . the 1980 hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction governs how international parental child abduction disputes are adjudicated . it requires that party states identify a lead government agency ( called a “central authority” ) to serve as a central point of contact and to initiate or facilitate judicial or administrative proceedings . the state department's office of children's issues , bureau of consular affairs , is the central authority for the united states . germany has identified the federal prosecutor general as its central authority . the united states and other countries , especially france and the united kingdom , have expressed concerns about german authorities' handling of hague convention cases . in may 1999 , state reported to congress that the german administrative and judicial processing of abduction cases took 18 months or longer , a period state considered unacceptable . in october 2000 , state further reported that the systemic failure of german courts to enforce contempt sanctions allowed abducting parents to resist enforcement of visitation orders indefinitely . in addition , a may 2000 congressional resolution cited germany , along with other countries , for not meeting their commitments under the hague convention . at that time , president clinton and chancellor schroeder , the german head of government , met in berlin and , according to the state department , discussed a number of high - profile abduction cases among other bilateral issues . their meeting resulted in the establishment of a u.s. - german working group on international parental child abductions . the working group met on june 27 , july 24 and 25 , september 25 and 26 , 2000 , and january 8 and 9 , 2001 , to discuss the concerns of each country and to seek solutions . our review focused on congressional concerns about germany's handling of u.s. parental child abduction cases under the hague convention . to gather information for our analysis , we interviewed more than 40 key officials and representatives from the state department , the german government , the hague secretariat in the netherlands , and organizations dedicated to researching and understanding issues associated with international parental child abduction . to identify what actions germany has taken or plans it has under way to address u.s. concerns about germany's handling of parental child abduction cases , we reviewed state department reports from may 1999 to january 2001 that documented systemic problems with germany's implementation of the hague convention and identified german actions taken or planned . these reports also identified state's goals and timetables for germany to take remedial measures .