penalties for violations . federal laws . the national child protection law of 1993 requires the department of justice to conduct a criminal - history check at the request of child care facilities or other youth - serving organizations . this check allows for a fingerprint - based criminal - history search of the fbi's national crime information center database . however , federal law does not require child care facilities to use this service unless the facility is federally owned or operated ( or operated under a federal contract ) . other laws governing the employment of sex offenders relate to facilities that receive federal grants . for example , head start grantees must either conduct a state or national criminal record check before hiring any employee , depending on state law requirements . grantees are prohibited from permanently hiring an individual until these checks h ave been performed , although they may conditionally hire an individual if it isnot feasible to perform a preemployment check . employees are also required to sign a declaration to all pending and prior criminal arrests and ith any charges related to child sexual abuse and their disposition , along w convictions related to other forms of child abuse and neglect and convictions of violent felonies . grantees are then required to determine whether the individual is fit for employment based upon his or her criminal charge or conviction . in addition to requirements for head start grantees , ccdf requires that states certify to the federal government that they have requirements in effect to protect the health and safety of children in child care facilities who are subsidized with these funds . however , the block grant does not dictate to states the specificity , stringency , or number of requirements they must have or the manner in which they should enforce them . ยง 98.41. child care facility . nine additional states more narrowly impose such a prohibition on offenders whose victims were minors . four states also specifically prohibit sex offenders from residing at a facility that provides child care services . criminal - history check requirements . although it is not always clear whether criminal - history checks need to be completed prior to employment , all 50 states require such checks for owners and employees of licensed child care facilities . however , the requirements for licensing vary widely . only 3 states appear to require criminal - history checks for all licensed and unlicensed child care facilities , while 11 states require that all facilities that receive state or federal funds perform these checks . in addition , 23 states require criminal - history checks for adult residents at licensed child care or group home facilities . fourteen states and the district of columbia specifically require checks for volunteers at licensed childcare facilities , and six states specifically require criminal - history checks for contractors . finally , several states exempt child care facilities associated with schools or religious organizations from the licensing or criminal - history check requirements . method for conducting criminal - history checks .