provider interviews . to gain an understanding of the ambulance industry , we interviewed experts from eight industry and professional organizations . we also interviewed several individual ambulance providers . factors affecting ambulance providers' costs . to examine the effect of selected factors on ambulance providers' costs , we analyzed the project hope survey data using a simplified version of a model reported by project hope . in our model , the natural logarithm of total costs is a function of the number of trips , the number of trips squared , and the proportion of the total trips that are als . we tested a number of additional terms , including length of trips , but they were all either statistically insignificant or significant but with very small effects . we restricted our model to providers with 5,000 or fewer total trips per year because we were primarily interested in rural providers , which generally have fewer trips . however , our sensitivity analyses showed that the results were broadly similar when the model was applied to all full cost providers . our model has an adjusted r of 0.48 , indicating that the model explains 48 percent of the variance in costs . in general , when trip volume declines , the estimated cost per trip increases , although less than proportionately . that is , a 10 percent decrease in trip volume is associated with an increase in cost per trip of less than 10 percent . analysis of variation in factors affecting costs across geographic areas . to examine differences between urban and rural areas in factors affecting ambulance costs , we grouped counties with similar characteristics . we followed cms in classifying counties in metropolitan statistical areas ( msa ) as urban counties and counties outside msas as rural . however , for our analysis we did not apply the goldsmith modification that cms uses to identify as rural certain areas within msas . these rural areas are typically small , so we did not treat them as rural counties because that would distort our urban and rural comparisons . our sensitivity analyses determined that our findings would have been generally the same if we had considered these areas as rural counties , although in some cases the differences between urban and rural counties would have been heightened . to examine differences among rural counties , we grouped them based on their population density . population density — the ratio of population to land area — is a commonly used measure of rurality . we used population density to group counties into quartiles , and then divided the least densely populated quartile of rural counties into frontier counties — those with six or fewer persons per square mile — and nonfrontier counties , because of our interest in the most sparsely populated rural areas . using this grouping , we found that ambulance trip volume decreased steadily from the most densely populated rural counties to the least densely populated .