dfas sampling . each month , dfas selects a sample of vouchers that have been processed in dts and assigns staff to review those vouchers to determine whether any resulted in an improper payment . according to dfas officials , dfas provides the results of these reviews to the components represented on the sao committee . an sao is a senior executive service member , general officer , or flag officer designated by a component as responsible for reducing improper payments . ( response options provided: “yes , a representative of our component attended all of the meetings,” “yes , a representative of our component attended some , but not all , of the meetings,” “no , a representative of our component has never attended an sao meeting,” and “don't know.” ) has the #component received a copy of the official minutes of the quarterly senior accountable official ( sao ) meetings since they were first held in january 2017 ? ( response options provided: “yes , our component received a copy of the minutes for all of the meetings,” “yes , our component received a copy of the minutes for some , but not all , of the meetings,” “no , our component has not received a copy of the minutes for any of the sao meetings,” and “don't know.” ) has the #component taken steps to identify the root causes of voucher errors that led to improper travel payments in fiscal year 2018 ? note , for the purpose of this question we define root causes as “the reasons personnel made errors preparing or approving vouchers,” including but not limited to: travelers were insufficiently trained on voucher preparation , approvers did not have sufficient time to review vouchers , and / or defense travel system was not effectively designed to process vouchers . ( response options provided: “yes,” “no,” and “don't know.” ) what are some examples of root causes of voucher errors that the #component identified in fiscal year 2018 ? ( response option provided: one text box. ) has the #component taken steps to address any identified root causes of voucher errors that led to improper travel payments in fiscal year 2018 ? ( response options provided: “yes,” “no,” and “don't know.” ) what steps have been taken by the #component to address the root causes of voucher errors that led to improper travel payments in fiscal year 2018 ? ( response option provided: one text box. ) because the majority of survey respondents did not provide open - ended responses to each question , we did not conduct a formal content analysis of the responses . we determined that the open - ended responses would not be representative of all components that responded to our survey , and we therefore present them only as illustrative examples . to analyze open - ended comments provided by those responding to the survey , gao analysts read the comments , jointly developed categories for the responses , and flagged relevant responses for inclusion in this report .