time frames . sia established time frames for each step in the review process for sunscreen applications . for example , the agency is required to determine whether a new application for a sunscreen active ingredient is eligible for review and notify the sponsor within 60 days of receipt by the agency . these time frames only include fda's review , and do not include the time for the sponsor or other interested parties to prepare and submit safety and effectiveness data , or respond to additional fda requests . filing determination . sia added a step , known as a filing determination , in which fda reviews the safety and effectiveness data to determine whether it is sufficiently complete for the agency to begin its more substantive review to determine whether an active ingredient is grase . if fda determines that the data are sufficiently complete to determine whether the active ingredient is grase , the agency will file the application and further analyze the data . sponsor representatives for the pending sunscreen applications and most stakeholders said that the sponsors and fda are essentially at a standstill about adding more sunscreen active ingredients to the u.s. market through the otc monograph process . sponsor representatives acknowledged that they could have submitted an nda to market a new sunscreen product instead of seeking a grase determination for a sunscreen active ingredient . however , some sponsor representatives and a stakeholder said that ndas are impractical for sunscreen products , because the formulations are continually changing ; for example , sunscreen products may have a new fragrance based on the season . additionally , many of the sponsors that submitted sunscreen applications manufacture the active ingredient , but not the finished sunscreen products ; yet , it is the finished products that receive approval through the nda process . though fda stated that it needs additional resources to complete its work related to the otc monograph process — and most stakeholders agree — additional resources alone will not lead to additional sunscreen active ingredients on the u.s. market . movement on sunscreen active ingredients will also depend on sponsors and other interested parties submitting data that fda determines are sufficient for a grase determination . some stakeholders said that they agree with fda on the need for testing to ensure the safety and effectiveness of sunscreen ingredients , but some of them said the agency should also consider the potential benefit of preventing skin cancer if new ingredients — which could offer better protection against uva rays — become available for the u.s. market . we provided a draft of this report to the department of health and human services for review and comment . the department provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the department of health and human services , appropriate congressional committees , as well as other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov .