munitions list . after responding to our 2006 report with such actions as issuing the 2008 instruction and developing the 2010 concept of operations , dod ceased updating the mctl in 2011 and disbanded the technology working groups that assessed technologies and produced updates because of funding constraints , according to officials . dod provided $1.49 million for the program in fiscal year 2012 , which program officials say is not sufficient to support the work needed to meet the dod requirement to update each technology section every 2 years . in light of expected funding decreases that began in fiscal year 2012 , officials decided not to invest resources in updating mctl sections and instead dedicated resources to complete archiving of research material for section updates that were underway . in the past 6 years , each section has been updated at least once ; however , the militarily critical technologies program has not fully met its goal to update each section at least every 2 years in accordance with the 2008 dod instruction . the majority of updates — 15 of 20 technology sections — took place in 2009 as shown in figure 2 . although five technology sections — armament and energetic materials , materials and processing , processing and manufacturing , signature control , and weapons effects — were updated in accordance with the new instruction , currently none of the mctl sections are in compliance with the 2-year update requirement . while funding was not reduced until fiscal year 2012 , none of the sections were updated in 2011 and only one section — space systems — was updated in 2012 to support dod's report to congress on the risks associated with moving certain satellite components from the u.s . munitions list to the commerce control list . four sections were updated after 2009 ; however , none of these updates have been validated , published , or made available to users , according to officials . technology areas that advance rapidly , such as information security and information systems , have only been fully updated once in the past 6 years . these two sections , along with sections on electronics ; biological ; and position , navigation , and timing technologies , have been prioritized for updates once resources become available given the increasingly dated content in the mctl , the technologies' impact on national security , and the rate at which these technologies are being produced . in light of the risks associated with using outdated content to support technology protection decisions , in march 2011 program officials removed access to the public version of the list from the dod website that hosted the list . the restricted version is still available via the same website , but program officials have posted a disclaimer noting that the list is no longer being updated and that content is being provided for information purposes only and is no longer intended to support technology decisions . dod has also halted its plans to integrate the compendium of emerging technologies with the mctl . similar to the mctl , the emerging technologies list is no longer being updated despite dod guidance to identify and assess such technologies .