( see app . i for additional information on our scope and methodology. ) as shown in table 1 , cms and tma contract with numerous firms to perform many of the functions necessary to administer the medicare and tricare programs . in addition , state agencies administer the medicaid program . federal contractors and state medicaid agencies perform a wide variety of functions that require the use of personal health information . such information may include medical diagnosis and treatment records and patient identifiers , such as name , address , date of birth , social security number , and evidence of insurance coverage . for example , when making a claims payment determination , federal contractors and state medicaid agencies verify patient eligibility and assess whether the services provided were medically necessary . in some cases , assessing medical necessity requires a review of the patient's medical history and treatment records . in addition to claims processing , federal contractors and state medicaid agencies use personal health information when enrolling beneficiaries , operating telephone call centers , conducting disease management programs , administering pharmaceutical benefit management services , and performing fraud investigations . a number of laws provide protection for personal health information . under the hipaa privacy rule , certain health care organizations and individuals — known as covered entities — are required to ensure that patients' personal health information is not improperly disclosed . covered entities — health care providers , health plans , and health care clearinghouses — must develop policies and procedures for protecting health information . these include restricting the amount of information disclosed to the minimum necessary to accomplish the intended purpose and to the workforce needing access . other requirements under the hipaa privacy rule include designating a privacy official and training employees on the covered entity's privacy policies . certain hipaa privacy rule safeguards also apply to “downstream users” — whether or not they are covered entities — through contractual agreements . the hipaa privacy rule requires covered entities to enter into “business associate agreements” with other firms or individuals to which they transfer personal health information for certain clinical , operational , or administrative functions . business associate agreements must establish the conditions under which a downstream vendor may use and disclose personal health information and the privacy safeguards they must apply . covered entities are not required , under the rule , to monitor their business associates' use of privacy safeguards , but must take corrective action if they become aware of a pattern of activity or practice that amounts to a material breach of the agreement . the hipaa privacy rule applies directly to state medicaid agencies , medicare advantage contractors , and tricare contractors that act as health plans or providers , and indirectly to medicare ffs contractors and other tricare contractors . specifically , state medicaid agencies , medicare advantage , and tricare contractors that act either as health plans or providers are covered entities under the hipaa privacy rule , while medicare ffs contractors and the remaining tricare contractors are considered business associates to cms and tricare , respectively , in their capacity as program contractors .