the application was denied . the options presented above could have significant cost and policy implications . however , with little data available on the actual number of civilians in vietnam , their exposure levels , and the number of claims that would be filed , it is difficult to estimate the costs of these options . according to information provided to us by va officials , of the 2.3 million living military veterans who were in vietnam during the war approximately 160,000 ( less than 10 percent ) are receiving disability compensation benefits from va for the four most common medical conditions associated with agent orange exposure . va's average annual cost of providing workers' compensation and medical expenses to veterans receiving benefits under the act for the four most common medical conditions is about $8,500 for disability compensation and $1,000 for medical expenses . although these costs do not include the costs of administering the claims , when va added diabetes as a condition related to agent orange exposure , it estimated that the administrative costs for each claim processed would be about $350 . including civilian employees who worked in vietnam under these options also has policy implications . it could set a precedent that might prompt other federal and contract employees who have worked for the u. s. government in war zones since the vietnam war — such as the gulf war and the current conflict in iraq — to seek similar benefits . such a precedent could prove costly because the u.s. military has employed a much larger number of contractor personnel in recent wars and conflicts than in vietnam . the fact that labor does not collect data on agent orange claims that allow it to identify the claims using its database makes it difficult to identify trends in the number and disposition of claims . the coding errors in labor's database also make it difficult to identify and track these claims . in addition , while labor is the licensor of insurance carriers for government contract employees , it is difficult , without proper records , to help claimants identify the insurance carriers or determine how well insurers are following through on their obligations . both labor and claimants are burdened by the difficulties the agency has in providing information to claimants — particularly contract employees filing claims under dba — on how to file claims , locate their former employers , and identify the employers' insurance carriers , difficulties that leave room for delays and errors in processing claims . federal and contract employees who may have been exposed to agent orange while working for the united states during the vietnam war have clearly had a different experience than their military counterparts in requesting compensation under the agent orange act . in short , these employees must meet more stringent standards in pursuing claims under feca and dba . the cost implications of options designed to increase access to compensation for civilians exposed to agent orange should be carefully considered in the context of the current and projected fiscal environment . the lack of information available about the number of possible civilian agent orange claims , however , makes it difficult for us to estimate the potential costs were such options to be adopted .