agencies. ) moreover , as emphasized in our interviews and in the forum discussion , the appointment of career civil servants to the coo / cmo position could be considered when assessing the position's roles , responsibilities , and reporting relationships . high turnover among politically appointed leaders in federal agencies can make it difficult to follow through with organizational transformation because of the length of time often needed to provide meaningful and sustainable results . as congress considers coo / cmo positions for federal agencies , the criteria and strategies we identified should help to highlight key issues that need to be considered , both in design of the positions and in implementation . while congress is currently focused on two of the most challenging agencies — dod and dhs — the problems they face are , to varying degrees , shared by the rest of the federal government . each agency , therefore , should consider the type of coo / cmo that would be appropriate for its organization , either by designating an existing position as the coo / cmo or creating a new position , and adopt the strategies we outline to implement such a position . because it is composed of the senior management officials in each department and agency , we recommend in the report being released today that the president's management council , working closely with omb , play a role in leading such an assessment and helping to ensure that due consideration is given to how each agency can improve its leadership structure for management . moreover , given the council's charter to oversee government management reforms , it can help institutionalize a leadership position that will be essential to overseeing current and future reform efforts . recent legislative proposals have called for certain features of the coo / cmo position that we have endorsed , including a direct reporting relationship to the departmental secretary , responsibility for integrating key management functions and overseeing overall business transformation efforts , the requirement for a performance agreement , and the designation of a term appointment . we are suggesting that congress consider the criteria and strategies that i have discussed today as it continues to develop and review legislative proposals for the appropriate type of coo / cmo positions for all major federal agencies , recognizing that the implementation of any approach should be determined within the context of the specific facts and circumstances that relate to each agency . appointed by the secretary of education . may be reappointed by the secretary to subsequent terms of 3 to 5 years as long as the incumbent's performance is satisfactory per required annual performance agreement . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact bernice steinhardt , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .