this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . administrators had more access than needed in certain instances . on one server , irs had configured multiple databases supporting different business units to operate using the same username . as a result , any administrator with access to the username could have access to all databases , exceed his or her job duties , and affect irs's ability to control the integrity of the data . for one system reviewed , database administrators were inadvertently granted privileges to administer the servers used by the database . until irs effectively implements all key elements of its information security program , the agency will not have reasonable assurance that computing resources are consistently and effectively protected from inadvertent or deliberate misuse , including fraud or destruction . irs has continued to make important progress in addressing information security control weaknesses , and in improving its internal control over financial reporting . during fiscal year 2012 , irs management devoted attention and resources to addressing information security controls , and resolved a significant number of the information security control deficiencies that we have previously reported . nevertheless , information security weaknesses remain in access and other information system controls over irs's financial and tax - processing systems , affecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial and sensitive taxpayer data . the financial and taxpayer information on irs systems will remain particularly vulnerable to internal threats until the agency ( 1 ) addresses weaknesses pertaining to identification and authentication , authorization , cryptography , audit and monitoring , physical security , and configuration management and ( 2 ) effectively implements key components of its comprehensive information security program that ensure processes intended to test , monitor , and evaluate internal controls are appropriately detecting vulnerabilities , including developing and implementing a strategy for continuous monitoring efforts and improving validation of corrective actions ; and policies are up - to - date , and reflect the current operating environment . these deficiencies are the basis of our determination that irs had a significant deficiency in internal control over financial reporting related to information security in fiscal year 2012 . continued and consistent management commitment and attention to an effective information security program will be essential to the maintenance of , and continued improvements in , the agency's information security controls .