some have both international and domestic components and operations . trying to effectively involve them in a single , coordinated effort makes a monumental undertaking . since september 11 , our nation has taken many actions to combat terrorism and enhance homeland security . today , it is well known that our servicemembers are conducting operations in afghanistan in operation enduring freedom . this operation covers offensive actions in the afghanistan theater and the north arabian sea , and includes ground , air , and naval forces , and follow - on operations for certain support activities . less well - known perhaps is the department of defense's other primary ongoing operation , noble eagle , which concerns the direct defense of the u.s. homeland . this operation protects civilian population centers , critical infrastructure , and special events such as the recently completed winter olympics held in salt lake city . to help provide operational forces , the department has alerted for activation just over 97,000 reserve component servicemembers and completed the call - up of more than 78,000 reserve and national guard augmentees . as requested , my testimony will cover three areas . first , i will discuss progress in enhancing homeland security through legislative and executive action prior to and after september 11 . second , i will present the preliminary results of the work we are doing for you and some of your house colleagues on integrating the efforts of all levels of government and the private sector into overall homeland security efforts . finally , i will discuss an approach that could be helpful in integrating governmental and private sector organizations into the office of homeland security's planned national strategy . my testimony is generally based on the large body of relevant work that we have completed or have ongoing . legislative and executive branch action has led to a variety of governmentwide and agency - specific initiatives , started and ongoing , to enhance homeland security . establishment of an office of homeland security and the office's planned national security strategy represent important governmentwide initiatives to address homeland security concerns . the planned production of new vaccines or expansion of existing vaccines , additional intergovernmental - planning and consequence - management efforts , and enhancements to aviation , seaport , and border security suggest progress in enhancing homeland security . moreover , congress appropriated about $19.5 billion in fiscal year 2002 and about another $9.8 billion contained in a $40 billion emergency supplemental budget after september 11 to help address homeland security concerns . the first responders to a terrorist incident usually belong to local governments and local emergency response organizations , which include local police and fire departments , emergency medical personnel , and public health agencies . historically , the federal government has primarily provided leadership , training , and funding assistance . the president's first responder initiative was announced in his state of the union address of january 29 , 2002 . the initiative will be led by the federal emergency management agency , and its proposed fiscal year 2003 budget includes $3.5 billion to provide the first responder community with funds to conduct important planning and exercises , purchase equipment , and train their personnel .