content . the new data do not , nor were they intended to , provide significant information about some of the characteristics of consumer bankruptcies that are of key interest to policy makers — most notably , the reasons consumers filed for bankruptcy , the nature or source of the debts , and the demographic characteristics of the filers . as noted earlier , this type of information is very difficult to capture through the formal bankruptcy system . aggregation . the data reported by the judiciary are provided in the aggregate as statistics — rather than as case - level data — limiting the value of the information , according to some trustee program staff , researchers , and judges we spoke with . aggregated numbers do not allow researchers and policy makers to drill down into the data to gain an understanding of the bankruptcy system . for example , an academic researcher we spoke with noted that “total assets” and “total liabilities” in the aggregate do not provide a useful picture of the average debtor's financial situation . narrow scope . the scope of what is provided by some of the specific data elements is relatively narrow . for example , the act requires the judiciary to report the number of cases in which creditors were “fined for misconduct.” however , because courts may reprimand creditors in a variety of ways , this statistic provides only a limited picture of sanctions imposed against creditors in bankruptcy courts . lack of specificity . alternatively , some statistics are so broad in what is included that the usefulness of the data is unclear . for example , the act requires that the judiciary report “total assets,” but this does not distinguish between net assets and assets with liens attached ( such as a home with a mortgage ) . further , total assets includes assets that are shielded from unsecured creditors , as defined by federal and state exemption laws . as such , the statistic will not be an accurate indicator of debtors' net worth or of the amount of equity that can actually be liquidated and distributed to creditors . accuracy . much of the data in the new annual statistics is based on information that debtors provide when submitting forms , schedules , motions , and other court filings . as noted in aousc's statistical report , self - reported data may be incomplete or inaccurate . for example , as described earlier , debtors do not always correctly designate whether their debts are primarily consumer versus business debt , and thus the new statistics may include some business cases that have been incorrectly designated as consumer cases . similarly , certain data in the new trustee final reports are derived from information provided by the debtor in the bankruptcy forms . definitional issues . certain definitional issues may limit the usefulness of some of the specific data elements in the statistical requirements and uniform final reports . for example: the bankruptcy reform act requires reporting on “the aggregate amount of debt discharged,” but the definition provided in the act does not , in fact , represent the amount of debt actually discharged in bankruptcy , according to aousc officials and legal experts we spoke with .