website . each ssbci participant also maintains a website where ssbci program information can be found . our review of all ssbci participants' websites found that the majority included detailed descriptions of their ssbci programs , links to related materials , information on how to apply for the program , and contacts for additional information . in addition , some websites included other useful promotional information , such as a list of participating financial institutions and testimonials on the program's benefits . in addition to treasury and ssbci participants , federal banking regulators also conduct outreach activities to promote the use of ssbci . outreach conducted by the federal banking regulators has been done on both a national and regional basis . however , regulators' regional offices focus more specifically on states in their regions and tend to be in a better position to focus on the differences between ssbci participants' programs . specific outreach activities they have conducted include participating in or sponsoring lender roundtables , conferences , and forums in which ssbci is discussed . these events are often held in conjunction with the promotion of other small business credit programs and include representatives from each of the federal banking regulators , as well as state economic development agencies . for example , an official from occ's southern district office stated that her office held a series of outreach events throughout the district . each event included a regulatory panel of officials from occ , fdic , and the federal reserve bank of atlanta in which they discussed ssbci with lenders and cdfis . in addition , some federal banking regulators have used their newsletters to provide information about ssbci . for example , regulators have written articles about how states are using ssbci to increase the amount of credit available for small businesses , and they have also published articles that treasury has written on ssbci . further , as discussed previously , both fdic and occ published a list of frequently asked questions to address their regulated entities' concerns regarding the regulatory implications of participating in ssbci . finally , trade associations for lenders , cdfis , and venture capitalists have also helped to promote the use of ssbci to their members . similar to the types of outreach activities conducted by treasury , ssbci participants , and federal banking regulators , trade associations have provided information on ssbci at their conferences and , as noted earlier , included articles in member newsletters and magazines . in addition , some trade associations , including the american bankers association , opportunity finance network , and council of development finance agencies , hosted conference calls and webinars for their members to promote the use of ssbci . treasury officials said that they are working with the group for venture capital programs as well to develop similar best practice guidance for ssbci participants who operate that type of program . the federal banking regulators also offered some examples of best practices they have identified to promote their programs . one of these was using technology and mobile resources to conduct outreach , such as using webinars to reach a larger audience .