we found that dod did not have such a strategy . to improve dod's ability to plan for and manage the development , production , and sustainment of twvs across the department , we recommended that the secretary of defense develop a dod - wide strategy and implementation plan for making sound investment decisions for twvs . dod concurred with our recommendation , stating the following . upon completion of the ongoing twv studies by the army and marine corps , and the analysis of alternatives for joint light tactical vehicles , dod will unite these efforts into a comprehensive strategy that dovetails with the services' equipping strategies . dod will endeavor to align requirements , resources , and acquisition strategies into a unified plan for twv investment decisions . the solution to the requirement was the mrap family of vehicles . more details about our scope and methodology are in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2009 to november 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the army , which has over 250,000 twvs , generally categorizes the vehicles as heavy , medium , and light . heavy twvs represent about 10 percent of the army's twv fleet and include vehicles like the heavy equipment transporter system , which is used to transport main battle tanks and other heavy equipment . medium twvs represent about 40 percent of the army's twv fleet and include vehicles for hauling cargo and for launch and support platforms' weapon systems such as the high - mobility artillery rocket system . light twvs represent about 50 percent of the army's twv fleet and currently consist of the hmmwv family of vehicles , which began production in 1983 . the army's hmmwv program also provides vehicles to satisfy marine corps and air force requirements . the hmmwv has gone through various upgrades during its nearly 30-year history and has served as dod's primary wheeled vehicle for shelter carriers , command and control systems , light cargo and troop carriers , weapons carriers , and ambulances . this report addresses issues related to light tactical vehicles and the m - atv . the m - atv is not considered a light vehicle by its weight , but it is being used for functions typically done by light tactical vehicles . in february 2005 , marine corps combatant commanders identified an urgent operational need for armored tactical vehicles to increase crew protection and mobility of marines operating in hazardous fire areas against improvised explosive devices , rocket - propelled grenades , and small arms fire . in response , the marine corps identified the solution as the up - armored hmmwv . over the next 18 months , however , combatant commanders continued to call for more robust mine - protected vehicles .