practice drills . during a practice drill evacuation at 1 facility , it was discovered that the path to the evacuation assembly area was up a steep slope and that some of the employees could not make the climb . the assembly area was subsequently changed and the oep revised . emerging threats . fps headquarters officials stated that recent media coverage of active shooter situations has increased the public's perception of this threat to facility safety and security . a fatal active shooter incident at 1 facility in los angeles prompted the revision of safety and evacuation procedures . fps headquarters officials said that fps has developed awareness training courses for how to handle an active shooter situation , and has proactively offered this training to facilities . to identify and help agencies address evacuation or oep challenges , officials at isc , gsa , and fps said that they provide initial guidance regarding the oep , and may provide additional assistance if requested by facilities or agencies . for example , isc officials stated that they issued their march 2013 oep program guidance in response to concerns raised by isc's members for consistency in oep guidance . officials said agencies experiencing a challenge regarding their oeps ( or other issues ) can ask isc for specific help such as one - on - one assistance , or referral to other agency officials that have addressed a similar challenge . also , isc officials said a working group can be created to identify solutions to an issue , as was the case in developing the 2013 guidance . as discussed earlier , gsa and fps have published oep information , and may provide additional information or training assistance in meeting specific challenges on a case - by - case basis . we provided a draft of this report to dhs and gsa for review and comment . gsa had no comments on the report . dhs provided technical comments , which were incorporated as appropriate . dhs also provided written comments , which are summarized below and reprinted in appendix iii . in its written comments , dhs reiterated that oeps are critical in safely evacuating federal facility occupants in an emergency . dhs noted that gao recognized the complex roles performed by the isc , gsa , fps , and agency officials to ensure that the approximately 9,600 gsa - owned and - leased facilities have an oep . for instance , dhs cited that isc establishes standards and guidance for developing oeps that are responsive to individual facility needs , whereas fps is responsible for coordinating with and assisting department and agency officials in developing facility oeps , and providing agencies with evacuation training , among other things . dhs also stated that it is committed to working collaboratively with isc and gsa to identify and mitigate security - related vulnerabilities at federal facilities . we are sending copies of this report to the department of homeland security , the administrator of the general services administration , selected congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .