, two or more ) . there are several challenges to mobility . three of the most significant are growing congestion , ensuring access to transportation for certain underserved populations , and addressing the transportation system's negative effects on the environment and communities . ensuring continued mobility involves preventing congestion from overwhelming the transportation system . congestion is growing at localized bottlenecks ( places where the capacity of the transportation system is most limited ) and at peak travel times on public roads , transit systems , freight rail lines , and at freight hubs such as ports and borders where freight is transferred from one mode to another . in particular: for local urban travel , a study by the texas transportation instituteshowed that the amount of traffic experiencing congestion during peak travel periods doubled from 33 percent in 1982 to 66 percent in 2000 in the 75 metropolitan areas studied . in addition , the average time per day that roads were congested increased over this period , from about 4.5 hours in 1982 to about 7 hours in 2000 . increased road congestion can also affect public bus and other transit systems that operate on roads . some transit systems are also experiencing increasing rail congestion at peak travel times . in addition , concerns have been raised about how intercity and tourist travel interacts with local traffic in metropolitan areas and in smaller towns and rural areas , and how this interaction will evolve in the future . according to a report sponsored by the world business council for sustainable development , mobility 2001 , capacity problems for intercity travelers are severe in certain heavily traveled corridors , such as the northeast corridor , which links washington , d.c. , new york , and boston . in addition , the study said that intercity travel may constitute a substantial proportion of total traffic passing through smaller towns and rural areas . congestion is expected to increase on major freight transportation networks at specific bottlenecks , particularly where intermodal connections occur , and at peak travel times . this expectation raises concerns about how interactions between freight and passenger travel and how increases in both types of travel will affect mobility in the future . trucks contribute to congestion in metropolitan and other areas where they generally move on the same roads and highways as personal vehicles , particularly during peak periods of travel . in addition , high demand for freight , particularly freight moved on trucks , exists in metropolitan areas where overall congestion tends to be the worst . with international trade an increasing part of the economy and with larger containerships being built , some panelists indicated that more pressure will be placed on the already congested road and rail connections to major u.s. seaports and at the border crossings with canada and mexico . according to a dot report , more than one - half of the ports responding to a 1997 survey of port access issues identified traffic impediments on local truck routes as the major infrastructure problem .