( recommendation 3 ) . we identified similar issues in our review of fastlane . as discussed earlier , for large projects to be eligible for an award , dot must determine that the project meets several statutory requirements , such as generating benefits and demonstrating cost - effectiveness , among others . you asked us to review the infra award process . this report: describes dot's process for evaluating infra grant applications , and assesses the consistency and transparency of dot's process for evaluating infra grant applications . to describe dot's processes for evaluating and awarding infra grant applications submitted in response to dot's july 2017 call for applications for the fiscal - year 2017 – 2018 round of funding , we identified pertinent statutory requirements in the fast act . we then reviewed dot's july 5 , 2017 , notice of funding opportunity ( nofo ) announcing the availability of infra funds , as well as the program's funding priorities and the corresponding criteria dot would use to evaluate the projects proposed in the grant applications . we also reviewed dot's infra evaluation plan that described how dot staff should evaluate and score the projects against these requirements and criteria as well as documentation from an internal dot spreadsheet showing the results of the reviews , including project scores and narratives explaining the rationale for the scores . finally , we reviewed the documents presented to the secretary . to assess the reliability of dot's infra spreadsheet , we interviewed dot officials and conducted checks of the data , such as identifying blank cells in the spreadsheet and comparing the information from the spreadsheet against the documents presented to the secretary to identify any discrepancies . while we identified instances in which dot did not record score changes in its spreadsheet , we were able to identify final project scores and found the data were reliable for the purposes of identifying the scores given by dot to projects and understanding how dot evaluated projects . similarly , internal control standards note that federal agencies should communicate with external entities and enable these entities to provide quality information to the agency that will help it achieve its objectives . dot's nofo states that the applications must include sufficient information for dot to determine whether projects meet the statutory requirements , but also notes that dot may seek additional information from applicants . the nofo does not provide information on the basis for why dot would follow up with one applicant and not another . after reviewing dot's documentation , we found that the rationales for following up with specific applicants were insufficient to explain why dot followed up with certain applicants over others . the documentation , with few exceptions , included generally vague statements that additional information from the applicant could help dot determine whether the project met the statutory requirements . we asked two officials from the senior review team about several specific projects for which those officials requested additional information . these officials both stated they could not recall their rationale , given that roughly a year had elapsed and the large number of projects reviewed .