 obvious problems . when inspectors notice obvious problems related to safety performance on a truck as it moves across the scale — such as a flat tire , unattached hoses , incorrect or damaged placards , etc. — they may pull the vehicle over for inspection . many of these problems could involve safety performance issues and may result in selecting trucks of carriers previously unranked by the sms .  random selection . inspectors choose trucks for inspection randomly from among those not put out of service for weight issues . this method does not gauge crash risk or other aspects of safety performance but could select trucks of carriers previously unranked by the sms .  local discretion . these methods may focus inspectors' efforts on particular types of inspections , carriers , trucks , or loads for a period of time . local discretion selection methods can be guided by the certification level of inspectors available at the station , the training needs of those inspectors , or news stories about crashes of particular types of vehicles or loads , among other things . in some cases , inspectors may focus their efforts on factors that influence safety , perhaps in response to public opinion about the safety performance of particular types of vehicles or loads . these methods could also result in selecting trucks of carriers previously unranked by the sms . all of these methods are limited in identifying higher - risk trucks and carriers . for example , a truck belonging to a carrier with a history of driver fatigue issues would not be readily identifiable to an inspector unless a software product employing the iss - 2010 basic - supported algorithm flagged it . no inspection selection method can assist weigh station inspectors in selecting trucks if drivers avoid the weigh station entirely . our observations at state inspection stations and discussions with inspection officials revealed that some drivers attempt to evade roadside inspection in different ways , allowing some carriers to potentially operate entirely beyond the scope of csa . for example , drivers may avoid driving past a weigh station during its regular hours of operation . inspection facilities in many states are open limited hours , and state officials told us there is a significant level of truck traffic when stations are closed . because of physical or staffing constraints at some weigh stations , we observed that staff may close a station periodically during its standard hours of operation to relieve crowding or avoid back ups of trucks that could present a safety hazard on the freeway . state police and other officials in a number of states also indicated that budgetary constraints may force them to reduce weigh stations' hours of operation , decreasing the number of trucks they can inspect and increasing the travel - time flexibility of drivers seeking to avoid inspection . state police officials also told us that some drivers seek to evade inspection by pulling over to the side of the road until a station closes or by altering their routes to drive around weigh stations , either on other highways or on smaller roads , sometimes within sight of staff at the weigh station .