hcfa officials were aware of our test . call center managers were also informed that their csrs would be receiving test calls from us . should the reduced services modifier be used ? what is the proper way to bill for an office visit on the same day as a surgical procedure ? can code 99211 be reported if a nurse in the physician's office provides instruction on self - administering insulin ? appendix ii provides the answers that appear on the web sites . the results of the test , which were validated by the coding expert , showed that 32 percent of the answers were inaccurate , 53 percent were incomplete , and only 15 percent were complete and accurate . these results are illustrated in table 2 . there was little variation among the carriers in the overall accuracy and completeness of their answers . many physicians we spoke to expressed frustration that csrs will not always provide information on how to properly code certain claims . carrier call centers had varying policies about providing physicians with specific coding information . knowing the appropriate code for a medical service is essential to properly billing medicare . although cms does not have a policy preventing them from doing so , managers at the carrier call centers we visited reported that it is not their policy to provide information to callers on how to code a specific claim . carriers reported that they are reluctant to provide specific codes because the csrs lack the medical expertise to appropriately make coding judgments , and they do not have the physician's clinical documentation at the time of the calls to understand the procedure or service in context . during our test of call center accuracy , we noted that csrs followed different procedures regarding coding - related inquiries and frequently did not adhere to the carriers' stated policy . while in 19 cases the csrs provided neither a code nor referral to a source of coding information , specific codes were given in 24 instances . specific referral to a bulletin issue or to a regulation number was given in 16 other cases , but for 7 of these cases the information was too vague to enable someone to locate the coding rules . even when the referrals to information sources were accurate , physicians told us that being directed to other carrier publications does not respond to their need for readily accessible interpretation of medicare regulations . our visits to 3 call centers also revealed that there is no uniformity or standardization across carriers in the types of technological resources available to csrs . for example , 1 call center we visited had an on - line searchable database of lmrps that facilitated quick retrieval of the appropriate information by the csrs . representatives at the 2 other call centers used hard copy bulletins or bulletins posted on their web sites in a nonsearchable format . csrs without easily searchable tools told us that they relied heavily on their more experienced colleagues , in the absence of more authoritative sources , for answers . the lack of technological resources at call centers can affect centers' abilities to monitor the performance of their csrs .