the army provided its data to osd in the summer of 2008 . navy headquarters officials stated that the navy used its database on facilities to obtain information on the number of relocatable facilities it is using . the navy then provided these data to each of its 13 regions to review and supplement with data not contained in the database . dod's instruction 4165.56 on relocatable facilities prescribes policies and procedures for the acquisition and use of these facilities ; however , officials with the navy and the marine corps headquarters and several officials at installations we visited told us osd's guidance on defining relocatable facilities was confusing to distinguish relocatables from other types of nonpermanent facilities because the definition of these types of facilities was not clear . this distinction is important because dod generally considers relocatable facilities to be personal property — like vehicles and other equipment — which is acquired using either procurement or operation and maintenance appropriations — whereas other types of buildings , including temporary buildings , are considered real property , which are funded mostly through military construction appropriations and , in some cases , operation and maintenance appropriations . at each installation we visited , we obtained data on the number and cost of purchasing or leasing relocatable facilities . we compared the installation's inventory of relocatable facilities to the numbers the service headquarters reported to osd and documented and discussed any discrepancies with installation and service headquarters officials . our analysis of the seven installation visits cannot be generalized to other military installations . according to cost data we obtained from the services , dod estimates it has spent about $1.5 billion over a 5-year period to acquire relocatable facilities , yet service officials told us that because the number of relocatable facilities was uncertain , then the associated cost to acquire these facilities was also uncertain . also , some service officials told us that collecting acquisition cost data was difficult given that reliable records on these costs were not always available and that maintaining information on these costs had not been a priority . for example , navy and marine corps headquarters told us that they did not maintain any cost information on relocatable facilities , although they told us cost information on relocatables should be readily available at the installation . however , during our visit to camp lejeune , north carolina , and little creek naval amphibious base , virginia , officials at both installations told us that their cost data to acquire relocatable facilities were incomplete . marine corps officials at camp lejeune told us that they did not retain cost information on their relocatable facilities prior to march , 2007 , thus they could not provide acquisition cost data covering the last 5 years as requested by osd . likewise , navy officials at little creek naval amphibious base told us that their cost data on relocatable facilities were their best estimates given that they did not maintain the contracts for all of their leased relocatable facilities . army officials stated that although the service updated its cost data for their relocatable facilities in march 2008 , the data are not complete for all installations .