app . united nations participation act ( unpa ) authorizes the president to apply economic sanctions , including freezing of assets , called for by united nations security council resolution ( 22 u.s.c . imposes procedural limitations on presidential declarations of national emergency under which foreign assets have been blocked or frozen . a national emergency declared under the act automatically terminates on the anniversary of the declaration of the emergency unless the president publishes in the federal register and transmits a notice to congress stating that the emergency continues in effect ( 50 u.s.c . after iraq invaded kuwait in 1990 , the united nations imposed sanctions against the iraqi regime ; however , in 1996 , the united nations and iraq agreed on the oil for food program , thereby enabling iraq to pay for humanitarian items . we estimated that between 1997 and 2002 , saddam hussein's regime accumulated at least $10.1 billion in surcharges on oil sales and illicit charges from suppliers exporting goods to iraq through the oil for food program . in its recent efforts to recover assets of the former iraqi regime worldwide , the u.s. government has engaged the services of a variety of u.s. agencies and recently developed domestic and international tools to recover these and other hidden assets . u.s. recovery efforts have had varying results . in august 1990 , iraq invaded kuwait , and the united states froze iraqi assets . shortly after , the united nations also imposed sanctions against the regime . security council resolution 661 , approved in 1990 , prohibited all nations from buying iraqi oil and selling iraq any commodities except food or medicines . the resolution also required member states to block the transfer of iraqi assets from their countries . the united states amended its sanctions consistent with the resolutions . other nations similarly froze iraqi government assets in their countries . in december 1996 , the united nations and iraq agreed on the oil for food program , which allowed iraq to sell a set amount of oil to pay for food , medicine , and infrastructure repairs . iraq's oil revenue was placed in a u.n. - controlled escrow account . from 1997 through 2002 , we estimate that the former iraqi regime acquired $10.1 billion in illegal revenues — $5.7 billion in oil smuggled out of iraq and $4.4 billion in surcharges on oil sales and illicit charges from suppliers exporting goods to iraq through the oil for food program.this estimate is higher than our may 2002 estimate of $6.6 billionbecause it includes ( 1 ) oil revenue and contract amounts for 2002 , ( 2 ) updated letters of credit from prior years , and ( 3 ) newer estimates of illicit commissions from commodity suppliers . oil was smuggled out through several routes , according to u.s. government officials and oil industry experts . oil entered syria by pipeline , crossed the borders of jordan and turkey by truck , and was smuggled through the persian gulf by ship . jordan maintained trade protocols with iraq that allowed it to purchase heavily discounted oil in exchange for up to $300 million in jordanian goods .