gsa agreed with these recommendations . the agency then implemented one of the recommendations and did not implement the other one , which was to examine , in coordination with the office of personnel management , potential government - wide telecommunications expertise shortfalls and use the study to shape the next telecommunications acquisition ( now called eis ) . more recently , we reported in 2017 that , among other things , the five agencies we selected had yet to fully apply most of the five planning practices . specifically , we noted that one agency fully implemented one practice , partially implemented three practices , and did not implement another . the other four agencies partially implemented each of the five practices . accordingly , we recommended , among other things , that the five agencies complete adoption of the planning practices to avoid schedule delays and unnecessary costs . four of the five agencies agreed with all of our recommendations . the other agency agreed with two recommendations , partially disagreed with one , and disagreed with two recommendations . all five agencies have efforts underway to address our recommendations , but had not yet fully implemented them as of november 2019 . the 19 selected agencies have varied plans for transitioning from their current telecommunications contracts to eis program contracts . as of october 2019 , these agencies were also in different stages of their eis transitions . all of the selected agencies reported that they plan to fully transition their telecommunications services to eis before the current contracts are set to expire in may 2023 . however , over half of the selected agencies did not plan to complete the transition by gsa's september 30 , 2022 , milestone . in addition , the majority of selected agencies did not meet gsa's two critical eis transition milestones in 2019 — to ( 1 ) release all fair opportunity solicitations by march 31 , 2019 , and ( 2 ) issue all task orders by september 30 , 2019 . the 19 selected agencies had various plans for completing their transitions to eis . in particular , eight of the selected agencies reported that they planned to finish their transitions to eis by gsa's september 30 , 2022 , milestone . the 11 remaining agencies did not plan to complete their transitions by that date . table 1 identifies the 19 selected agencies' plans for completing the transition to eis by gsa's september 30 , 2022 , milestone . officials from the 11 selected agencies that did not plan to finish their transitions to eis by gsa's september 30 , 2022 , milestone — the departments of agriculture , commerce , energy , hhs , homeland security , the interior , justice , transportation , the treasury , and va ; and the social security administration — reported that they planned to complete the transitions before the current telecommunications contracts are set to expire in may 2023 .