this report does not contain all the results from the interviews . the interview guide and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at gao - 06-611sp . opinions varied on how effective customized disclosures would be in influencing cardholder behavior . consumer groups , financial educators , and many of the cardholders we interviewed indicated that considerable benefits might result from providing cardholders with customized disclosures . such benefits could include cardholders making larger payments or otherwise changing how they use their credit cards . customized disclosures might have greater impact because they would be more noticeable than other disclosures . these estimates were generally less than $500,000 . for example , one lender stated in a comment letter to the federal reserve that such programming would cost about $412,500 . estimated programming costs for smaller issuers that use third - party processors were lower than for large issuers . we obtained estimates for programming the customized provisions under the bankruptcy act from a processor and a medium - sized issuer . a representative of the processor estimated it would cost about $300,000 to modify information systems to accommodate the bankruptcy act disclosure option requiring issuers to provide an estimate of the repayment time . according to the representative , this cost would be spread across the processor's small - and medium - size issuer client base of about 5,000 issuers . in addition , representatives for a medium - sized issuer told us it would cost the issuer $5,000 to $10,000 to have its third - party processor modify its information systems to accommodate customized provisions contained in the bankruptcy act . they further noted that it would cost about $150 per hour to hire a processor to program the other two messages that are envisioned to be included in customized disclosures . costs for programming would vary depending on the level of precision that would be required and the complexity of an issuer's account practices . some issuers have more complex pricing schemes that could increase the programming required to develop estimates that more closely reflect a cardholder's situation . for example , as noted above , many large issuers engage in transaction - based pricing , in which different rates of interest apply to balances originating from different transactions ( such as purchases , cash advances , or balance transfers ) . programming a calculation that accounts for a variety of balances at different interest rates , while more precise , is more complex than a calculation that uses one balance and one interest rate . adding further to the complexity , with multiple balances and interest rates , decisions would need to be made about the order in which to allocate cardholder payments to the outstanding balances . a smaller portion of the programming estimates we received was for reformatting billing statements to accommodate the text of the disclosure . issuers use various formats or templates to present cardholders with information about their accounts , including transactions , payment due dates , and rewards program information . issuers may also use different templates for different card programs , such as cards with rewards ( eg , cash - back or travel benefits ) or private - label cards associated with major retailers .