proliferation detection . develops , demonstrates , and delivers long - and short - range sensor technologies to detect the spread of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons , materials , and technologies worldwide . chemical and biological national security . ( see table 1. ) fourteen percent was distributed to other national laboratories , including , among others , pacific northwest national laboratory in washington ( $85.0 million ) and the oak ridge national laboratory and y - 12 plant in tennessee ( $35.1 million ) . six percent was distributed to universities , industry ( including small businesses ) , and other governmental agencies . for example , nearly $240,000 was obligated to the u.s. army for chemical and biological agent detection research . finally , about 5 percent or $58.8 million has been spent from fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2002 to build the nisc at los alamos national laboratory . this center ( that nnsa estimates will cost a total of $63 million before construction is complete in fiscal year 2003 ) will provide consolidated office and laboratory space for nonproliferation r&d activities that are currently housed in 47 different structures — many of which , according to nnsa , are old and substandard — across the 43-square mile los alamos national laboratory . in fiscal year 2002 , r&d activities in the proliferation detection research area received 37 percent of the $323 million appropriated to nnsa's r&d program . the chemical and biological national security research area received 26 percent and the nuclear explosion monitoring research area received 23 percent . ( see fig . the proliferation detection research area received about $119 million in fiscal year 2002 . the largest single amount ( $11.2 million ) was obligated to lawrence livermore national laboratory for r&d of remote spectroscopy technology . while many of the specific applications and characteristics of this technology are classified , the systems developed are used by several defense and intelligence agencies in a variety of arms control and treaty verification activities . the technology developed is particularly useful in identifying chemical releases associated with proliferation activities . for example , these systems can be used to detect chemical signatures of agents released on a battlefield . one of these systems was also used at the world trade center site after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks to monitor for hazardous chemicals that might affect construction workers . communicating with technology users and receiving clear guidance from the office of homeland security — or the department of homeland security , if established — on what the highest priorities are and how nnsa and the doe national laboratories can play a role in addressing those priorities could assist program managers in their efforts to prioritize and plan future r&d work .