these recommendations are listed below . comments reflect the status of the program at the time gao closed the recommendation . appendix iii: list of independent review board ( irb ) recommendations telescope ( jwst ) launch success at the same level of responsibility they have for u.s. launches , or the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) should contract with aerospace corporation for similar accountability . 2 the goddard space flight center ( goddard ) and northrop grumman project offices should be established as consistent and factual source of all jwst mission status 3 communications of status and details appropriate for stakeholders need to be presented clearly and frequently . 4 nasa headquarters should be responsible for developing a “communication plan” ( messaging strategy ) for jwst . 5 communicating complexity , risk , and science return for jwst is critically important . 6 use the same criticality and assessment charts for all jwst reporting . 7 nasa should implement a jwst reporting structure where the science mission directorate associate administrator has responsibility for the entire jwst program and the goddard space flight center director is responsible for all aspects of the project . 8 nasa should revise nasa policy directives to be consistent with the recommendation . 9 assure consistent , sustained and meaningful engagement of the science working group ( swg ) . 10 appoint an executive committee of nasa - selected members of the swg to act as conduits to the broader community on mission challenges . 11 nasa should designate a commission manager . 12 nasa should implement sunshield hardware and simulation elements to aid in sunshield anomaly identification and resolution . 13 northrop grumman should establish corrective actions in1 ) processes , 2 ) training , 3 ) personnel certification , 4 ) discipline to ensure individual accountability and 5 ) a failure - proof “safety net” through a robust testing , analysis , and inspection process . 14 goddard and northrop grumman should conduct an audit including forensic engineering , hardware pedigree assessment , drawing checks , etc. , to identify potential embedded problems . 15 goddard should conduct an audit of the jwst project residual risk , reviewing the objective evidence of ( a ) the completed test as you fly and single point failures mitigation plans , and ( b ) failure corrective action effectiveness to determine the “as built” residual risk . 16 the project should reconcile the “as built” residual risk with the expected “as designed” residual risk . 17 nasa should define security requirements and plan for jwst transport to launch site . 18 develop contingency operations and sparing plan for spacecraft / launch site operations . 19 develop “pathfinder” jwst simulator and contamination protection systems for integration “dry runs.” 20 assess shipping vessel contamination environment and develop contingency plans for off - nominal shipping operation . 21 it is critically important that goddard jwst project office maintain responsibility and provide adequate support to ensure space telescope science institute ( stsci ) mission operations readiness 22 the project should review all simulators / testbeds and required usage against pre - launch tests and rehearsals , post - launch deployment anomaly resolution , fault isolation , and correction .