collaboration . first , most of the federal officials we surveyed indicated that a potential lack of collaboration among stakeholders could reduce the likelihood of achieving strategy goals and actions . they reported that some form of collaboration is necessary to accomplish all of the strategy's measurable goals and the vast majority of its actions . this collaboration could be between federal agencies , federal and state agencies , or federal agencies and other entities . in particular , federal - state collaboration is crucial to accomplishing the strategy's goals and actions . if this action were not completed , how would this affect the likelihood of achieving the outcome or goal listed below the drop down box ?  achieving the outcome or goal would be far less likely  achieving the outcome or goal would be somewhat less likely  achieving the outcome or goal would be no less likely  don't know . please explain your answer to 4 . we asked officials from each agency the following questions regarding each measurable goal ( which are referred to as outcomes in the strategy and in our survey questions ) that contain an action for which the agency has responsibility . for actions in the water quality broad goal that are listed under more than one measurable goal , we asked the relevant agencies question 4 twice , once for each measurable goal . if all the actions for this outcome ( including those for which your agency or other agencies are responsible ) are completed , do you believe the outcome will be achieved ? collaboration between federal agencies and the watershed states will be required to complete many of the strategy actions . in response to question 3 of the actions portion of our survey , federal officials identified strategy actions that require state participation in order to accomplish the actions . in those cases where federal officials reported that state participation was necessary to accomplish the action , the officials identified the necessary state or states . figure 3 shows the extent of collaboration that will be needed between federal agencies and watershed states to accomplish strategy actions . each node represents a federal agency or a state . each link between a pair of nodes indicates that the corresponding entities will need to collaborate to accomplish an action .  definitely yes  probably yes  probably no  definitely no  don't know . please explain your answer . ( for example , please describe whether certain portions of this outcome are more or less likely to be achieved by the deadline than others. ) if all the actions for this outcome ( including those of your agency and other agencies ) are completed , what factors do you foresee , if any , that could reduce the likelihood that this outcome will be achieved ? ( please list and briefly describe the factors . this could include factors within or beyond your agency's control. ) how important is this outcome to attaining the goal listed below the drop down box ?  very important  somewhat important  not at all important  don't know .