needs . for example , commerce officials noted that portland's sbdc offers intensive export training through a 10-session course that takes place over 10 months . on the other hand , commerce and the area's district export council offer an export university course that is specifically designed as a 1-day course . while sba typically does not provide much assistance with trade leads — connecting small businesses with overseas buyers — a few of the sbdc counselors we met with said they sometimes try to help clients identify specific opportunities with overseas partners . additionally , about 3 years ago , oit started a matchmaker program in which oit hosts or co - sponsors events . the matchmaker events are designed to help small businesses interested in exporting meet with export management companies , which are intermediaries that represent a company's product overseas and reduce some of the risks associated with exporting by managing the logistics of the process . unlike programs sponsored by other u.s. agencies , sba does not directly connect companies with potential buyers through this matchmaking program . however , oit's matchmaking events could potentially result in more trade leads for small businesses because export management companies may be able to help identify foreign buyers . other agencies connect clients with trade leads in a variety of ways . for example , usda's market access program provides funding that helps businesses attend trade shows , where they have opportunities to meet directly with potential buyers . commerce leverages its international network of commercial officers to help u.s. businesses set up appointments with potential buyers abroad and to notify businesses when foreign buyers are looking to import u.s. goods . state foreign service officers sometimes serve a similar role at overseas posts where commerce does not have a presence . ustda helps businesses identify export opportunities by providing financial assistance through grant and contract opportunities for u.s. businesses to conduct feasibility studies , pilot projects , and technical assistance , as well as hosting reverse trade missions , in which ustda brings foreign buyers to the u.s. to help connect them with u.s. companies , both large and small . sba , ex - im , and usda offer various forms of financing assistance to small businesses , as outlined in table 4 . sba and ex - im both offer loan guarantees , which help businesses secure financing from private lenders , for working capital loans . working capital loans may be used by businesses to finance activities that will help complete export sales . for example , a business might use a working capital loan to buy raw materials that it will use in manufacturing goods for export . sba also offers guarantees on facilities development loans , which can be used to acquire or upgrade facilities and equipment used to produce goods or services involved in international trade . usda offers loan guarantees to facilitate international sales of u.s. agricultural products , and ex - im provides direct loans to international buyers of u.s. exports , both of which allow u.s. companies to secure export orders and may result in larger orders . ex - im also offers insurance on export sales .