3 years . this active user population is then used as a multiplier for the cost adjustment and access to care factors . the cost adjustment factor provides an adjustment to account for geographic differences in the costs of purchasing health care services . it is based on a price index derived from the american chamber of commerce researchers association regional cost of living index , which provides regional comparative costs for inpatient and outpatient services . the price index for each chs program is multiplied by the active user population for each program to determine the value of the cost adjustment factor . the access to care factor provides an additional increase only for those individual chs programs that do not have access to an ihs or tribally operated hospital . ihs area officials determine if individual chs programs meet two qualifying criteria for this factor: ( 1 ) the individual chs program has no ihs or tribally operated hospital with an average daily patient load of five or more , and ( 2 ) the individual chs program does not have an established referral pattern to an ihs or tribally operated hospital within the area . these additional funds are allocated to each program where there is no access to an ihs or tribally operated hospital in an amount proportional to the cost adjustment factor . to allocate the program increase funding , ihs first designates 75 percent of the funds for increases based on the cost adjustment factor at each individual chs program and 25 percent of the funds for the increases based on the access to care factor at each individual chs program . ihs then totals the program increases for the individual chs programs and allocates that total amount to the ihs area offices . program increases allocated using the chs allocation formula become part of the area offices' base funding for the next fiscal year . ihs used the chs allocation formula to allocate program increases in fiscal years 2001 , 2002 , and 2008 through 2010 . in each of those years , ihs informed the ihs area offices of the total amounts of program increase funds to be allocated to the offices and the dollar values that ihs calculated under that formula for each individual chs program in their areas . to specifically address health care needs in local communities , ihs permits area offices , in consultation with the tribes , to distribute program increase funds to local chs programs using criteria other than the chs allocation formula . because these adjustments are made at the individual chs program level , they do not affect future base funding which is determined at the area level . funds allocated to the ihs area offices through base funding , annual adjustments , and program increases have increased substantially over the past 10 years . in fiscal year 2001 , area offices received just over $386 million ; in fiscal year 2010 , they received just over $715 million in chs funds . ( see fig . ihs's allocation of chs funds has varied widely across ihs area offices , and ihs's method of allocating chs funds has maintained those funding differences .