this makes it difficult to track audit status . the current organizational structure of cms compounds the weaknesses i have highlighted today . this organizational structure has created challenges to effective oversight because of unclear lines of authority and responsibility between the regions and headquarters . although the 10 regional offices are the cms front line in overseeing state financial management and medicaid expenditures , there are no reporting relationships to dfm , the headquarters unit responsible for medicaid financial management . for example , a working group headed by the director of dfm updated guidance for expenditure reviews in september 2000 in response to concerns raised by auditors about the inconsistency in expenditure reviews across regions . while the guide strongly encouraged regional analysts to perform all procedures , it did not mandate that they do so . headquarters financial managers do not have direct authority to enforce such a directive and regional managers have discretion in how resources are utilized . similarly , the guide allowed regional branch managers the discretion to review regional analyst's expenditure review workpapers for compliance with the guide or simply to obtain written or verbal assurance from the analyst that the procedures were performed . by allowing supervisors to satisfy their review responsibilities merely with verbal assurance , cms minimized the effectiveness of this basic control . during our site reviews , we found evidence that supervisory reviews were not conducted . the cms organizational structure also hindered efforts to evaluate and monitor regional office performance . at the time of our review , there were few formal requirements for regions to report to headquarters and cms did not collect , analyze , or evaluate consistent information on the quality of regional financial oversight for medicaid across the country . previous efforts to monitor performance were discontinued because regional staff resources were not available to collect and submit the data to headquarters managers . headquarters managers , in turn , did not have the authority to require regions to collect such data . as a result , medicaid financial managers in headquarters were not in a position to provide formal feedback to region financial management staff to improve their performance and therefore have not been in a position to assess the effectiveness of medicaid oversight activities . the current organizational structure also poses challenges to implementing corrective actions aimed at addressing oversight weaknesses and improving accountability . over the past 2 years , headquarters financial managers have taken steps to develop and implement improvements to the financial oversight process . medicaid staff are currently developing risk analysis to identify expenditures of greatest risk ; working with states to develop methodologies for estimating medicaid developing work plans that guide efforts to allocate financial oversight staff and travel resources based on the risk analysis ; and developing performance - reporting mechanisms . medicaid staff have also recently formed a financial management strategy workgroup of headquarters and regional financial management staff to review the entire medicaid financial oversight process and determine the proper structure for an adequate oversight process ; updated its expenditure and budget review guides ; and gathered information on how regional financial analyst staff time is allocated between oversight responsibilities .