goals . gao - 06-788 ( washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2006 ) . combating terrorism: evaluation of selected characteristics in national strategies related to terrorism . gao - 04-408t ( washington , d.c.: feb. 3 , 2004 ) . the following reports describe outcome - based performance indicators as a necessary component of campaign planning and execution: combating terrorism: the united states lacks comprehensive plan to destroy the terrorist threat and close the safe haven in pakistan's federally administered tribal areas . gao - 08-622 ( washington , d.c.: apr . securing , stabilizing , and rebuilding iraq progress report: some gains made , updated strategy needed . gao - 08-837 ( washington , d.c.: june 23 , 2008 ) . delays in delivery . delays have occurred at israeli customs and during shipment into the west bank , constraining ussc's mission of properly equipping the nsf and presidential guard , according to officials we spoke with . ussc officials stated that shipping items to israel takes about 1 month by sea and as little as 1 day by air from the united states . however , ussc officials also stated that while the time needed for israeli customs to approve shipments averages about 2 months , approval can take up to a year or more for items that require modification by the israelis in order to pass israeli customs inspections . for example , ussc officials noted that vehicles and trailers were held up as israeli customs required modifications to their lights , brakes , and other specifications before they would release them . according to an israeli official , the pa also contributes to the equipment delays at customs by not following the shipment instructions in the approved requests . for example , in one case equipment was shipped with other types of goods destined for the west bank and the quantity of equipment was lower than the approved amount . in another case , the shipper consolidated a shipment of pasf items with items for other customers . the increasing number of equipment deliveries in 2009 has also added to the delays in clearing customs , according to the israeli government official . additional unexpected delays in delivery have occurred when israeli customs inspectors have not released equipment shipments they have approved , according to ussc and inl officials . these officials told us that security inspections required at israeli border crossings and checkpoints in the west bank have also delayed delivery . ussc and inl officials noted that they have taken steps to improve their ability to deliver equipment on time , including: developing standardized nsf battalion equipment packages to minimize israeli opportunities to question equipment specifications ; requiring the contracted freight forwarder in virginia to check every item against shipment manifests prior to shipment ; and making greater use of airfreight delivery . in addition , ussc officials said they have shortened the lead times needed to procure and ship equipment over time by pre - ordering items previously approved by the israelis to be included in later shipments . moreover , ussc , inl , and pa officials and staff have found it difficult to check on the status of the shipment or to hold parties accountable for delays , according to ussc officials .