lives . it finances loan disbursements and the payments for loan guarantee defaults with ( 1 ) the subsidy cost payment from the program account , ( 2 ) loans from the treasury , and ( 3 ) collections received by the government . figure 8 diagrams this cash flow . each year , as part of the president's budget , agencies prepare estimates of the expected subsidy costs of new lending activity for the coming year . agencies are also required to reestimate this cost annually . the office of management and budget ( omb ) has oversight responsibility for federal credit program compliance with credit reform act requirements and also has responsibility for approving subsidy estimates and reestimates . in addition , for international credits extended by u.s. agencies , omb provides agencies with specific guidance , including estimated defaults and recoveries by risk rating category , to be used in determining expected losses for financing activities . all credit programs automatically receive any additional budget authority that may be needed to fund reestimates . thus , for discretionary programs , original subsidy cost estimates receive different budget treatment than subsidy cost reestimates . the original estimated subsidy cost must be appropriated as part of the annual appropriation process . however , upward reestimates of subsidy costs are financed from permanent indefinite budget authority and do not have to be appropriated in the annual appropriations process . the office of management and budget ( omb ) determines expected losses for international credit activities through ( 1 ) a complex model that includes two estimates of default probabilities by ratings category and a rule for combining them and ( 2 ) an assumption about how much of the value of defaulted credits will be recovered . the default rate estimates use a statistical concept from finance literature that omb terms “distance to default.” the first estimated relationship — the spread - default relationship — is between interest rate spreads on international bonds and historical default rates of corporate debt . the second estimated relationship — the ratings - default relationship — is between ratings on corporate debt and the historical default rates of that debt . historical corporate default data are used in estimating both relationships . the model is structured so that the overall estimates of default for different ratings and maturities would be expected to be close to the underlying corporate default rates used . they will differ from the underlying historical default rates when interest rate spreads are higher or lower than their average over the historical period of the data used in the analysis . in addition , available information on the model suggests that there may be certain technical biases in the model's forecasts . omb's modeling approach uses a mathematical concept called “distance to default,” a concept used in some finance models , which is a statistical representation of the safety of a credit . the statistical variable has an inverse relationship with default probability — the larger the distance to default , the smaller the probability of default .