gao - 13-728t . washington , d.c.: june 20 , 2013 . managing for results: agencies should more fully develop priority goals under the gpra modernization act . gao - 13-174 . washington , d.c.: april 19 , 2013 . security clearances: agencies need clearly defined policy for determining civilian position requirements . gao - 12-800 . washington , d.c.: july 12 , 2012 . we expect to issue a report on this process by spring of 2014 . once an individual has obtained a personnel security clearance and as long as they remain in a position that requires access to classified national security information , that individual is reinvestigated periodically at intervals that are dependent on the level of security clearance . for example , top secret clearance holders are reinvestigated every 5 years , and secret clearance holders are reinvestigated every 10 years . some of the information gathered during a reinvestigation would focus specifically on the period of time since the last approved clearance , such as a check of local law enforcement agencies where an individual lived and worked since the last investigation . further , the joint reform team began an effort to review the possibility of continuous evaluations , which would ascertain on a more frequent basis whether an eligible employee with access to classified information continues to meet the requirements for access . specifically , the team proposed to move from periodic review to that of continuous evaluation , meaning annually for top secret and similar positions and at least once every five years for secret or similar positions , as a means to reveal security - relevant information earlier than the previous method , and provide increased scrutiny on populations that could potentially represent risk to the government because they already have access to classified information . the current federal investigative standards state that the top secret level of security clearances may be subject to continuous evaluation . the executive branch has developed some metrics to assess quality at different phases of the personnel security clearance process ; however , those metrics have not been fully developed and implemented . to promote oversight and positive outcomes , such as maximizing the likelihood that individuals who are security risks will be scrutinized more closely , we have emphasized , since the late 1990s , the need to build and monitor quality throughout the personnel security clearance process . having assessment tools and performance metrics in place is a critical initial step toward instituting a program to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures . however , we have previously reported that executive branch agencies have not fully developed and implemented metrics to measure quality in key aspects of the personnel security clearance process , including: ( 1 ) investigative reports ; ( 2 ) adjudicative files ; and ( 3 ) the reciprocity of personnel security clearances , which is an agency's acceptance of a background investigation or clearance determination completed by any authorized investigative or adjudicative executive branch agency . we have previously identified deficiencies in opm's investigative reports — results from background investigations — but as of august 2013 opm had not yet implemented metrics to measure the completeness of these reports .