we provided a draft of this report to hhs and ssa for comment . both agencies generally agreed with our recommendations and indicated that they look forward to working together to help low - income individuals with impairments become more self - sufficient . specifically , ssa stated that it would be pleased to work with hhs on the planning and design of a demonstration project . likewise , hhs stated that it would be pleased to have its staff work with ssa to develop a process or criteria for identifying individuals who could benefit from employment services . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our methods . the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) replaced the individual entitlement to benefits under the 61-year - old aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) program with tanf block grants to states and emphasized the transitional nature of assistance and the importance of reducing welfare dependence through employment . administered by hhs , tanf provides states with $16.5 billion each year , and in fiscal 2002 , the total tanf caseload consisted of 5 million recipients . prwora provides states with the flexibility to set a wide range of tanf program rules , including the types of programs and services available and the eligibility criteria for them . states may choose to administer tanf directly , devolve responsibility to the county or local tanf offices , or contract with nonprofit or for - profit providers to administer tanf . some states have also adopted “work first” programs , in which recipients typically are provided orientation and assistance in searching for a job ; they may also receive some readiness training . only those unable to find a job after several weeks of job search are then assessed for placement in other activities , such as remedial education or vocational training . while states have great flexibility to design programs that meet their own goals and needs , they must also meet several federal requirements designed to emphasize the importance of work and the temporary nature of tanf aid . for example , tanf established stronger work requirements for those receiving cash benefits than existed under afdc . furthermore , to avoid financial penalties , states must ensure that a steadily rising specified minimum percentage of adult recipients are participating in work or work - related activities each year . to count toward the state's minimum participation rate , adult tanf recipients in families must participate in a minimum number of hours of work or a work - related activity a week , including subsidized or unsubsidized employment , work experience , community service , job search , providing child care for other tanf recipients , and ( under certain circumstances ) education and training . if recipients refuse to participate in work activities as required , states must impose a financial sanction on the family by reducing the benefits , or they may opt to terminate the benefits entirely . states must also enforce a 60-month limit ( or less at state option ) on the length of time a family may receive federal tanf assistance , although the law allows states to provide assistance beyond 60 months using state funds .