gao - 05-424 . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2005 . paperwork reduction act: agencies' paperwork burden estimates due to federal actions continue to increase . gao - 04-676t . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 06-974t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . in contrast to the cio review process , which did not lead to reduced paperwork burden in gao's 12 case studies , irs and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have set up alternative processes specifically focused on reducing burden . these agencies , whose missions involve numerous information collections , have devoted significant resources to targeted burden reduction efforts that involve extensive outreach to stakeholders . according to the two agencies , these efforts have led to significant reductions in paperwork burden on the public . in light of these promising results , the weaknesses in the current cio review process , and the persistent increases in burden , a new approach to burden reduction appears warranted . gao suggested that congress should consider mandating pilot projects to target some collections for rigorous analysis along the lines of the irs and epa approaches . madam chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the implementation of the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) . as you know , one of the goals of the pra is to help ensure that when the government asks the public for information , the burden of providing this information is as small as possible and the information itself is used effectively . in other words , the goal is to minimize the paperwork burden while maximizing the public benefit and utility of the information collected . to achieve this goal , the pra includes provisions that establish standards and procedures for effective implementation and oversight of information collections . among these provisions is the requirement that agencies not establish information collections without having them approved by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and that before submitting them for approval , agencies' chief information officers ( cio ) certify that the collection meets 10 specified standards — including that they avoid unnecessary duplication and reduce the paperwork burden as much as possible . as you requested , i will begin by discussing the estimates of government paperwork burden provided in the annual pra report ( known as the information collection budget ) that omb recently released , which presents federal agencies' estimates of federal paperwork burden as of the end of fiscal year 2005 . i will also discuss results from a may 2005 report that we issued on pra processes and compliance , concentrating on our findings regarding agencies' processes to certify that information collections meet pra standards and on alternative processes that two agencies have used to minimize the paperwork burden . in preparing this testimony , we reviewed prior work and analyzed omb and other documents . for our discussion of the information collection budget , we examined the current omb report as well as our reviews of previous annual pra reports .