ii ) . once completed , this inspection sheet should contain the following: the trailer's fema - issued barcode ( noted as “temporary housing unit no.” on the form ) . it should be noted that md contractors told us that the barcode information they received from the original contractors was incomplete and they had trouble figuring out which trailers they were assigned . a checklist of interior components inspected . a checklist of exterior components inspected . the trailer occupant's signature verifying that both interior and exterior inspection occurred . according to our discussions with fema , if a unit occupant is not home to sign the inspection sheet ( and therefore the inspector does not have access to the interior components of the unit ) , the inspector is required to make at least two additional attempts to conduct a complete inspection . if the occupant is still not available to sign the inspection sheet or allow access to the interior of the unit , the inspector must note on the sheet that three attempts were made to complete the work in order to submit a valid invoice for payment . all of the contractors confirmed that fema told them to make three attempts to inspect a unit prior to submitting an invoice for payment , even though this requirement is not stated in the contract . as shown in figure 2 , fema's payment process is well designed and , if followed , provides reasonable assurance that payments are being made for work actually performed . as detailed in the figure , the contracting officer's technical representative ( cotr ) is supposed to check the accuracy of both the contractors' calculations and the supporting documentation associated with a “random sample” of barcodes . if the cotr finds any errors as a result of this sample , he or she must conduct accuracy checks on all of the invoices submitted by the contractor for that particular line item . prior to submitting the invoice to fema's disaster finance center for processing , the cotr is to check for duplicate billings and verify that work was not performed on trailers that had been deactivated . during the course of our investigation , we found instances where fema's cotrs adhered to this process and did not approve payments because they identified inaccurate calculations or duplicate invoices . however , our review of contractor billing records and testing of a statistical sample of inspections also shows that fema paid the md contractors even though there was insufficient documentation that work had been performed , making it difficult to believe that the cotrs were consistently conducting the accuracy checks specified in figure 2 . from june 2006 through january 2007 , available records indicate that fema made about $28.5 million in preventative maintenance payments for over 180,000 inspections . based on our initial analysis of billing records related to 12,000 of these inspections , we confirmed that fema should not have approved about $2.2 million in payments . specifically , we reviewed approximately 90 preventative maintenance invoices submitted by the md contractors from june 2006 through january 2007 . most of these invoices contained approximately 1,000 to 3,000 monthly inspection billings .