doe is at the beginning of the process . in particular , doe officials said they have successfully fabricated the fuel for the first test and addressed previous manufacturing problems with u.s. fuel development efforts in which contaminants weakened the coated particle fuel . however , the irradiation testing of the fuel in the advanced test reactor has not yet begun . the first test is scheduled to begin early in fiscal year 2007 and to be completed in fiscal year 2009 . the eighth and final test is scheduled to begin in fiscal year 2015 , and the fuel testing program is scheduled to conclude in fiscal year 2019 . as a result , doe will not have the final results from all of its fuel tests before both design and construction begin . while doe has carefully planned the fuel tests and expects favorable results , a doe official acknowledged that they do not know if the fuel tests will ultimately be successful . doe is also at the beginning stages of r&d on other key project areas such as the hydrogen production system for the plant and materials development and testing . for example , idaho national laboratory successfully completed a 1,000-hour laboratory - scale test of one of two potential hydrogen production systems in early 2006 . doe ultimately plans to complete a commercial - scale hydrogen production system for demonstration by fiscal year 2019 , which will allow time to test the system before linking it to the very - high - temperature reactor . doe also has selected and procured samples of graphite — the major structural component of the reactor core that will house the nuclear fuel and channel the flow of helium gas — and designed experiments for testing the safety and performance of the samples . the idaho national laboratory has considerable experience with nuclear energy technologies . since 1949 , 52 nuclear reactors have been designed and tested at the site . doe has chosen the “very - high - temperature reactor,” which is cooled by helium gas , as the advanced reactor design for the next generation nuclear plant . as its name implies , this reactor would operate at a much higher temperature than existing nuclear power plants — up to about 950 degrees celsius ( 1,742 degrees fahrenheit ) . the first priority is deploying new advanced light water reactors under the nuclear power 2010 program . the second priority is the global nuclear energy partnership , launched in february 2006 . the partnership's objectives are to demonstrate and deploy new technologies to recycle nuclear fuel and minimize nuclear waste , and to enable developing nations to acquire and use nuclear energy while minimizing the risk of nuclear proliferation . the third priority is r&d on the next generation nuclear plant . according to doe officials , the department remains committed to this project even though the global nuclear energy partnership has assumed a higher priority . doe is engaged in r&d on the next generation nuclear plant as part of a larger international effort to develop advanced nuclear reactors ( generation iv reactors ) that are intended to offer safety and other improvements over the current generation of nuclear power plants ( generation iii reactors ) .