omb circular no . a - 126 ( revised ) , improving the management and use of government aircraft ( may 22 , 1992 ) , prescribes policies for executive agencies to follow in acquiring , managing , using , accounting for the costs of , and disposing of government aircraft . this circular applies to all government - owned , leased , chartered , and rental aircraft and related services operated by executive agencies , except for aircraft while in use by or in support of the president or vice president . omb circular no . a - 126 , section 6 , a. , provides that the number and size of aircraft acquired and retained by an agency and the capacity of those aircraft to carry passengers and cargo should not exceed the level necessary to meet the agency's mission requirements . omb circular no . a - 126 , section 5 , b. , defines mission requirements to include activities related to the transport of troops and / or equipment , training , evacuation ( including medical evacuation ) , intelligence and counter narcotics activities , search and rescue , transportation of prisoners , use of defense attaché - controlled aircraft , and aeronautical research and space and science applications . omb circular no . a - 126 , section 5 , b. explicitly states that mission requirements do not include official travel to give speeches , attend conferences or meetings , or make routine site visits . in addition to the policies prescribed by omb circular no . a - 126 , agencies must also follow the guidance of omb circular no . a - 76 before purchasing , leasing , or otherwise acquiring aircraft and related services , to assure that these services cannot be obtained from and operated by the private sector more cost effectively . further , agencies must review periodically the continuing need for all of their aircraft and the cost effectiveness of their aircraft operations in accordance with the requirements of omb circular no . a - 76 and report the results of these reviews to gsa and omb . as discussed previously , our analysis of flight purposes showed that about seven of every eight flights were for routine business travel . consistent with omb policy guidance , nasa regulations provide that individual cost justifications comparing estimated commercial airline travel costs with estimated variable costs associated with using nasa - owned or - chartered aircraft should be prepared prior to all passenger aircraft flights . figure 4 provides an overview of the methodology nasa used to compare nasa and commercial costs for its flight - by - flight justifications . vs. 2.5 ( multiplier ) several nasa centers had not updated the variable costs used in their flight - by - flight cost - comparison calculations for over 6 years . such out - of - date variable costs significantly understated nasa's flight - by - flight costs . for example , at two centers , the $964 variable cost per flight hour used for flight - by - flight justifications during fiscal years 2003 and 2004 was over 6 years out of date . according to nasa aircraft management officials , this hourly rate was last adjusted in 1998 .