he disagreed with two recommendations . the deputy commissioner agreed with the recommendation to use the existing process of regular team meetings with frontline telephone assistors to solicit information on call trends and other potential improvements to phone service and contact analytics . he also agreed with the recommendation to develop a performance measure for taxpayer correspondence that includes providing timely service to taxpayers . further , in response to the recommendation that irs establish an evaluation plan for the debit card program that includes taxpayers , volunteer site partners , and other stakeholders and assesses the reasons for program participation rates , he described steps irs plans to take to assess the debit card program participation rates . the deputy commissioner disagreed with the recommendation that irs develop a customer service telephone standard , stating that he does not believe that irs needs to revise its current process to measure telephone service at this time as it currently develops its telephone plans after consideration of many factors . such factors include historical call demand and the types and anticipated lengths of calls . however , a customer service telephone standard would serve as a means of communicating to congress and others what irs believes would constitute good customer service . having such a standard would make the gap between the standard and annual performance goals more transparent . we recognize that irs may not be able to achieve the standard because of factors such as unexpected call volume and competing resources . the intent is to highlight for congress and others the gap between good service and what irs is able to attain . in addition , developing such a standard would put irs in compliance with office of management and budget guidance that requires agencies to develop customer service standards . accordingly , we believe this recommendation remains valid . finally , the deputy commissioner disagreed with the recommendation that irs assess its business units' needs for holding contact analytics calls beyond 45 days and store calls for this period or document that the costs of doing so exceed the benefits . he stressed that irs's contact recording system is used to store calls and the contact analytics system is used to analyze some calls , noting that irs is confident that storing calls beyond 45 days would not be a low - cost effort . however , irs officials responsible for recording and storing calls told us that irs developed its policy on how long to store data , including calls available through contact analytics , several years ago . as we note in our report , irs officials acknowledged that they have not surveyed business units as to whether they need to store the calls for a longer period or analyzed whether the benefits of doing so would exceed the costs . further , we identified an example during our review in which irs needed to use more time - consuming processes to analyze calls because the calls were not available beyond 45 days for use by contact analytics . contact analytics should allow irs to better understand the reasons taxpayers call .