children . we identified tens of thousands of ssns for children under the age of 14 . specifically , ndnh data included 33,856 ssns of individuals who , according to ssa data , were under the age of 14 with earned income reported . one reason children can be at risk of long - term victimization of employment - related identity fraud is because it usually takes children a while before they start working or applying for financial credit . this gives a fraudster ample opportunity to exploit their stolen identities . still , there are legitimate circumstances for children to be earning wages , such as in the entertainment and advertising industries . elderly . we identified tens of thousands of wage records from elderly individuals . specifically , the 2016 ndnh data included 65,823 ssns with earned income reported that ssa data identified as being over 84 . the federal trade commission reported that in 2016 , approximately one - fifth of idt complaints they received involved people age 60 years or older . further , the elderly have low participation rates in the workforce . the bureau of labor statistics reported that , in 2016 , the workforce participation rate for those ages 75 and above was 8.4 percent , compared to a rate of 62.8 percent for the overall workforce . some ssns with risk characteristics were sometimes also associated with irs returns that did not include required w - 2 forms . specifically , more than 1.3 million individuals — of the 2.9 million ssns we determined to have risk characteristics associated with ssn misuse — had at least one wage record they did not report to irs . of these 1.3 million individuals , more than half failed to include at least one w - 2 on their tax return , and slightly less than half ( 43 percent ) did not include any w - 2s in a tax return ( see table 3 ) . irs has enforcement tools that are intended to detect reporting deficiencies , but these tools did not always detect the reporting issues we identified . irs can use automated underreporter ( aur ) and the nonfiler , as well as seven idt - related indicators to mark a taxpayer's account or w - 2 if it has determined that the ssn was compromised ( see sidebar ) . we compared data from these enforcement tools and idt indicators to the 1.3 million individuals identified above and found that irs did not mark all accounts or w - 2s . action code 501: closed identity theft cases initiated by a taxpayer . action code 506: closed identity theft cases initiated by irs . action code 524: deceased taxpayer . it prevents the use of a deceased taxpayer's identity on a federal income tax return . action code 525: mismatch between the identity listed on the w - 2 and on the tax return . these are cases where returns filed with an individual taxpayer identification number include a w - 2 with an ssn belonging to another person . individuals with three or more w - 2s for the same period .