moreover , others commented about its infrequent use . second , when considering changes to umra itself , umra's narrow coverage stands out as the primary issue for most sectors because it excludes so many actions from coverage under umra and contributes to complaints about unfunded or under funded mandates as discussed in both of our reports . even with an issue such as coverage on which there was some general agreement across most sectors , the variety of suggested options indicates that finding workable solutions will require including all affected parties in the debate . third , one of the challenges for congress and other federal policy makers is to determine which issues and concerns about federal mandates are best addressed in the context of umra and which are best considered as part of more expansive policy debates on federal mandates and federalism . on broader policy issues concerning federal mandates , various parties recognized that umra is only part of the solution and the issue raises broader public policy questions about structuring and funding mandates in general . these parties made it clear that retrospective analysis is needed to ensure that mandates are achieving their desired goals , which could help provide additional accountability for federal mandates and provide information that could lead to better decisions regarding the design and funding of mandate programs . finally , as we move forward in an environment of constrained fiscal resources , the issue of unfunded mandates raises broader questions about the assignment of fiscal responsibilities within our federal system . reconsideration of such responsibilities begins with the observation that most major domestic programs , costs , and administrative responsibilities are shared and widely distributed throughout our system . part of this public policy debate includes a reexamination of the federal government's role in our system and a need to sort out how responsibilities for these kinds of programs should be financed in the future . if left unchecked , unfunded mandates can weaken accountability and remove constraints on decisions by separating the enactment of benefit programs from the responsibility for paying for these programs . likewise , 100 percent federal financing of intergovernmental programs can pervert fiscal incentives necessary to ensure proper stewardship at the state and local level for shared programs . commenting parties from business , federal agency , and state and local governments sectors questioned some federal agencies' compliance with umra requirements and the effectiveness of enforcement mechanisms to address this perceived noncompliance . they mentioned the failure of some agencies to consult with state , local and tribal governments when developing regulations that may have a significant impact on nonfederal entities . likewise , at least one party of each of the three sectors expressed concerns about the lack of accurate and complete information provided by federal agencies , which are responsible for determining whether a rule includes a mandate and whether it exceeds umra's thresholds . the perceived lack of compliance with certain umra requirements generated several suggested changes to umra . however , the only suggestion that had support across parties from multiple sectors was to replicate cbo's role for legislative mandates by creating a new office within omb that would be responsible for calculating the cost estimates for federal mandates in regulations .