we plan to do so in our analysis for the final report . for occupational disease claims , our analysis showed that upon receipt , owcp claims examiners , at the median processing time , took 22 days to make the initial payment for the approved claims . owcp did not specify a performance standard for occupational disease claims . finally , our preliminary analysis of case file data showed that during the time between the date of injury or recognition of a disease as job - related , injured employees often ( 1 ) continued working in a light - duty capacity , ( 2 ) received cop while absent from work , or ( 3 ) went on paid annual or sick leave until the time they actually missed work and their pay stopped . in fact , the data showed that the median elapsed time from the date the injury occurred or the disease was recognized as job - related to the beginning date of the compensation period was 98 days for traumatic injuries and 243 days for occupational disease claims . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact bernard ungar , director , or sherrill johnson , assistant director , physical infrastructure issues , at ( 202 ) 512-4232 and ( 214 ) 777-5699 , respectively . these requirements are as follows: 1 . the claim was filed within the time limits specified by law . the injured or deceased person was , at the time of injury or death , an employee of the united states . the injury , disease , or death did , in fact , occur . the injury , disease , or death occurred while the employee was in the performance of duty . the medical condition for which compensation or medical benefits is claimed is causally related to the claimed job - related injury , disease , or death . such evidence , among other things , must be reliable and substantial as determined by owcp claims examiners . if the claimant submits factual evidence , medical evidence , or both , but owcp determines the evidence is not sufficient to meet the five requirements , owcp is required to inform the claimant of the additional evidence needed . the claimant then has at least 30 days to submit the evidence requested . additionally , if the employer – in this case , the postal service – has reason to disagree with any aspect of the claimant's report , it can submit a statement to owcp that specifically describes the factual allegation or argument with which it disagrees and provide evidence or arguments to support its position . according to the files we reviewed , about 99 percent of the postal service employees' traumatic injury claims contained evidence related to the five requirements set by owcp regulations . about 1 percent of the traumatic injury claims were not approved , according to the case files we reviewed , because evidence was not provided for one or more of the requirements .