inspections . during and after the crisis , fda conducted an increased number of domestic and foreign heparin - related inspections of drug and device firms compared with the number of inspections prior to the crisis ( see fig . in particular , fda increased its frequency of inspections of chinese firms associated with oscs contamination in the united states . in the 20-month period prior to the crisis , fda did not conduct any inspections of chinese heparin firms . in contrast , 11 chinese firms constituted 14 of the 21 heparin - related foreign inspections conducted by fda during and after the crisis . of the chinese firms that fda inspected , only 2 had been inspected prior to the contaminated heparin crisis . fda officials said that there were and continue to be significant legal and practical challenges to conducting inspections of crude heparin manufacturers and the casing facilities that supply them , such as the limits on fda's ability to require foreign establishments to allow the agency to inspect their facilities , the large number of and incompleteness of fda's information on the casing facilities , and the expenses associated with conducting foreign inspections . for these reasons , according to fda officials , fda focused on firms' responsibilities to ensure that they could trace their crude heparin back to qualified suppliers that produce an uncontaminated product . furthermore , according to officials , during inspections fda inspectors requested that firms conduct their own investigations of any heparin products for which they received complaints or that did not meet specifications . investigations . in addition to inspections , fda conducted investigations at u.s. health care facilities and device firms , domestic drug firms , and a foreign drug firm . fda data show that the agency conducted at least 37 domestic and 1 foreign investigations related to heparin between january 2008 and june 2009 , with individual investigations sometimes consistin fda visits to multiple facilities , such as a drug firm and a health care provider . the reasons for these investigations included , for example , obtaining heparin samples , collecting information on firms' crude and heparin api suppliers , following up on patient adverse event reports and the status of product recalls , and witnessing the destruction of contaminated heparin . monitoring imports . beginning in february 2008 , fda began monitoring ning heparin products offered for import by physically examining and detai products to help ensure that additional contaminated heparin did not reach u.s. consumers . the agency initially issued an import bulletin in late february 2008 instructing fda staff to assess the admissibility of hep products offered for import , and then replaced it with a plan in mi d - march 2008 to physically sample and test these products for osc s contamination . this testing plan , which provided more detailed instructions than the import bulletin , required that fda test all imported heparin api , and other imported heparin products , on a case - by - case ba for contamination upon arrival at the u.s. border unless u.s. firms had already committed to testing their imported heparin products using fda's sis , newly developed testing methods .