usda agreed with the recommendation . in april 2009 , ascr officials indicated that a draft federal register notice requesting omb's approval to collect these data for farm service agency , natural resources conservation service , and rural development programs is being reviewed within usda . these officials said they hoped this notice , which they considered an initial step toward implementing our recommendation , would be published and implemented in time for usda's field offices to begin collecting these data by october 1 , 2009 . according to these officials , usda also plans to seek , at a later time , authority to collect such data on participants in all usda programs . in light of usda's history of civil rights problems , better strategic planning is vital . results - oriented strategic planning provides a road map that clearly describes what an organization is attempting to achieve and , over time , it can serve as a focal point for communication with congress and the public about what has been accomplished . results - oriented organizations follow three key steps in their strategic planning: ( 1 ) they define a clear mission and desired outcomes , ( 2 ) they measure performance to gauge progress , and ( 3 ) they use performance information for identifying performance gaps and making program improvements . ascr has started to develop a results - oriented approach as illustrated in its first strategic plan , assistant secretary for civil rights: strategic plan , fiscal years 2005-2010 , and its ascr priorities for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . however , ascr's plans do not include fundamental elements required for effective strategic planning . in particular , we found that the interests of ascr's stakeholders — including representatives of community - based organizations and minority interest groups — are not explicitly reflected in its strategic plan . for example , we found that ascr's stakeholders are interested in improvements in ( 1 ) usda's methods of delivering farm programs to facilitate access by underserved producers ; ( 2 ) the county committee system , so that stakeholders are better represented in local decisions ; and ( 3 ) the diversity of usda employees who work with minority producers . a more complete list of these interests is included in the appendix . in addition , ascr's strategic plan does not link to the plans of other usda agencies or the department and does not discuss the potential for linkages to be developed . ascr could also better measure performance to gauge progress , and it has not yet started to use performance information for identifying usda performance gaps . for example , ascr measures usda efforts to ensure usda customers have equal and timely access to programs by reporting on the numbers of participants at usda workshops rather than measuring the results of its outreach efforts on access to benefits and services . moreover , the strategic plan does not make linkages between levels of funding and ascr's anticipated results ; without such a discussion , it is not possible to determine whether ascr has the resources needed to achieve its strategic goal of , for example , strengthening partnerships with historically black land - grant universities through scholarships provided by usda .