hubzone program . at the headquarters level , the office of hubzone within ogcbd administers the hubzone program by certifying businesses as eligible to receive hubzone contracts , maintaining a list of qualified hubzone small businesses that federal agencies can use to locate vendors , adjudicating protests of hubzone eligibility , decertifying firms that no longer meet eligibility requirements , and conducting marketing outreach and training . in the field , each district office has a hubzone liaison who serves as the program expert at the local level . because business opportunity specialists are responsible for marketing ogcbd's other programs in addition to their 8 ( a ) duties , some of them also work with or serve as the hubzone liaison to help ensure that the hubzone program is implemented according to internal operating procedures and statute and help ensure that relevant hubzone program goals and objectives are accomplished . public comment period . in addition , sba officials noted that the public comment period varied in some cases , with extended comment periods being added as necessary . for example , for the all small mentor - protégé rule , sba initially provided a 60-day comment period , but extended it by an additional 30 days in response to public request . likewise , for the limitations on subcontracting rule , sba reopened the initial 60-day comment period for an additional 30 days starting about a week after the initial comment period ended . agency officials said they were used to receiving such legislation in stand - alone bills every couple of years until congress began including rule - making requirements for sba in ndaas in fiscal year 2013 . in written responses to our questions on the four selected rules , sba officials noted that the three rules required by ndaa for fiscal year 2013 came at a time when they were busy completing rules required by the small business jobs act of 2010 , thereby delaying the start of their work on the new set of rules . in a congressional testimony in february 2016 , the associate administrator of ogcbd stated that sba had implemented over 25 provisions from the small business jobs act of 2010 and was making progress on the remaining provisions . omb officials stated that the timeliness of sba's rule makings is not unusual and has not raised any concerns . additionally , sba officials noted that some of the rules contained other statutory requirements that required additional work . specifically , the all small mentor - protégé program and the limitations on subcontracting rules included changes that affected indian tribes , alaska native corporations , and native hawaiian organizations , which required sba to consult with these groups in accordance with executive order 13175 . also , the lower tier subcontracting rule required sba , the general services administration , and the department of defense to submit a plan for implementing the rule to both house and senate committees ; the agencies were required to complete planned actions within 1 year after enactment , and sba was required to issue any regulations necessary , including the completion of a far amendment , within 18 months after enactment .