gao - 09-326sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2009 . this hampers a direct comparison . the total program cost is about $3.61 billion ( base year 2009 dollars ) . the u.s. navy vertical take - off and landing tactical unmanned air vehicle ( vtuav ) will provide local commanders real - time imagery and data to support isr requirements . a vtuav system is composed of up to three air vehicles with associated electro - optical / infrared / laser designator - rangefinder sensors , two ground control stations , one recovery system , and associated spares and support equipment . the air vehicle launches and recovers vertically and operates from ships and land . interoperability is achieved through use of a common data link and standard communications . vtuav is being designed as a modular , reconfigurable system to support various operations , including potential surface , antisubmarine , and mine warfare missions . future capabilities currently under consideration include surface search radar , signal intelligence , enhanced data and communications relay , and integration of weapons . the navy expects the vtuav to achieve initial operational capability in late fiscal year 2009 . the program began in fiscal year 2000 , after market research and a competitive ship - based vertical takeoff and landing demonstration were conducted . a competitive contract was awarded to northrop grumman for delivery of system development air vehicles and the first lot of low - rate initial production ( lrip ) systems . during fiscal year 2002 , the program was de - scoped to a technology demonstration effort , and two lrip options were not exercised . in fiscal year 2003 , the vtuav program was restructured to support the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) , and received increased funding from congress in fiscal year 2004 toward that goal . the restructured program was expected to cost about $2.3 billion , and as a result in august 2006 it was designated as an acquisition category ic program . the program received milestone c approval in may 2007 to procure up to 4 air vehicles in the first lot of lrip . the navy plans to procure a total of 168 air vehicles , plus 9 developmental lrip vehicles . vtuav is currently undergoing test and evaluation . the vtuav program was restructured in 2004 to support the lcs . at the time of the restructuring , congress authorized funding for an upgraded vtuav variant , the mq - 8b , which addressed requirement shortfalls — including time on station — of an earlier version , the rq - 8a . in february 2008 , after being advised of at least a 2-year delay in the lcs program , the navy decided to continue vtuav development using an alternate ship — a frigate . navy officials estimated that the move to the alternate ship would require $42.6 million of additional funding and result in a 9-month schedule delay . vtuav efforts are funded under cost - type contracts for system development and firm - fixed price for production . the program uses common , mature technologies as much as possible . the air vehicles are based on a commercial manned helicopter that has been in service for over 20 years .