( see app . i for additional information on our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) in serving as the federal government's human capital agency , opm sees its role to be the president's strategic advisor on human capital issues , to develop tools and provide support to agencies in their human capital transformation efforts , and to assist in making the federal government a high - performing workplace . as such , opm , in conjunction with the office of management and budget ( omb ) , is charged with leading the federal government's strategic management of human capital initiative , one of five governmentwide initiatives of the president's management agenda . in carrying out this effort , opm's strategy is to provide human resources management leadership and services to all agencies in a manner that blends and balances flexibility and consistency . as we noted in our recent report on opm's management challenges , opm carries out its leadership role in a decentralized environment where both it and the agencies have shared responsibilities for addressing the human capital and related challenges facing the federal government . opm's role in aiding federal agencies represents a considerable challenge because federal managers have complained for years about the rigid and elaborate procedures required for federal personnel administration and have often expressed the need for more flexibility within a system that has traditionally been based on uniform rules . reformers have long sought to decentralize the personnel system and simplify the rules , arguing that however well the system may have operated in the past , it is no longer suited to meet the needs of a changing and competitive world . in 1983 , for example , napa published a report critical of excessive restrictions on federal managers , including constraints on their human resources decisions . in response to these criticisms , opm has , over time , decentralized and delegated many personnel decisions to the agencies and has encouraged agencies to use human capital flexibilities to help tailor their personnel approaches to accomplish their unique missions . our strategic human capital management model also advocates that agencies craft a tailored approach to their use of available flexibilities by drawing on those flexibilities that are appropriate for their particular organizations and their mission accomplishment . because of this tailoring , the federal personnel system is becoming more varied , notwithstanding its often - cited characterization as a “single employer.” the overall trend toward increased flexibility has revealed itself in a number of ways , including the efforts of some agencies to seek congressional approval to deviate from the personnel provisions of title 5 of the u.s. code that have traditionally governed much of the federal government's civil service system . as observed in a 1998 opm report , federal agencies' status relative to these title 5 personnel requirements can be better understood by thinking of them on a continuum . on one end of the continuum are federal agencies that generally must follow title 5 personnel requirements . these agencies do not have the authority , for example , to establish their own pay systems . on the other end of the continuum are federal agencies that have more flexibility in that they are exempt from many title 5 personnel requirements .