participation is voluntary . the office of personnel management ( opm ) has overall administrative responsibility for contracting with private health insurance carriers and plans sponsored by federal employee and postal organizations . the contracts provide — for fixed , predetermined plan premiums — benefits that opm judges affordable and appropriate for the needs of federal workers and retirees . the fehbp law does not require plans to offer a particular benefit package , although opm requires that they cover such services as child immunizations , cancer screening , prescription drugs , mental health , and organ transplants . plans are required to limit enrollees' annual out - of - pocket expenses for deductibles and coinsurance but can vary with regard to availability of high and low options , deductibles , coinsurance , and copayment requirements . as of june 2001 , there were a total of 38 participants in icmp - pec whose services for the fiscal year were projected to cost about $6 million . also , the care costs of 10 other participants from earlier hhd programs that preceded icmp - pec were transferred to icmp - pec . the projected costs for such services for this fiscal year are $2.5 million . tma managers lack the ability to track actual program costs during the year despite their efforts to improve data collection made during our review . some regional program managers told us they have worked with the $1,000 cap for many years and have become experienced in planning and scheduling services and equipment purchases so that needed care is delivered and the monthly cap is not exceeded . because pfpwd equipment costs can be prorated at $500 per month over the months needed to amortize the costs , the patient can use up to $500 per month for other services such as therapies . for example , an $8,000 wheelchair can be prorated over 16 months , leaving $500 per month over that period for other services . a case manager told us that to ensure that costs were kept within a family's monthly cap , she could negotiate lower costs with the local providers , search for alternative providers , or consider purchasing the services under tricare prime — which if done before april 1 , 2001 , would have entailed added beneficiary copayments . currently , however , the example wheelchair and other services can likely be obtained under tricare prime at no cost . as a result , none of the program managers we spoke with could provide examples of pfpwd cases whose services were interrupted or who otherwise were adversely affected by the monthly limit . further experience with the effects of eliminating tricare prime's copayments on pfpwd costs and caseloads may suggest that the services and equipment exclusively obtained under pfpwd could as appropriately be obtained under tricare prime . if so , the need for pfpwd could become the issue . comparing icmp - pec's unlimited home health and snf benefits with medicare and medicaid showed that icmp - pec's benefits are more generous . medicare provides limited home health and snf benefits . and , while the state medicaid programs we compared provide unlimited coverage for under - age - 21 patients , older patients' benefits have varying limits .