we did not conduct such a study . our study included a broad focus on changes in the freight railroad industry since the staggers rail act , the actions stb has taken to address concerns about competition and captivity , and future freight demand and capacity . the data we collected and analysis we performed — such as a review of rate changes over 20 years — were too broad to represent a national study of the state of competition . it is the limitations in the scope of our analysis of competition , along with limitations in the data available to us and a reasonable possibility that shippers in selected markets may be paying excessive rates , which led us to recommend that stb conduct a more rigorous analysis of competition . stb commented that it has already addressed our recommendation to improve data collection by proposing standardized monthly reports of fuel surcharges and also described its efforts to ensure the accuracy and reliability of data in the waybill . we commend stb for its recent action on fuel surcharges , which occurred during our review , but we also note stb has not yet implemented standardized reporting of fuel surcharges . clifford winston , deregulation of network industries – what's next ? specifically , revenues generated through railcar auctions and congestion fees may not be included . ( washington: aei - brookings joint center for regulatory studies: 2000 ) , pp . freight rail is an important component of our nation's economy . approximately 42 percent of all intercity freight in the united states , measured in ton - miles , moves on rail lines . freight rail is particularly important to producers and users of certain commodities . for example , about 70 percent of automobiles manufactured domestically and about 70 percent of coal delivered to power plants moves on freight rail . rail rates across the freight railroad industry have generally declined since the enactment of the staggers rail act . because changes in traffic patterns over time ( for example , hauls over longer distances ) can result in a decrease in the average revenue per ton - mile , purely relying on cents per ton - mile can present misleading industrywide rate trends . therefore , we developed a set of rail rate indexes to examine trends in rail rates over the 1985 through 2004 period . these indexes account for changes in traffic patterns over time that could affect revenue statistics but do not account for inflation . to provide a measure for inflation , we also included the price index for the gross domestic product ( gdp ) in figure 2 . from 1985 through 1987 , rail rates dropped by 10 percent and then continued to decline , although not as steeply , through 1998 . rates increased in 1999 , then dropped again in 2000 . in 2001 and 2002 rates rose again . rates were nearly flat in 2003 and 2004 , finishing approximately 3 percent above rates in 2000 , but were 20 percent below 1985 rates ( these trends are shown in figure 2 ) .