, not depreciated ) . we disagree with tva in this regard . our choice of ratios was appropriate because they result in meaningful information regarding the relative financial conditions of the entities . to assess the financial condition of the entities , we selected two types of ratios . the first type indicates an entity's financial flexibility to successfully respond to competitive and financial challenges . in this regard , we compared tva to other utilities in terms of ( 1 ) total financing costs , ( 2 ) fixed financing costs , and ( 3 ) the ability of an entity to pay for capital expenditures and common stock dividends from net cash generated from operations . each of these ratios is an indicator of an entity's ability to withstand stressful financial conditions . interest costs are particularly important to consider because they are fixed costs that must be paid even in times of competitive or financial pressures . contrary to tva's comment letter , we recognize the differences between tva's financial structure and those of ious and accounted for those differences in performing our analyses . as our report notes , tva's financing ( except for internally generated cash , as with all entities we assessed ) is obtained by issuing debt , while ious also have the option of equity financing . the requirement that tva obtain financing only by issuing debt could be considered a competitive disadvantage because of the corresponding fixed financing costs which affect tva's financial flexibility . the ratio of total financing cost to revenue compares tva interest costs , as a percent of revenue , to the ious' costs of ( 1 ) interest , ( 2 ) preferred stock dividends , and ( 3 ) common stock dividends as a percent of revenue . the ratio of fixed financing costs to revenue compares tva interest costs , as a percent of revenue , to the fixed portion of the ious' financing costs ( i.e. , their interest costs and preferred stock dividends ) as a percent of revenue . these analyses appropriately adjust for the different financing structures of the entities in assessing financing costs , and assessing the extent to which entities have fixed costs that limit their financial flexibility is a valid means by which to consider their respective financial conditions . the second type of financial ratio we used indicates the extent to which capital costs , including the costs of deferred assets , have been recovered . in this regard , we compared tva to other utilities in terms of the ( 1 ) portion of capital assets that has not begun to be included in rates and ( 2 ) the portion of gross property , plant , and equipment that has already been recovered . these indicators are important because a high level of unrecovered capital costs could compound an entity's challenges as it enters a competitive market . in the case of tva , if it enters a competitive environment with the relatively high debt service costs it now carries , its ability to price its power competitively could be jeopardized , thus increasing its potential for stranded costs .