moving marines to iwakuni . as envisioned by the 2006 roadmap , the u.s. government would return to japan the marine corps air station futenma in okinawa once the government of japan constructed a fully operational replacement facility ( futenma replacement facility ) , including a runway , in a northern , less - populated area of the island . this facility was originally projected to be completed by 2014 , but delays have slowed its progress . according to the officials , as of june 2016 , 9 of 184 projects have been constructed at the planned site of the realignment — camp schwab . figure 1 shows the planned location of the runway at camp schwab and how high landfill material must rise to build the runway . after several years of planning to move approximately 8,000 marines from okinawa to guam , dod revised its plan in april 2012 to , among other things , relocate 4,100 marines to guam , 2,700 to hawaii , and 800 to the continental united states , as shown below in figure 2 . additionally , the plan includes establishing up to a 2,500-person rotational marine corps presence in australia , 1,300 of whom would come from okinawa — a move that , according to dod officials , stems from a november 2011 announcement between the united states and australia . dod expects relocation to guam to occur between fiscal years 2022 and 2026 . to provide additional training opportunities for pacific command's service components , dod is planning to construct training ranges on the nearby commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) , specifically the islands of tinian and pagan . however , no forces are expected to relocate to cnmi . dod estimates that the total cost to relocate marines to guam and training on cnmi will be $8.7 billion in fiscal year 2012 dollars , with approximately $3.1 billion being provided by japan . dod expects relocation to hawaii to occur between 2027 and 2031 . according to dod documentation , its baseline rough order - of - magnitude cost estimates for development on hawaii range from approximately $1.3 billion to $2.5 billion in fiscal year 2012 dollars , although actual costs will vary depending upon the mix of units and the facilities needed . for the relocation to the continental united states , the marine corps currently has no plans , time frames , or cost estimates . according to marine corps officials , the decision to relocate 800 marines to the continental united states was made because there was a need to further reduce the marine corps presence on okinawa . additionally , senior officials at marine corps headquarters and marine corps pacific command stated there was no strategic need to move the marines to the continental united states , and they assume that this move may never happen — for example , they said that if the global marine corps presence continues to downsize , then perhaps the positions for the 800 marines slated to move to the continental united states may be eliminated from the global marine corps presence .