referrals . irs employees and units , as well as external sources , such as other agencies and citizens , can refer potentially noncompliant taxpayers to sb / se . sb / se may start an audit if the referral indicates significant potential for noncompliance . referrals can involve , among others , those promoting shelters created to avoid taxation , whistleblowers , and those not filing required tax returns . related pickups . after opening an audit , sb / se may identify the taxpayer's prior or subsequent year returns or returns of related taxpayers to audit . user - developed criteria . these criteria use filters or rules embedded in computer software to identify returns with specific characteristics , often for projects . these characteristics generally involve a specific tax issue known or suspected to have high noncompliance in a particular geographic area , industry , or population . all of sb / se's selection workstreams involve multiple parties so that no individual can control the decision - making process . for example , staff who classify a return cannot later audit the same return . also , for field audits , irs coordinators in an area office generally determine which returns will be assigned to the field offices , rather than field offices and auditors generating their own work . sb / se also has procedures to ensure that managers review about 10 percent of returns classified for the dif and nrp workstreams . also , managers must approve auditors' requests to open audits for prior or subsequent year and related returns . although not every step in the selection process is reviewed , these procedures provide some assurance that the decision to audit a return is not determined unilaterally . safeguarding data / systems . sb / se demonstrated that safeguards are in place to restrict system access to authorized users . irs has procedures on system security and uses a multitiered authentication process to control system access , which we observed . the mission statements for both irs and sb / se declare the strategic goal of administering the “tax law with integrity and fairness to all.” sb / se officials stated that integrity and fairness are core values of irs . however , they did not define these terms or provide evidence that staff know what is to be achieved by this strategic goal . without a clear definition of fairness that has been communicated to staff , sb / se has less assurance that its staff consistently treat all taxpayers fairly . internal control standard: define objectives internal control standards call for program objectives to be clearly defined in measurable terms to enable the design of internal control for related risks . specific terms should be fully defined and clearly set forth so they can be easily understood at all levels of the entity . consistent information must be reliably communicated throughout the entity if the entity is to achieve its goals .