this has started to occur . noaa has already made decisions to remove a transmission capability that is important to the navy . other functions that are currently under consideration ( such as delaying receipt of the data or removing ground processing functions ) could also affect military operations . agency officials reported that they formed a joint working group in july 2011 to discuss and mitigate these issues , but it is too soon to determine what progress has been made , if any . if the agencies cannot find a way to build an effective partnership that facilitates both efficient and effective decision - making on data continuity needs , the needs of both agencies — and their users — may not be adequately incorporated into the new programs .  oversight of new program management: under its new jpss program , noaa plans to transfer parts of the npoess program to nasa , but it has not yet defined how it will oversee nasa's efforts . we have reported that nasa has consistently underestimated time and cost and has not adequately managed risk factors such as contractor performance . because of such issues , we listed nasa's acquisition management as a high - risk area in 1990 , and it remains a high - risk area today . noaa officials reported that they are developing a management control plan with nasa and intend to perform an independent review of this plan when it is completed . this plan has now been in development for about 18 months , and neither noaa nor nasa could provide a firm time frame for its completion . without strong noaa oversight of nasa's management of program components , jpss may continue to face the same cost , schedule , and contract management challenges as the npoess program .  cost and schedule implications resulting from contract and program changes: nasa has transferred the sensor development and common ground systems contracts from the npoess contract . however , noaa has been in negotiations for at least 6 months with the npoess contractor regarding intellectual property rights for components of jpss . the agency could not provide a time frame for when it expects this issue to be resolved . until these issues are resolved , the full cost and schedule implications of contract and program changes will be unknown .  ensuring key staff and capabilities: the npoess program office was composed of noaa , nasa , air force , and contractor staff with knowledge and experience in the status , risks , and lessons learned from the npoess program . this knowledge would be important to both programs after the transition period . according to noaa and nasa officials , the jpss program office is now fully staffed . on the other hand , the dod program has only staffed approximately 80 out of 155 positions in its program office . in addition , noaa officials acknowledged that they had estimated that a contractor workforce of approximately 1,600 would work on jpss activities ; however , only 819 are on board due to budget constraints .