gao - 06-272 . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2006 . these reports are listed in attachment i . we analyzed bureau cost and planning documents and data and interviewed key bureau officials regarding the 2004 and 2006 census tests , contract monitoring , and the life - cycle cost estimate . in conducting our work , we visited the texas and south dakota test sites ; queens , new york ; and several counties in rural south - central georgia , where an earlier field test was held in 2004 . to help policymakers make informed decisions , including funding decisions , the bureau needs to provide policymakers with comprehensive , timely , and updated information . as we have previously reported , the bureau has planned earlier than in the past and that its plans and efforts to reengineer the census have potential to contain costs . however , we believe the bureau needs to do more . in this testimony , as well as in our previous reports and testimonies , we have discussed the bureau's ongoing emphasis on reengineering the census to contain costs . we have noted that while the $11.3 billion estimate makes the 2010 census the most expensive in history , new cost drivers have emerged . as we previously recommended , a periodically updated comprehensive project plan and cost estimate that is supported by transparent , detailed , and comprehensive analyses and documentation would enable analysts , policymakers , and others to ascertain whether significant risks exist that could cause costs to increase . we believe that in this era of serious national budget challenges , it is important for the bureau to implement our 2004 recommendation not only for this fiscal year but every fiscal year of the 2010 decennial life - cycle . to conduct its oversight and budgetary functions , congress needs the bureau to provide it with an annually updated comprehensive , integrated project plan which includes milestones , itemized costs , measurable goals , and risk mitigation plans . that concludes my statement , mr. chairman . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact brenda s. farrell , on ( 202 ) 512-6806 , or by email at farrellb@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony include carlos hazera , assistant director ; mike carley , betty clark , robert goldenkoff , , shirley hwang , wright lewis , krista loose , lisa pearson , scott purdy , mark ryan , shannon vancleave , and timothy wexler . 2010 census: census bureau needs to take prompt actions to resolve long - standing and emerging address and mapping challenges . 2010 census: costs and risks must be closely monitored and evaluated with mitigation plans in place . gao - 06-822t . washington , d.c.: june 6 , 2006 . 2010 census: census bureau generally follows selected leading acquisition planning practices , but continued management attentions is needed to help ensure success . gao - 06-277 . washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2006 . census bureau: important activities for improving management of key 2010 decennial acquisitions remain to be done . gao - 06-444t .