syria . syria's instability is largely caused by an ongoing civil war that began with a government crackdown on antigovernment protests in march 2011 . usaid has reported that the conflict has led to economic collapse , a breakdown in services and governance , and instability , which violent extremist groups , including isis , have sought to exploit . millions of syrians have become refugees or internally displaced due to this crisis , according to reporting from the united nations high commissioner for refugees . usip is governed by a bipartisan board of directors , which includes the secretaries of state and defense or their designees , the president or vice president of the national defense university , and 12 others . usip's primary funding comes from congressional appropriation and can be supplemented by funds from u.s. government partners . usip staff work abroad and at its headquarters in washington , d.c. usip initiates its own work and enters into interagency agreements with u.s. agencies such as state , usaid , and dod , according to usip officials . because usip is not an agency within the executive branch , it is not a formal participant in interagency national security policy processes involving state , usaid , and dod , according to state . u.s. agencies and usip are engaged in efforts to counter violent extremism and address conflict in countries affected by instability and violent conflicts , including iraq , syria , and nigeria . for example , as areas are liberated from isis in iraq and syria , the united states is working with its partners to try to consolidate gains , reduce levels of local instability , peaceably manage change , and build the capacity of local governance entities . to improve the effectiveness of these efforts , u.s. agencies have evaluated lessons from similar efforts in countries such as afghanistan and iraq . the sar and assessments from the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction and the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction are examples of u.s. government initiatives to identify lessons learned from past u.s. efforts . in prior work , we have identified key collaboration practices that can be used to assess collaboration at federal agencies ( see fig . these practices can help agencies implement actions to operate across boundaries , including fostering open lines of communication , and establish goals based on what the agencies share in common . additionally , clarifying roles and responsibilities allows agencies to determine who will do what , organize their joint and individual efforts , and facilitate decision making . we have previously found that improving coordination and collaboration across agencies can potentially help agencies reduce or better manage fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . state , usaid , dod , and usip reported that they have conducted a variety of efforts in iraq , nigeria , and syria aimed at preventing and mitigating violent conflicts and stabilizing areas affected by such conflicts . in response to our request , each agency and usip provided descriptions and goals for their specific program - level or project - level efforts in iraq , nigeria , and syria ( and in neighboring countries for syria ) .