gao - 07-343t . washington , d.c.: january 24 , 2007 . ( see fig . these changes include mandatory work requirements , changes to application procedures , lower benefits , and policies such as lifetime limits on assistance , diversion policies , and sanctions for non - compliance , according to a review of the research . while mandatory work activities assisted some participants in getting jobs , according to a research synthesis conducted for hhs , these mandates may have led other families to choose not to apply rather than be expected to fulfill the requirement to work . other families may have found it more difficult to apply for or continue to participate in the program , especially those with poor mental or physical health or other characteristics that make employment difficult . a decline in average cash benefits may also have contributed to the decline in participation . average cash benefits under 2005 tanf rules were 17 percent lower than they were under 1995 afdc rules , according to our trim3 estimates , as cash benefit levels in many states have not been updated or kept pace with inflation . research also suggests that in response to lifetime limits on the amount of time a family can receive cash assistance eligible families may hold off on applying for cash assistance and “bank” their time , a practice that could contribute to the decline in families' use of cash assistance . in addition , fewer families may have applied or completed applications for tanf cash assistance because of state policies and practices for diverting applicants from cash assistance ; nearly all states have at least one type of diversion strategy , such as the use of one - time nonrecurring benefits instead of monthly cash assistance . finally , some studies and researchers noted that full sanctions for families noncompliance — those that cut off all benefits for a period of time — are associated with declines in the number of families receiving cash assistance , although more research is needed to validate this association . during the recent economic recession , caseloads increased in some states but decreased in others , as circumstances in individual states as well as states' responses to the economic conditions varied . between december 2007 and september 2009 , 37 states had increases in the number of families receiving tanf cash assistance while 13 states had decreases . however , the degree of change in families receiving tanf cash assistance varied significantly by state , as some states experienced caseload increases or decreases of over 25 percent while others experienced minimal changes of 0 to 5 percent . nationwide , the total number of families receiving tanf cash assistance increased by 6 percent during this time period although the subset of two - parent families receiving such assistance increased by 57 percent . initially few states reported reducing tanf - related spending on family and / or work supports in response to the recession , instead using funding sources such as the emergency contingency fund created by the recovery act to respond to rising caseloads and / or to establish or expand subsidized employment programs .