el paso , tex. besides the two direct loans already mentioned , since 1997 it has provided more than $38.7 million in loan guarantees made in el paso through its partnership with small business administration loan guarantee programs . eda had previously awarded a grant of $500,000 for a revolving loan fund that had lain dormant . working together with a newly elected mayor , this grant was reactivated , and matching funds of $167,000 were obtained from el paso county . beaufort county has received state industrial recruitment competition funds , which are designed to provide incentives for companies to locate in economically distressed areas . specifically , four companies in the county received a total of $400,000 in commitments that provided $1,000 for each job created . beaufort county did not apply for any community development block grant funds over the last few years even though , as the director of the state department of commerce's finance center explained , beaufort may have been eligible for them . he told us that these funds frequently come with “too many strings attached,” citing the stringent requirements that generally accompany these funds and the fact that community officials want more flexibility than the funds offer . in addition , the community development block grant application is about 40 pages long , is extremely time consuming , and is difficult to prepare . generally , small communities such as beaufort county hire a contractor to write the grant application . community officials said that beaufort county applied for but was denied a caip grant . officials also said they did not have sufficient staff resources to adequately develop the caip grant proposal . officials stated that beaufort county's most pressing economic development needs are infrastructure and natural gas . insufficient roadways to carry vehicles and trucks through beaufort county , combined with the long distance from interstate 95 , contribute greatly to the slow economic development of beaufort county . in addition , the county needs to build additional gas lines for industries before they will move into the area , according to local officials . one avenue of potential economic development is that the community of washington and chocowinity is becoming a popular area for retirees from northern states . officials explained that both towns are located along the pamlico river , which has drawn a great number of boaters . the community has built a major retirement community with large and expensive homes , a marina , a golf course , and a restaurant . as a result , the community is now also building a supermarket and drugstore to meet the needs of these new residents . located at the western tip of texas , el paso borders new mexico and the mexican state of chihuahua . it is the fourth largest city in texas ( see fig . 7 ) , with a population of 563,662 , 77 percent of whom are hispanic or latino . ciudad juarez , el paso's sister city across the border , has about 1.2 million in population . in 2000 , their combined population was an estimated 1.9 million . additional community characteristics are shown in table 9 .