( recommendation 2 ) . these transitions at state have had an effect on its reform efforts . without explicit direction from senior leadership , some implementing officials involved in the reform efforts remain unclear about whether their projects are an agency priority . further , for the reform efforts that remain an agency priority , a dedicated team to oversee implementation could help accelerate state's efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its operations . we are making the following two recommendations to state: the secretary of state should determine which of the unimplemented reform projects included in its fiscal year 2019 congressional budget justification , if any , should be implemented and communicate this determination to congress and appropriate state personnel . ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of state should establish a single dedicated team to manage the implementation of all reform efforts that the secretary decides to pursue . state notified both omb and the congress of these projects . a full description of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2018 to august 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to the contractor's report , the survey had a 43 percent response rate , with 27,837 state employees and 6,142 usaid employees responding to the survey . the contractor also conducted in - person interviews with a randomly selected cross section of personnel , which included 175 employees from state and 94 from usaid . the contractor's report on the results of the survey and the interviews highlighted five areas for state reforms . in july 2017 , the deputy secretary of state created five planning teams to develop multiple projects in those five areas . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in developing our june 2018 report to assist the congress , omb , and agencies in assessing agency reform plans , we reviewed our prior work and leading practices on organizational transformations ; collaboration ; government streamlining and efficiency ; fragmentation , overlap , and duplication ; and high - risk and other long - standing agency management challenges . the resulting june 2018 report includes 58 key questions to aid in assessing reform efforts . these questions are organized into four broad categories and 12 subcategories . we determined that the questions most relevant to the current implementation stage of state's reform efforts are found in two subcategories: ( 1 ) leadership focus and attention and ( 2 ) managing and monitoring . table 1 lists the key questions in these subcategories . in response to the march 2017 executive order 13781 and the ensuing omb memo , state launched a “listening tour” intended to gather ideas and feedback from state and usaid employees . as a key component of this outreach effort , state hired a contractor to design and administer a confidential online survey , which was sent to all state and usaid employees in may 2017 .