goals . gao - 06-788 . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2006 defense logistics: preliminary observations on equipment reset challenges and issues for the army and marine corps . gao - 06-604t . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2006 . defense logistics: better management and oversight of prepositioning programs needed to reduce risk and improve future programs . gao - 05-427 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2005 . defense logistics: dod has begun to improve supply distribution operations , but further actions are needed to sustain these efforts . gao - 05-775 . washington , d.c.: august 11 , 2005 . defense logistics: actions needed to improve the availability of critical items during current and future operations . gao - 05-275 . washington , d.c.: april 8 , 2005 . military personnel: a strategic approach is needed to address long - term guard and reserve force availability . gao - 05-285t . washington , d.c.: february 2 , 2005 . military personnel: dod needs to address long - term reserve force availability and related mobilization and demobilization issues . gao - 04-1031 . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2004 . defense logistics: preliminary observations on the effectiveness of logistics activities during operation iraqi freedom . gao - 04-305r . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2003 . military operations: contractors provide vital services to deployed forces but are not adequately addressed in dod's plans . gao - 03-695 . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2003 . there are also limited maintenance facilities in afghanistan . the army and marine corps have developed rotation plans that allow equipment to be sent back to the united states for depot - level maintenance cycles which essentially rebuilds equipment and extends its service life . equipment availability may pose challenges depending on equipment requirements for operations in afghanistan . army and marine corps officials stated that they are in the process of determining equipment requirements for afghanistan ; however , final equipment needs will be based on several factors such as the type of operations , force structure , and capabilities needed . for example , army and marine corps officials recently stated that operations in afghanistan may require lighter body armor and lighter mrap vehicles . in addition , geographic and environmental factors also play a role in determining equipment requirements for afghanistan . for example , heavy brigade combat teams , which include tanks , may not be well suited for the afghanistan terrain . as a result , the army is currently developing a lighter version of the mrap vehicle better suited for the difficult terrain of afghanistan . also , given the fact that , since 2006 , there have been about 4,800 army , marine corps , and joint urgent needs requests processed to date for operations in iraq and afghanistan , it is likely that the number of urgent needs requests will increase in the future as dod continues to build up its forces in afghanistan . in addition to ground equipment , dod will need to assess its requirements for intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) capabilities to support increased force levels in afghanistan , given its current allocation of assets to support ongoing operations in iraq .