all commercial airports are eligible to apply to the spp . to apply , an airport operator must complete the spp application and submit it to the spp program management office ( pmo ) , as well as to the fsd for its airport . figure 1 illustrates the spp application process . although tsa provides all airports with the opportunity to apply for participation in the spp , authority to approve or deny the application resides in the discretion of the tsa administrator . according to tsa officials , in addition to the cost - efficiency and effectiveness considerations mandated by faa modernization act , there are many other factors that are weighed in considering an airport's application for spp participation . for example , the potential impacts of any upcoming projects at the airport are considered . once an airport is approved for spp participation and a private screening contractor has been selected by tsa , the contract screening workforce assumes responsibility for screening passengers and their property and is required to adhere to the same security regulations , standard operating procedures , and other tsa security requirements followed by federal screeners at non - spp airports . tsa has developed guidance to assist airport operators in completing their spp applications , as we recommended in december 2012 . specifically , in december 2012 , we reported that tsa had developed some resources to assist spp applicants , but it had not provided guidance on its application and approval process to assist airports . as it was originally implemented in 2004 , the spp application process required only that an interested airport operator submit an application stating its intention to opt out of federal screening as well as its reasons for wanting to do so . in 2011 , tsa revised its spp application to reflect the “clear and substantial advantage” standard announced by the administrator in january 2011 . specifically , tsa requested that the applicant explain how private screening at the airport would provide a clear and substantial advantage to tsa's security operations . among other things , the revised application no longer included the “clear and substantial advantage” question , but instead included questions that requested applicants to discuss how participating in the spp would not compromise security at the airport and to identify potential areas where cost savings or efficiencies may be realized . in december 2012 , we reported that while tsa provided general instructions for filling out the spp application as well as responses to frequently asked questions ( faq ) , the agency had not issued guidance to assist airports with completing the revised application or explained to airports how it would evaluate applications given the changes brought about by the faa modernization act . in 2007 , tsa estimated that spp airports would cost about 17 percent more to operate than airports using federal screeners . in our january 2009 report we noted strengths in the methodology's design , but also identified seven limitations in tsa's methodology that could affect the accuracy and reliability of cost comparisons , and its usefulness in informing future management decisions .