ii ) . for example , the management operations indicator rose from a troubled level of 16 in fiscal year 1999 to a standard level of 23 in fiscal year 2000 , and the financial operations indicator rose from a failing score of 15 in fiscal year 1999 to a passing score of 19 in 2000 . despite these improvements , the public housing authority has not yet fully recovered . furthermore , there is a real concern within the authority's current administration regarding whether the existing reforms can be sustained and the authority can continue to move forward after the camden housing board resumes control . public housing programs started in puerto rico in 1938 . in an effort to reorganize its public housing , in 1957 , the puerto rico government created the urban renewal and housing corporation — the current housing authority's predecessor . then , in 1989 , the government created the puerto rico public housing administration ( prpha ) within the puerto rico department of housing . for a brief period , the government operated both housing authorities before dissolving the puerto rico urban renewal and housing corporation in 1991 and transferring its public housing program to prpha . an administrator who is appointed by the puerto rico secretary of housing directs prpha . prpha is the second largest public housing authority in the nation , with 338 developments and 56,834 units . fifteen private management companies and eight resident management corporations manage the developments . in fiscal year 2001 , it received about $270 million from the federal government , including $175.2 million for its capital fund program , $80.8 million for its operations , and $14 million for its drug elimination program . in addition , prpha continued to obligate funds from a $50 million hope vi grant that it received in fiscal year 1994 . over the years , prpha has experienced many management problems , although it is not currently considered troubled under phas . in 1981 , hud designated the authority's predecessor as “financially troubled.” later , in 1985 , because of serious financial , administrative , and project maintenance problems , hud designated the agency as “operationally troubled.” in 1991 , hud severely sanctioned the agency by freezing about $308 million of unobligated funds , and in 1992 , the governor of puerto rico transferred the housing authority's modernization and development programs to the puerto rico building authority , directing it to act as an agent for the housing authority . in addition , private management companies were hired to manage the housing developments , and the housing authority's staff was reduced from over 4,500 employees to fewer than 100 . the housing authority's role was limited to accounting for and reporting on the use of federal funds and ensuring that the management agents were fulfilling their contractual responsibilities . hud continued to view the housing authority as troubled until december 1996 , when it lifted the troubled rating and restored control of the modernization program to the authority . however , a year later , hud designated the modernization program as troubled because of financial management problems and the need for corrective actions .