sustainability . programs should have the necessary resources for long - term sustainability and success . treasury's office of financial education and financial access has noted that a successful financial literacy program should be developed for long - term success , as evidenced by characteristics such as continuing financial support , legislative backing , or integration into an established course of instruction . criteria could also address the expertise and capacity of providers , including years of experience and staff knowledge in economics and personal finance education . some stakeholders told us that for - profit companies that market or sell financial products should be ineligible , presumably because they may not provide unbiased information or may be more likely to use financial education to help sell products . along these lines , only nonprofit organizations and units of government are eligible to become hud - approved housing counseling agencies . by contrast , the bankruptcy code does not require entities approved to fulfill the debtor education requirement to be nonprofits , although it does require approved credit counseling agencies to be nonprofits . some bank representatives told us that , within their industry , many entities provide financial education as a legitimate community service and do not use it to market products . one step in developing a federal process for certifying financial literacy providers would be to determine the scope of the entities that would be eligible . some stakeholders with whom we spoke noted that trying to encompass all types of financial literacy providers could be unrealistic . for example , applying consistent criteria and standards among programs using very different approaches and delivery mechanisms would be difficult . one representative of a federal agency suggested that there be separate certification processes based on the topics covered . the institute for financial literacy , according to its representatives , has opted for a broader scope in developing its organizational accreditation , which is open to organizations that provide financial education either exclusively or as part of a wider range of services , in which case only the relevant activities are accredited . what criteria would be used ? criteria would need to be developed for determining the certification of financial literacy providers . these criteria could include financial soundness , governance structure , size , populations served , reputation , and nonprofit status , among others . one federal agency noted that a code of ethics could also be included as part of the certification process to help address these issues . should certification include content standards ? one option for certification would be to require that certified providers include in their programs certain content standards , such as specific topics that must be covered , or to require that certain core competencies be addressed . such standards could provide consistency and quality in the program content offered by certified financial literacy providers . for example , one financial literacy advocate told us that such standards would help teachers identify high - quality content for financial education incorporated into classroom instruction or after - school programs .