we have modified language in the report . state's comment reinforces our belief that it is time for state to develop a strategy for addressing long - term visa demand . if state determines it needs more staff to handle projected demand , then it should detail these needs in its strategy . we based our comment on a cable prepared by the u.s. embassy in london . state acknowledges that the 10-fingerprint requirement could reduce the number of applicants processed . applicants are not interviewed until after their fingerprints are taken , so a reduction in the number of applicants processed would subsequently result in a reduction of applicants interviewed . we have modified language in the draft to clarify our point . we have incorporated information on the visa office's two - year plan into the report . state does not have a plan that outlines how it will cope with growing visa demand , which is why we recommend that state develop a strategy that identifies the actions it will take to address increasing demand . all nivs must now be adjudicated by consular officers . personal interviews are required by law for most foreign nationals seeking nivs . as of october 2004 , consular officers are required to scan visa applicants' right and left index fingers through the dhs automated biometric identification system before an applicant can receive a visa . in 2005 , the secretary of homeland security announced that the u.s. government had adopted a 10-fingerscan standard for biometric collection of fingerprints . in february 2006 , state reported that it would begin pilot testing and procuring 10-print equipment to ensure that all visa - issuing posts have collection capability by the end of fiscal year 2007 . according to state , consular officers face increased requirements to consult with headquarters and other u.s. agencies prior to visa issuance in the form of security advisory opinions . according to state , as a result of the patriot act , consular officers have access to , and are required to consult , far greater amounts of interagency data regarding potential terrorists and individuals who would harm u.s. interests . a number of potential factors can contribute to delays for visa interview appointments at consular posts . for example , increased consular officer workload at posts , which can be caused by factors such as increased security screening procedures or increased visa demand , can exacerbate delays because there are more work requirements for each available officer to complete . other factors such as staffing gaps and ongoing consular facility limitations could also affect waits because they may limit the number of applicants that can be seen for an interview in a given day . following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , applications for visas declined from a high of over 10.4 million in fiscal year 2001 to a low of approximately 7 million in 2003 . for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 , the number of visa applications increased , according to state's data ( see fig . state anticipates that 8.1 million visas applications will be received in fiscal year 2007 and 8.6 million in 2008 . state's visa workload increased by almost 16 percent between 2004 and 2006 .