( see fig . between 1980 and 1991 , the number of employees working in general aviation manufacturing fell by almost half . the downturn in general aviation manufacturing was reflected in other areas of the industry as well . the number of fixed - wing aircraft in the general aviation fleet dropped by more than one - quarter between 1984 and 1994 , from about 200,000 aircraft to about 150,000 aircraft . the total number of active pilots also declined in this time period , with the number of pilots holding private certificates falling from about 320,000 in 1984 to about 284,000 in 1994 . what did key indicators in general aviation activity show in the years leading up to gara and what have they shown since then ? what funding is available for general aviation airports and is it sufficient to accommodate planned development ? what are the trends in general aviation accident rates and the causes of accidents , and how have the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and the industry attempted to improve safety ? we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and to the secretary of transportation ; the administrator of faa ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report or would like to discuss it further , i can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-2834 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . most consideration in the nation's rapidly growing aviation industry focuses on commercial passenger and cargo airlines . attention to general aviation , which includes most aviation operations other than commercial and military , is often the result of an accident that involves a well - known figure , such as the 1999 crash of john f. kennedy , jr.'s , airplane . in fact , general aviation is an important component of the nation's air transportation system and economy , accounting for 96 percent of all civilian aircraft and three out of every four takeoffs and landings . general aviation airports provide a vast network of landing areas across the country . and while most general aviation pilots fly only for personal use , others use their general aviation training as a base for moving into other parts of civilian aviation such as piloting for commercial passenger and cargo airlines . general aviation encompasses a wide variety of operations , including the training of new pilots , crop dusting , and providing air tours for sightseers and transportation for business executives . in addition , general aviation provides rapid transportation for medical and other civil emergencies . the federal aviation administration ( faa ) divides general aviation activities into use categories . about 85 percent of general aviation flying falls into one of five categories , as described in table 1 . the largest of these categories is personal flying , which is defined as flying for pleasure or personal transportation and not for business purposes . in 1999 , personal flying accounted for 36 percent of all general aviation hours flown , nearly twice as much as the next largest segment — instructional flying .