this also did not occur . most brigades in the army begin training for their deployment to a combat training center , such as the national training center , 4 to 6 months ahead of time . we also reported that the need to train stryker brigade soldiers in digital systems was posing a challenge because the brigade's design requires digitization to maintain the critical situational awareness capability . these systems use sophisticated technology that allows the soldiers to achieve superior battlefield information enabling them to engage the enemy long before coming into contact . our analysis of the operational evaluation concludes that 1 year later , the brigade still had not mastered the use of its digital systems . the army is implementing a risk management plan to mitigate most issues identified in the operational evaluation , which generally correspond with the weaknesses we identified . the army concluded that the issues were largely training related , but it also identified a few as design or equipment related . although the army developed , and is implementing , a plan that will mitigate most of the identified issues , the army's immediate focus was to resolve those training and equipment issues that affected the brigade's ability to deploy to iraq . it deferred for future consideration the remaining issues and decisions that have implications for the future brigades . based on its analysis of the operational evaluation report , the army first developed a matrix that assigned a risk level to issues and determined whether issues would preclude the stryker brigade from a scheduled deployment or could be addressed in the future . it then developed a mitigation plan to address all issues identified . to mitigate the identified training issues and to prepare for the brigade's deployment to iraq , i corps developed and implemented an 8-week modular predeployment training event that included a command post exercise to train the staff and a brigade field training exercise that emphasized platoon and company operations . the training addressed four general issues identified from the operational evaluation: army battle command system interoperability and connectivity , staff operations and synchronization , application of doctrine in unit operations , and subordinate unit specific training . furthermore , the command post and field training post exercises were to ensure that the brigade was proficient in stability and support operation tasks as specified by validated the interoperability of newly fielded systems and equipment , validated the integration of newly assigned soldiers and leaders and attached units such as the assigned aviation task force , exercised the staff planning and battle command process using the digital and communications systems to refine the staff planning process , exercised distributed logistics in a complex environment , and exercised force protection and accountability of contractors on the battlefield . to help the brigade achieve the training objectives , u.s . forces command provided observer - controllers from the joint readiness training center to provide feedback and conduct informal after - action reviews focused on lessons learned from operation iraqi freedom . a senior training center official stated that 40 to 50 percent of the observer - controllers had participated in the operational evaluation segment held at the joint readiness training center .