estimated completion for that work was 2010 . in the chalmette area work was estimated to be 90 percent complete with some levee enlargement work and floodwall work remaining . in st. charles parish work was 60 percent complete with some gaps still remaining in the levees . over the last 10 fiscal years ( 1996-2005 ) , federal appropriations have totaled about $128.6 million and corps reprogramming actions resulted in another $13 million being made available to the project . during that time , appropriations have generally declined from about $15-20 million annually in the earlier years to about $5-7 million in the last three fiscal years . while this may not be unusual given the state of completion of the project , the corps' project fact sheet from may 2005 noted that the president's budget request for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 and the appropriated amount for fiscal year 2005 were insufficient to fund new construction contracts . among the construction efforts that could not be funded , according to the corps , were the following: levee enlargements in all four parishes pumping station flood protection in orleans parish floodgates and a floodwall in st. charles parish bridge replacement in orleans parish . the corps had also stated that it could spend $20 million in fiscal year 2006 on the project if the funds were available . the corps noted that several levees had settled and needed to be raised to provide the design - level of protection . closure of these gaps was scheduled by september 2005 . federal allocations for the project totaled $458 million as of the enactment of the fiscal year 2005 federal appropriation . this represents 87 percent of the federal government's responsibility of $528 million with about $70 million remaining to complete the project in 2015 . for the last few years , the project generally received the amount of funds appropriated to it and was not adversely affected by any corps reprogramming actions . in recent years , questions have been raised about the ability of the project to withstand larger hurricanes than it was designed for , such as a category 4 or 5 , or even a slow - moving category 3 hurricane that lingered over the area and produced higher levels of rainfall . along this line , the corps completed in 2002 a reconnaissance or pre - feasibility study on whether to strengthen hurricane protection along the louisiana coast . a full feasibility study was estimated to take at least five years to complete and cost about $8 million . in march 2005 , the corps reported that it was allocating $79,000 to complete a management plan for the feasibility study and a cost - share agreement with local sponsors . the president's fiscal year 2006 budget request did not include any funds for the feasibility project . in closing , the lake pontchartrain hurricane project has been under construction for nearly 40 years , much longer than originally envisioned and at much greater cost , although much of that can be attributed to inflation over these years , and the project is still not complete .