officials at the u.s . postal service , consumer financial protection bureau , federal reserve board , international trade commission , and postal regulatory commission stated that pursuant to certain laws or regulations , their agencies have determined that they are not required to report civil monetary penalty information in the afrs . in total , we found 9 federal agencies that were not applicable for our analysis of the afrs . for the remaining 43 federal agencies , we reviewed the agencies' 2016 afrs to review civil monetary penalty inflation adjustment information . the inflation adjustment act requires agencies to include in the afrs submitted under omb circular a - 136 information about the civil monetary penalties within the agencies' jurisdiction , including the inflation adjustment of civil monetary penalty amounts . omb to issue guidance to agencies for implementing the inflation adjustments . in response to the inflation adjustment act , in february 2016 , omb issued omb memorandum m - 16-06 , implementation of the federal civil penalties inflation adjustment act improvements act of 2015 , for agencies implementing the civil monetary penalty inflation adjustment requirements of the inflation adjustment act and , in october 2016 , revised omb circular a - 136 to include guidance to federal agencies for including inflation adjustments in annual financial reporting . consistent with omb guidance for implementing inflation adjustments , federal agencies are responsible for identifying the civil monetary penalties that fall under the statutes and regulations they enforce . agencies with questions on the applicability of the inflation adjustment requirement to an individual penalty should first consult with their offices of general counsel and then seek clarifying guidance from omb if necessary . in addition , agencies may request omb concurrence that they be allowed to adjust the amount of a civil monetary penalty by less than the amount required under the inflation adjustment act ( a reduced catch - up adjustment determination ) , if they demonstrate that the otherwise required increase of the penalty or penalty range would have a negative economic effect or that the social costs would outweigh the benefits . consistent with the inflation adjustment act , agencies should consult with omb before proposing a reduced catch - up adjustment determination . fcsic included civil monetary penalty information in its 2016 annual report issued on june 9 , 2017 . fhfa officials stated that fhfa did not assess or enforce any civil monetary penalties during the reporting period and therefore did not report this information in its afr . mspb officials stated that mspb did not assess or enforce any civil monetary penalties during the reporting period and therefore did not report this information in its afr . nea officials stated that nea did not assess or enforce any civil monetary penalties during the reporting period and therefore did not report this information in its afr . nigc officials stated that nigc is an independent federal regulatory agency within doi . nigc's financial information is consolidated and reported in doi's afr . ntsb officials stated that ntsb did not assess or enforce any civil monetary penalties during the reporting period and therefore did not report this information in its afr .