certain information has been omitted . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same objectives as the november 2015 report . as required by fisma ( both the 2002 and 2014 laws ) , nist has developed standards and guidelines for agencies to develop , document and implement their required information security programs , select controls for systems , and conduct risk - based cyber threat mitigation activities . for example , nist's special publication 800-37 recommends cost - effectively reducing information security risks to an acceptable level and ensuring that information security is addressed throughout an information system's life cycle . in addition , nist special publication 800-94 establishes guidance for federal agencies to use when designing , implementing , and maintaining the systems they deploy to perform intrusion detection and prevention . dhs designated the national protection and programs directorate to lead the national effort to strengthen the security and resilience of the nation's physical and cyber - critical infrastructure , including supporting federal agencies in securing their information systems and information . specifically , the directorate is responsible for enhancing the security , resilience , and reliability of federal agencies in the protection of the “.gov” domain of the federal civilian government . within the national protection and programs directorate , the office of cybersecurity and communications , among other things , operates the national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) that is to serve as a 24 / 7 cyber monitoring , incident response , and management center and as a national focal point of cyber and communications incident integration . the us - cert , one of several subcomponents of the nccic , is responsible for operating the ncps , which provides intrusion detection and prevention capabilities to covered federal agencies . the network security deployment ( nsd ) division of the office of cybersecurity and communications is responsible for developing , deploying , and sustaining ncps . for example , the division is to deliver ncps intrusion detection capability directly to federal agencies through trusted internet connection access providers or through internet service providers at managed trusted internet protocol service locations . ncps is an integrated system - of - systems that is intended to deliver a range of capabilities , including intrusion detection , intrusion prevention , analytics , and information sharing . the ncps capabilities , operationally known as the einstein program , are one of a number of tools and capabilities that assist in federal network defense . originally created in 2003 , ncps is intended to aid dhs in its ability to help reduce and prevent computer network vulnerabilities across the federal government . its analysts examine raw and summarized data from a wide variety of information sources to make determinations about potential attacks across the network traffic of participating federal agencies detected by ncps . table 3 provides an overview of the enhancements dhs has made to the original iteration of einstein as well as the corresponding objective of ncps the functionality supports . ncps is intended to build successive layers of defense mechanisms into the federal government's information technology infrastructures .