( see fig . 3 for an illustration of these elements. ) developing a legal foundation for reform: projects under this element have focused on assisting governments in passing legislation that would provide the legal basis for a transparent and predictable administration of justice system , including a post - communist constitution , a law establishing an independent judiciary , and post - soviet - era civil and criminal codes and procedures . this element also includes efforts to strengthen the legislative process . strengthening the judiciary: projects under this element involve strengthening the independence of the judiciary and the efficiency and effectiveness of the courts , including increasing the expertise and status of judges and supporting the development of judicial institutions . modernizing legal education: projects under this component have concentrated on improving legal education available to both students and practitioners of the law , including modernizing law school curricula , establishing legal clinics for law students , and developing indigenous continuing legal education opportunities for practicing lawyers and other legal professionals . improving law enforcement practices: projects under this component have been aimed at improving law enforcement practices by training procurators and other law enforcement personnel in modern techniques of criminal investigation and prosecution that are effective yet respectful of citizens' civil rights . increasing civil society's access to justice: projects under this component have targeted the participation of nongovernmental organizations and the general population in the judicial sector to make legal information and access to justice affordable and realizable . in general , usaid implements assistance projects primarily aimed at development of the judiciary , legislative reform , legal education , and civil society . the departments of state , justice , and the treasury provide assistance for criminal law reform and law enforcement projects . though the program has generally included these elements throughout its existence , it has evolved over the years in response to lessons learned about effectiveness and to adapt to emerging constraints . for example , in the earlier years of the program , the united states emphasized promotion of western methods and models for reform . as it became clear that host country officials often did not consider these to be appropriate to their local contexts , usaid projects began to foster the development of more “home - grown” reforms . also , in russia , the united states has placed increasing emphasis on regional projects outside of moscow instead of projects aimed at the central government , as regional officials were often more receptive to reform . establishing the rule of law in the new independent states of the former soviet union has proven to be an extremely complex and challenging task that is likely to take many years to accomplish . u.s. assistance has had limited results , and the sustainability of those results is uncertain . in each of the five elements of the rule of law assistance program , the united states has succeeded in exposing these countries to innovative legal concepts and practices that could lead to a stronger rule of law in the future . however , we could not find evidence that many of these concepts and practices have been widely adopted .