( see fig . included are california , new york , and texas , the three states with the largest procurement markets . the gpa also includes seven states not covered under any fta we reviewed . across the ftas we reviewed , the united states only includes subcentral government entities in the colombia - fta and the australia - fta . the united states does not list any state in its coverage schedule in nafta or the south korea - fta . nevertheless , canadian and south korean suppliers are able to participate in state - level procurement covered under the revised gpa in the same manner as domestic suppliers because those countries are also gpa members . the colombia - fta covers eight states that are also included in the revised gpa , as well as puerto rico . the australia - fta covers 30 states that are also included in the gpa , as well as georgia ; this is the only agreement that we reviewed that covers georgian procurement . states whose procurement is not covered under any agreement we reviewed are alabama , alaska , indiana , nevada , new jersey , new mexico , north carolina , north dakota , ohio , south carolina , virginia , and west virginia . according to ustr officials , they must obtain state government authorization to cover procurement in a trade agreement on a state - by - state basis , and each state independently determines whether to have its procurement covered under a trade agreement . officials noted that despite the flexibilities that states have in determining the scope of procurement covered , such as being able to limit coverage to procurement by specified agencies and to exclude purchases of sensitive goods or services , u.s. state participation has not increased over time . other countries give u.s. suppliers access to their subcentral government procurement as well . among the top five gpa parties , there has been an expansion in the number of subcentral government entities covered by the agreement over time between the 1994 and the revised gpa . canada added a territory to its subcentral government entity coverage schedule in the revised gpa and excluded procurement by the entities listed in the subcentral coverage schedule from iceland and the principality of liechtenstein . japan added 7 designated cities ; it covers all 47 prefectures and 19 designated cities . south korea increased the number of subcentral government entities covered by adding to its coverage schedule the ulsan metropolitan city , and the local government entities in three metropolitan cities: seoul ( 25 local governments ) , busan ( 16 local governments ) , and incheon ( 10 local governments ) . as stated previously , of the ftas we reviewed , only the australia - fta and the colombia - fta include subcentral government entities' coverage schedules . in these agreements , australia includes its six states and two territories , and colombia includes its 32 gobernación del departamento entities in the subcentral government procurement market access commitments . in addition to central and subcentral government entities , parties to procurement agreements also cover other government entities .