unemployment . this variable captures the percentage of individuals that responded to a labor force question as being “unemployed” . it is important to note that this is not equivalent to an unemployment rate — as individuals classified as not in the labor force were included in the denominator . women and men were equally likely to report being unemployed . helping parents financially or with daily activities . these variables capture the percentage of households that provided financial help or assistance with basic daily activities to either the parents of the respondent or spouse . again , it appears that these rates were comparable for women and men . table 18 uses the second method to show the proportion of women and men that had a life event status change during the period of analysis . as table 18 shows: divorce / separation . during the period in which both members of the household are less than 65 , less than 1 percent of men experienced divorce or separation between any of the two waves . for women , the proportion was negative – indicating that more women went from divorced or separated to married than from married to divorced or separated . widowhood . during the earlier period , about 1 percent of women became widowed between any of the two waves . this proportion increased to more than 2 percent as the household aged and was twice the rate for men . decline into poor health . the rate of health decline was similar for women and men . on average , approximately 2 percent of women and men reported a decline in health from one period to another . for example , we estimated how changes in health lead to changes in household assets and income . researchers use the fixed - effects method because much of the differences in income and wealth between households are consistent over time ( as poorer households tend to stay poor and richer households tend to stay rich ) . the fixed - effects method sweeps away these “time invariant” differences , thus better isolating the effect of health or other life events from other aspects of households that could explain differences . in addition to the fixed - effects analysis , we also developed “cross - section” regression models . in these models , we attempted to control for a set of demographic and other variables , such as education and age that could be correlated with life events , household assets , and household income . a challenge to this approach is that many factors that affect assets and income are unobserved , and lead to mistaken conclusions . for example , if an individual earns a low wage , that may be connected with poor health and the accumulation of assets . so , while the researcher is attempting to estimate the effect of health on income , what is actually measured is the effect of income on health . in general , in our cross - section models , we found that effects were larger in magnitude than in the fixed - effects models , but these models were not as good a fit to the data as the fixed - effects models .