costs . agencies consider the costs of maintaining a legacy system and modernizing the system . appendix viii: comments from the office of personnel management error ! for example , according to the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , there are systems for which a life - cycle cost analysis of the legacy system may show that the cost to modernize exceeds the projected costs to maintain the system . appendix ix: comments from the small business administration error ! similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) noted that , before deciding on a modernization solution , it is important to assess the costs of the transition to a new or replacement solution . an agency also may decide to modernize a system when there is potential for cost savings to be realized with a modernization effort . for example , hhs stated that it may pursue the modernization of a legacy system if the department anticipates reductions in operations and maintenance costs due to efficiencies gained through the modernization . performance . before making the decision to modernize , agencies consider the legacy system's operational performance . specifically , if the legacy system is performing poorly , the agency may decide to modernize it . for example , the department of transportation ( transportation ) stated that , if a legacy system is no longer functioning properly , it should be modernized . in addition , hhs noted that the ability to improve the functionality of the legacy system could be a reason to modernize it . as previously mentioned , in may 2016 , we reported that federal legacy it investments were becoming increasingly obsolete . in this regard , agencies had reported operating systems that used outdated languages and old parts , which were difficult to replace . further , we noted that each of the 12 selected agencies had reported using unsupported operating systems and components , which could create security vulnerabilities and additional costs . at the time , five of the selected agencies reported using 1980s and 1990s microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago . we concluded that agencies were , in part , maintaining obsolete investments because they were not required to identify , evaluate , and prioritize investments to determine whether the investments should be kept as - is , modernized , replaced , or retired . we pointed out that the office of management and budget ( omb ) had created draft guidance that would require agencies to do so , but omb had not committed to a firm time frame for when the guidance would be issued . risks . agencies consider the risks associated with maintaining the legacy system as well as modernizing the legacy system . for instance , agencies may prioritize the modernization of legacy systems that have security vulnerabilities or software that is unsupported by the vendor . however , limited system accessibility may also reduce the need to modernize a legacy system . for example , air - gapped systems , which are systems that are isolated from the internet , may mitigate a legacy system's cybersecurity risk by preventing remote hackers from having system access .