justice concurred with the recommendations . in summary , the global it supply chain introduces a myriad of security vulnerabilities to federal information systems that , if exploited , could introduce threats to the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of federal information systems . thus the potential exists for serious adverse impact on an agency's operations , assets , and employees . these risks highlight the importance of national security - related agencies fully addressing supply chain security by defining measures and implementation procedures for supply chain protection and monitoring compliance with and the effectiveness of these measures . until these agencies develop comprehensive policies , procedures , and monitoring capabilities , increased risk exists that they will be vulnerable to it supply chain threats . chairman stearns , ranking member degette , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement include michael w. gilmore ( assistant director ) , bradley w. becker , kush k. malhotra , and lee mccracken . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the report contains a more detailed overview of the scope of our review and the methodology used . the work on upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . information systems can be complex undertakings consisting of a multitude of pieces of equipment and software products , and service providers . each of these components may rely on one or more supply chains . obtaining a full understanding of the sources of a given information system can also be extremely complex . according to the software engineering institute , the identity of each product or service provider may not be visible to others in the supply chain . typically , an acquirer , such as a federal agency , will only know about the participants directly connected to it in the supply chain . in addition , the complexity of corporate structures , in which a parent company ( or its subsidiaries ) may own or control companies that conduct business under different names in multiple countries , presents additional challenges to fully understanding the sources of an information system . as a result , the acquirer will have little visibility into the supply chains of its suppliers . federal procurement law and policies promote the acquisition of commercial products when they meet the government's needs .