however , the manufacturers are not required to do so . ( see fig . emerging infectious diseases: preliminary observations on the zika virus outbreak.gao - 16-470t . washington , d.c. , march 2 , 2016 biosurveillance: ongoing challenges and future considerations for dhs biosurveillance efforts . mosquito control entity officials also said that sentinel animals , such as regularly monitored chickens , are used for surveillance of mosquitoes that carry west nile virus . one mosquito control entity uses landing counts , which enumerate the number of mosquitoes landing on a human volunteer over some period such as 1 minute . finally , mosquito control entities can rely on reported mosquito complaints from the community as part of their surveillance . the federal government has a limited role in implementing mosquito control because mosquito control efforts are implemented at the state and local levels . however , the federal government faced a number of challenges in supporting these mosquito control efforts . according to cdc documentation , the agency developed technical guidance and provides funding and technical assistance to support state and local mosquito control activities . we identified four challenges to the federal government's efforts to support mosquito control activities: ( 1 ) the timing of the availability of funds and sustaining expertise , ( 2 ) communication of data about mosquito distribution , ( 3 ) linking the effects of mosquito control to disease outcomes , and ( 4 ) limited information about mosquito control entities . federal agencies faced challenges related to the cyclic nature of mosquito - borne diseases , including recruiting and maintaining expertise . for example , part of ivm is matching specific methods or tools to specific situations and requires an understanding of mosquito biology . however , experts at our meeting identified two issues in implementing ivm . first , one expert at our meeting said that vector biology is “ kind of a dying field” in which “trained people cannot get jobs,” and another expert at our meeting indicated that vector biology program support has not been sustained . cdc officials agreed , stating that it is challenging to study cyclic diseases such as west nile virus . when the disease fades , the jobs and resources also go away , so that the next time the disease appears , staff must be retrained or new staff trained . second , cdc officials told us that mosquito control needs vary with seasonal cycles , resulting in periods of several months that require more resources followed by some periods when little or no resources are needed . for example , cdc officials told us that even though surveillance traps are not perishable , mosquito control entities ran out of certain traps during the 2016 mosquito season and had to wait 6-months to acquire new traps . according to cdc officials , funds for purchasing traps were not available until summer . further , grant funds awarded for mosquito control may not make it to some local mosquito control districts . cdc staff stated that cdc awarded funds to combat the zika virus , including $56 million between august and december 2016 for mosquito control and surveillance .