6 for more details ) . in fiscal year 2009 , cbp undertook a “hiring surge,” which resulted in an additional 285 staff for northern border land poes . due to cbp's hiring effort , cbp officials report that northern border field offices received additional staff allocations . the seattle , washington ; detroit , michigan ; and buffalo , new york , field offices received a majority of the new staff , as 238 of 285 positions were allocated to these three offices . although cbp has taken actions to begin to address the effect of staffing constraints on wait times , it faces challenges in providing training to its officers . to what extent do cbp and fast participants experience the benefits of the fast program at u.s. northern border land ports of entry ? to address these questions , we reviewed cbp , department of commerce ( commerce ) , dot , general services administration ( gsa ) , and food and drug administration ( fda ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) documents and data on staffing , infrastructure , wait times , training , the fast program , and commercial traffic volumes . we visited six ports of entry ( poe ) ( ambassador bridge in michigan , detroit - windsor tunnel in michigan , lewiston - queenston bridge crossing in new york , pacific highway crossing in washington , peace bridge crossing in new york , and port huron in michigan ) , which we selected based on high commercial volume ; geographic diversity ; the results of cbp's strategic resource assessments ( sra ) ; and interviews with cbp , border stakeholders , importers , and trade organizations . the ports we visited accounted for , in total , approximately 64 percent of the value of goods imported into the united states from canada in 2008 . at each port , we held discussions with cbp officers and met with management to discuss , among other things , staffing , infrastructure needs , and trends in border wait times . we toured each facility and observed primary and secondary inspections for fast and non - fast commercial vehicles . additionally , we interviewed 13 border stakeholders , including officials from dot ; commerce ; canada border services agency in the windsor – st . clair and niagara - fort erie regions ; detroit river international crossing ; gsa ; five bridge authorities — the blue water bridge authority , the niagara falls bridge commission , the peace bridge authority , the detroit international bridge company , and the detroit - windsor tunnel operators — and two regional traffic organizations — the niagara international transportation technology coalition and the international mobility and trade corridor project . we also interviewed 10 importers and trade organizations , of which 3 — ford , general motors ( gm ) , and chrysler — were fast participants . the other 7 trade organizations were the american trucking association ; the canadian trucking alliance ; the u.s. , mexican , and detroit chambers of commerce ; as well as the national and detroit customs forwarders and brokers associations .