( app . ii includes the project delivery methods used for each of va's 50 major medical - facility projects ) . va staff at various organizational levels participate in the construction management process for major medical - facility projects . for example , a contracting officer is ultimately responsible for managing the execution of the construction contract , while local site - level staff , — such as a project manager , senior resident engineers , and resident engineers — oversee the actual construction , with assistance provided by the contracting officer . in some instances , officials from cfm's regional offices and va's central office , including the office of general counsel , provide assistance to the contracting officer . va staff from cfm and vha , such as medical center directors , also provide support during the construction of major medical - facility projects . during the construction phase of any federal government project , changes need to be made to the construction contract . va contracts contain specific language and requirements , in accordance with applicable federal acquisition regulations , which give the government the right to make changes within the scope of the contract . generally , government contracts contain a changes clause that permits the contracting officer to make unilateral changes , in designated areas , within the general scope of the contract . contractors can also request changes to the contract . changes can occur for a variety of reasons , such as design changes resulting from the addition of new medical equipment . for va's four largest medical - facility construction projects , when comparing november 2012 construction project data with the cost and schedule estimates first submitted to congress , cost increases ranged from 59 percent to 144 percent , representing a total cost increase of nearly $1.5 billion and an average increase of approximately $366 million per project . the schedule delays ranged from 14 to 74 months with an average delay of 35 months per project ( see table 3 ) . in commenting on a draft of this report , va stated that project designs , initial cost estimates , and completion dates are developed years prospectively , several years before congress appropriates funds and the construction contract is awarded , which determines the cost to complete the project and the completion date . va provided information indicating that after the department received appropriations for these four projects , and the construction contract was awarded , the magnitude of cost increases and schedule delays was significantly less . for example , the costs for the four projects decreased or remained unchanged , and the number of months the completion dated extended ranged from 0 to 10 months.construction contract would be more accurate for measuring schedule delays ; however , using this start date would not account for how va va officials said that using the initial completion date from the managed these projects prior to awarding the construction contract . by using the methodology va suggests , the schedule delays and cost increases are significantly lower .