( app . i provides detailed information on our methodology for developing estimates and characteristics of working - age individuals with disabilities. ) to examine the designs of the buy - in programs for states that had chosen to establish a buy - in program and whose programs were in effect as of december 2002 , we reviewed state medicaid plan amendments describing the buy - ins , analyzed published state documents , and conducted telephone interviews with state medicaid officials . for example , under these rules , participants can save to buy cars or homes and can set aside money for retirement . in most of the 12 states , the buy - in programs were especially beneficial for di - eligible individuals who , in contrast to most ssi individuals , were not always eligible for medicaid coverage . prior to the ticket to work legislation , di individuals in 11 of the 12 states could qualify for medicaid by spending down their incomes to specified levels ( wyoming did not offer a spend - down option ) . in these 11 states , the spend - down income eligibility levels ranged from 15 percent to 100 percent of the fpl . under the new buy - in programs , the income eligibility levels significantly exceeded those established under the spend - down categories ( see fig . 2 ) , thus allowing individuals to qualify for the medicaid buy - in directly — rather than spending down their incomes to qualify for medicaid coverage . for example , an individual receiving di in arkansas could obtain medicaid coverage through the buy - in program with an income up to 250 percent of the fpl ; prior to the buy - in , the individual would have had to incur medical expenses that reduced his or her income to approximately 15 percent of the fpl in order to qualify for the spend - down category of medicaid . this allows an individual with disabilities in arkansas to maintain an income of up to $22,150 per year under the buy - in , whereas that person would have had to spend down to an income of $1,300 a year to qualify for medicaid . buy - in programs afforded di beneficiaries more immediate — and sometimes expanded — medicaid coverage . in addition to relieving individuals of the requirement to spend down their income to qualify for medicaid , di individuals , who are not entitled to receive medicare coverage until they have been receiving di cash benefits for 24 months , also received more immediate health insurance coverage through the medicaid buy - in . buy - in participants may also have access to a more expanded benefit package than individuals who receive medicaid through a state's medically needy program . however , when considering participation in the buy - in program , di beneficiaries must weigh the benefits of the higher earnings allowed under the program against the possible loss of di cash benefits and medicare coverage if their earnings increase beyond a certain threshold .