, results — and the budget process . we conducted our work from january through may 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . formulation of acf's budget and its performance plan are closely related but they are not fully integrated . acf's budget and performance plan are based on joint budget and planning guidance issued by hhs in the spring , and the funding request is linked to acf's gpra goals . however , formulation does not begin with evaluating past program performance to inform the upcoming year's budget request and performance plan . budget and planning become more closely aligned when the budget request and annual performance plan are sent to the hhs budget and planning staff for review . finally , allocating resources based on performance is most integrated into day - to - day management during budget execution , which is largely decentralized to the regional offices . ( olab and opre , acf's budget and planning offices , respectively , play small roles in this part of the process. ) figure 2 depicts a timeline for a typical acf budget and planning cycle as well as the roles and responsibilities of the various key players at each stage of the process . acf's gpra planning process follows the budget process and must be completed according to the budget timeline , but formulation does not begin with a formal look - back at program performance to help shape the upcoming year's budget request and performance plan ; thus , the processes are not yet completely integrated . however , acf does link its funding requests for program activities to gpra goals . olab and opre work together to review and clarify the hhs budget and planning guidance , and , as appropriate , distribute supplemental guidance throughout acf . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to gao mailing lists” under “order gao products” heading . in fiscal year 2000 , in keeping with the way headquarters program units and senior leadership plan and report , acf required the regions to crosswalk their activities to acf's four gpra goals . san francisco was able to accomplish this because the seven key priorities — to which region 9's work plan was connected — clearly linked to the goals . regional managers told us that this helped staff make the connection between their work and acf's larger gpra goals in a way they had not been able to before . also , on its own initiative , the pacific hub created a work plan ( in addition to the regional work plan ) to address crosscutting initiatives and to better leverage hub resources . the region continued to strengthen its work plan in fiscal year 2001 by further developing an emphasis on outcomes , and by streamlining its work plans and reports . also , officials describe frequent communication throughout the formulation process . this is in keeping with practices we have previously reported as those an agency can use to link performance information to the budget process .