other categories . other socioeconomic programs include those for veterans , small disadvantaged businesses , and other small businesses . to help ensure that small businesses receive a share of federal procurement contract dollars , congress has set an annual government - wide goal of awarding not less than 23 percent of prime contract dollars to small businesses . to promote this goal , the small business act permits contracting officers at federal agencies to award contracts to small businesses through set - aside or sole source to 8 ( a ) , hubzone , wosb , and sdvosb businesses , under certain requirements . federal agencies are generally required to set aside contracts with values exceeding $150,000 if the contracting officer expects at least two small businesses to submit bids for the procurement . under the hubzone , wosb , and sdvosb programs , a contracting officer may award sole source contracts valued up to $4 million if the contracting officer does not have a reasonable expectation that two or more small businesses would submit offers and the award can be made at a fair and reasonable price . under the 8 ( a ) program , federal agencies are to make sole source awards for contracts valued up to $4 million . federal agencies are also required to reserve contracts with values exceeding $3,000 but less than $150,000 for small businesses exclusively if the contracting officer expects at least two small businesses to submit bids . the small business act also established other programs and resources to assist small businesses nationwide , including with small business contracting activities . among them , sba employs procurement center representatives ( pcr ) to assist small businesses in obtaining federal contracts . among other activities , pcrs can make recommendations to agency contracting officers that proposed contracts be set aside for eligible small businesses . in addition , the act generally requires federal agencies with procurement authorities to establish an office of small and disadvantaged business utilization to oversee the agency's functions and duties related to the awarding of contracts to small and disadvantaged businesses . our analysis of federal prime contracting data identified a number of trends in federal contracting obligations to small businesses in puerto rico from fiscal years 2006 through 2016 . for example , we found that small businesses in puerto rico received a relatively high proportion of federal prime contracting obligations for work performed in puerto rico compared to small businesses nationwide . additionally , we found that a greater percentage of obligations was awarded to small businesses in puerto rico through full and open competition and the 8 ( a ) program compared to the other three sba socioeconomic contracting programs . we also found that the number of hubzone applications has increased since sba expanded the number of hubzone - eligible census tracts in june 2016 ; about half of the applicants were located in newly designated hubzone - qualified census tracts . the percentage of federal prime contracting obligations awarded to small businesses within puerto rico for contracts performed there was relatively high from fiscal years 2006 through 2016 , particularly in the last 4 fiscal years .