dredging needs vary among ports . for example , industry and port officials told us that harbors located off the main stem of the river provide port and tenant infrastructure some protection from the river's current and large debris in the river , but these harbors also tend to accumulate more sediment , particularly at the mouth , or entrance , of the harbor . finally , flooding events can deposit large amounts of sediment in the channels and harbors , which becomes more problematic as water levels fall . the corps is responsible for dredging the nation's federally authorized inland waterways , harbors , and channels , which are those that congress defined in statute as federal projects and approved their construction and maintenance by the corps to certain dimensions ( depth , width , and length ) . to maintain the harbors and channels , the corps may hire contractors or use its own vessels to dredge the harbors . the corps does not dredge outside of the federally authorized areas , but ports and their tenants may dredge around their private docks and in other areas not maintained by the corps . dredging is part of the corps' civil works navigation mission , which includes the provision of safe , reliable , efficient , effective , and environmentally sustainable waterborne transportation systems for the movement of commerce , national security needs , and recreation in the united states . we also interviewed officials at the united states department of agriculture ( usda ) agricultural marketing service's transportation services division to discuss their research on agricultural transportation . see tables 4 and 5 for a list of stakeholders and experts we interviewed . we selected industry and academic stakeholders based on a review of our prior reports on waterway transportation , as well as through recommendations from other interviewees . in addition , to understand how the corps budgets and implements dredging activities and the role of the federal budget process , we reviewed relevant statutes , the corps' budget guidance documents , as well as prior president's budget requests and congressional appropriations , and interviewed corps officials from the headquarters , division , and district offices . we reviewed statutes , regulations , and legislation to understand what factors congress has directed the corps to consider when allocating funds for dredging harbors . we also used prior frameworks developed by gao to assess the corps' actions with respect to collecting and analyzing data to help inform its budgeting decisions . such fluctuations can cause flooding and shoaling . to fund dredging of eligible harbors and channels , congress appropriates funds to the corps through certain corps appropriation accounts , which are usually reimbursed from the harbor maintenance trust fund . the trust fund is funded by a tax collected on imports , domestic shipments , foreign - trade zone admissions , and passengers primarily at coastal ports . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , contained a provision for us to study freight flows , dredging , and funding of dredging with respect to the harbors of inland shallow - draft ports on the mississippi river between st. louis and baton rouge .