system issues . in 1996 , nwcg reported that there was a duplication of information systems and computer applications supporting wildland fire management , noting that agencies were using 15 different weather - related software applications , 9 logistics applications , and 7 dispatch applications . since that time , the number of applications has grown — as has the potential for duplication of effort . duplicative systems not only waste limited funds , but they also make interoperability between systems more difficult . this issue is complicated by the fact that there is no single , comprehensive inventory of information systems and applications that could be of use to others in the interagency wildland fire community . a single comprehensive inventory would allow the wildland fire community to identify and learn about available applications and tools , and to avoid duplicating efforts to develop new applications . we identified five different inventories of software applications — including information systems , models , and tools — that are currently being used in support of wildland fire management . while these listings are not limited to geospatial applications , many of the applications have geospatial components . the most comprehensive listing is an inventory managed by nwcg . this inventory identifies 199 applications used in support of wildland fire , but even this inventory is not complete . that is , it did not include 45 applications that were included in the other inventories . additionally , it did not include 23 applications that we had identified . infrastructure issues . many geospatial specialists noted that there are problems in getting equipment , networking capabilities , and internet access to the areas that need them during a fire . for example , at a recent fire in a remote location , geospatial specialists reported that they were unable to produce needed information and maps because they had problems with networking capabilities . again , this issue is critical during a fire , when incident teams try to set up a command center in a remote location . however , it is also an issue when federal regional managers try to obtain consistent information from the different land management agencies' field offices before or after fires . the majority of local field offices have equipment to support geospatial information and analysis , but some do not . staffing issues . geospatial specialists noted that the training and qualifications of the gis specialists who support fire incidents is not consistent . specifically , officials noted that skills and qualifications vary widely among those who work with geographic information systems . for example , some gis specialists are capable of interpreting infrared images as well as developing maps , but others are not . some have experience working with gis applications but are not specifically trained to develop gis maps for fires . use of new products . while many commercial vendors are developing geospatial products and services that could be of use to the wildland fire community — including advanced satellite and aerial imaging ; gis applications and equipment ; and advanced mapping products including analyses , visualization , and modeling — many have expressed concern that the wildland fire community is not aware of these advancements or has little funding for these products .