gao - 10-143 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2010 . cms concurred with this recommendation . agency officials indicated that they intended to review vulnerabilities on a case - by - case basis and were considering assigning them to risk categories that would help them prioritize action . however , this recommendation has not been implemented . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for further information about this statement , please contact kathleen m. king at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . sheila avruch , christine brudevold , and martin t. gahart , assistant directors ; lori achman ; jennie f. apter ; thomas han ; jennel harvey ; amanda pusey ; and james r. walker were key contributors to this statement . medicare recovery audit contracting: weaknesses remain in addressing vulnerabilities to improper payments , although improvements made to contractor oversight . medicare part d: cms oversight of part d sponsors' fraud and abuse programs has been limited , but cms plans oversight expansion . gao - 10-481t . washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2010 . medicare: cms working to address problems from round 1 of the durable medical equipment competitive bidding program . gao - 10-27 . washington , d.c.: november 6 , 2009 . medicare: improvements needed to address improper payments in home health . gao - 09-185 . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2009 . medicare part d: some plan sponsors have not completely implemented fraud and abuse programs , and cms oversight has been limited . gao - 08-760 . washington , d.c.: july 21 , 2008 . medicare: covert testing exposes weaknesses in the durable medical equipment supplier screening process . gao - 08-955 . washington , d.c.: july 3 , 2008 . medicare: competitive bidding for medical equipment and supplies could reduce program payments , but adequate oversight is critical . my testimony today will focus on our findings in these areas . this statement is based on nine products that we have issued regarding fraud , waste , abuse , and improper payments in the medicare program . these products were issued from september 2005 through march 2010 using a variety of methodologies , including analysis of claims , review of relevant policies and procedures , stakeholder interviews , and site visits . for this statement we also received updated information from cms in june 2010 . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . gao has identified key strategies to help cms address challenges it faces in preventing fraud , waste , and abuse , and ultimately to reducing improper payments .