the fhlbank system and the enterprises are gses . this report does not contain any recommendations . congress created gses to help make credit available to certain sectors of the economy , such as housing and agriculture , in which the private market was perceived as not effectively meeting credit needs . gses receive benefits from their federal charters that help them fulfill their missions . the federal government's creation of and continued relationship with gses have created the perception in the financial markets that the government would not allow a gse to default on its obligations , even though intervention is not required . as a result , gses can borrow money in the capital markets at lower interest rates than comparably creditworthy private corporations that do not enjoy federal sponsorship , and market discipline is reduced . in fact , during the 1980s , the government did provide limited regulatory and financial relief to fannie mae when it experienced significant financial difficulties , and , in 1987 , congress authorized $4 billion to bail out the farm credit system , another gse . additional background on the fhlbank system , the enterprises , fhfb , ofheo , and financial risks are presented in appendix ii . our mandate directs us to analyze interest rate , credit , and operations risks . interest rate risk is a component of what is commonly called market risk . market risk is the potential for financial losses due to the increase or decrease in the value or price of an asset or liability resulting from broad movements in prices , such as interest rates , commodity prices , stock prices , or the relative value of foreign exchange . credit risk is the potential for financial loss because of the failure of a borrower or counterparty to perform on an obligation . credit risk may arise from either an inability or unwillingness to perform as required by a loan , a bond , an interest rate swap , or any other financial contract . operations risk is the potential for unexpected financial losses due to inadequate information systems , operational problems , breaches in internal controls , or fraud . it is associated with problems of accurately processing or settling transactions and with breakdowns in controls and risk limits . individual operating problems are considered small - probability but potentially high - cost events for well - run firms . operations risk includes many risks that are not easily quantified , but controlling these risks is crucial to a firm's successful operation . the fhlbank system is establishing a new capital structure that will include new risk - based and leverage capital requirements and will also make capital more permanent . fhlbank capital will continue to differ from capital issued by publicly traded corporations , however , because of the cooperative nature of the fhlbank system . additionally , each fhlbank's capital is potentially available throughout the system , because the fhlbanks are jointly and severally liable for the system's outstanding debt securities . the unique characteristics of fhlbank capital and the potential for risk taking within the system heighten the importance of supervisory oversight by fhfb .