we disagree . the criteria we used to assess nasa's projects represent commonly accepted , fundamental tenets of disciplined project management , regardless of complexity or quantity . in fact , the concept of the knowledge - based approach we use has been adopted in nasa's own acquisition policy . key criteria that we use have been developed by nasa and / or incorporated into its engineering policy . moreover , facing long - standing cost and schedule growth and performance shortfalls , the department of defense ( dod ) acknowledges the need for a knowledge based approach in the air force's “back to basics” policy for space systems . lastly , we remain open to discussions with nasa as to whether additional criteria can and should be applied to its systems to ensure that decisions to move forward in development are well - informed and ultimately , that taxpayer dollars are well spent . today i will be highlighting the results of this work , the actions nasa is taking to address the concerns raised in our high risk report and better position its projects to meet their goals , and what we believe is necessary to make these actions successful . because we also have responsibility for examining military space systems , we will also highlight common challenges with space acquisitions within nasa and the department of defense ( dod ) . this testimony is based on previously issued gao work , which was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we assessed 18 projects in nasa's current portfolio . four were in the “formulation” phase , a time when system concepts and technologies are still being explored and 14 were in the “implementation” phase , where system design is completed , scientific instruments are integrated , and a spacecraft is fabricated . when implementation begins , it is expected that project officials know enough about a project's requirements and what resources are necessary to meet those requirements that they can reliably predict the cost and schedule necessary to achieve its goals . reaching this point requires investment . in some cases , projects that we reviewed spent 2 to 5 years and up to $100 million or more before being able to formally set cost and schedule estimates . ten of the projects in our assessment for which we received data and that had entered the implementation phase experienced significant cost and / or schedule growth from their project baselines . based on our analysis , development costs for projects in our review increased by an average of almost 13 percent from their baseline cost estimates — all in just two or three years — including one that went up more than 50 percent . it should be noted that a number of these projects had experienced considerably more cost growth before a baseline was established in response to statutory reporting requirements . our analysis also shows that projects in our review had an average delay of 11 months to their launch dates . we found challenges in five areas that occurred throughout the various projects we reviewed that can contribute to project cost and schedule growth .