see comment 1 . the following are gao's comments on the department of justice letter dated february 21 , 2008 . we disagree that our report severely understates doj's enforcement activities . our analysis of federal ip enforcement efforts is a systematic evaluation of trends in key agencies' enforcement indicators over a 6- year period . although there were fluctuations ( i.e. attorneys assigned to chip units . another 122 assistant u.s . attorneys have been specially trained to prosecute computer crime and ip offenses , with at least one such chip prosecutor located in every u.s. attorney's office . doj began tracking the time attorneys spend on ip enforcement in may 2006 , but we did not collect this data . in addition , according to doj , it had 14 attorneys working on ip enforcement in its ccips . despite having these dedicated and trained staff , however , officials from the u.s. attorney's offices we visited noted that , over the past few years , their offices have experienced high turnover and have been generally understaffed , with vacant positions left unfilled . given the interdependent nature of federal ip enforcement and the central role played by the field offices , the emphasis placed on ip enforcement at one location can affect the ip enforcement efforts of others . for example , investigative agency officials at some locations we visited said that their decisions about beginning or continuing an ip - related investigation were influenced by the willingness of the local u.s. attorney's office to prosecute the case . some field office officials we interviewed stated that local u.s. attorney's offices set minimum value thresholds for taking ip cases , in part because the u.s. attorney's offices also have limited resources . however , officials at the u.s. attorney's offices we visited said that they did not have specific thresholds for ip prosecutions , particularly when it comes to public health and safety , and that they evaluate cases on their individual merits . similarly , the degree to which an ice field office can accept and work on ip enforcement referrals from cbp may depend on the field office's other priorities , such as money laundering or smuggling enforcement . officials at most of the agencies noted other factors that influence their ip - related enforcement decisions , including the number or value of items seized , the health or safety impacts of the crime , and the organizational structure of the entities involved . federal ip enforcement activity generally increased from fiscal year 2001 through 2006 ; however , most agencies have not taken key steps to assess their achievements . specifically , most agencies have not: ( 1 ) conducted systematic analyses of their ip enforcement data to inform management and resource allocation decisions , ( 2 ) clearly identified which of their efforts relate to a key ip enforcement area — ip crimes that affect public health and safety — nor collected data to track these efforts , and ( 3 ) established performance measures or targets to assess their achievements and report to congress and others . our review of agency statistics for fiscal years 2001 through 2006 indicated that ip enforcement actions generally increased over the period , with some fluctuations in activity .