such financial deterioration can occur quickly . while companies no longer meeting the financial test are to obtain other financial assurance , they may not be able to obtain or afford to purchase it . in addition , in may 2012 , we found that , according to the bureau of land management and the environmental protection agency , corporate guarantees are potentially risky because they are not covered by a specific financial asset such as a bond . therefore , in our december 2015 report , we concluded that boem's use of the financial strength test and corporate guarantees in lieu of bonds raised the risk that the federal government would have to pay for offshore decommissioning if lessees did not . according to boem officials we spoke with for our december 2015 report , boem recognized the financial risks associated with its financial assurance procedures and planned to revise its procedures to reduce risk . specifically , boem officials told us that boem's planned revisions would eliminate the use of financial strength tests to completely waive lessees from the requirement to provide supplemental bonding . instead , boem planned to conduct financial reviews of lessees' financial status and , based on those reviews , assign lessees an amount of credit that may be used to reduce required bonding associated with decommissioning liabilities on leases . lessees would be able to apportion this credit to leases , in coordination with other responsible parties on those leases , to ensure that lease decommissioning liabilities are fully covered by apportioned credit or supplemental bonds . however , because it was unclear whether boem's planned revisions would improve its procedures and the extent to which these revisions would increase the amount of bonding that lessees provide , we recommended in our december 2015 report , that boem complete its plans to revise its financial assurance procedures , and interior concurred . since the issuance of our december 2015 report , boem revised its financial assurance procedures . illustrations of these structures are shown in figure 1 . in our december 2015 report , we also discussed the oil and gas infrastructure installed and removed in the gulf over time . figure 2 shows the annual number of wells drilled and plugged in the gulf from 1947 through 2014 . during this period , lessees drilled a total of 52,223 wells in the gulf ( including 18,447 exploratory wells and 33,776 development wells ) and plugged a total of 29,879 wells ( including 4,017 temporarily abandoned wells and 25,862 permanently abandoned wells ) . figure 3 shows the annual number of structures installed and removed in the gulf from 1947 through 2014 . during this period , lessees installed a total of 7,038 structures in the gulf . in addition , starting in the 1970s , lessees began removing structures from the gulf . specifically , lessees removed a total of 4,611 structures from 1973 through 2014 . most of the structures installed and removed were fixed platforms and caissons installed in shallow water . from the late 1940s through the early 1960s , lessees only drilled wells in shallow water . however , starting in the mid - 1960s , lessees began drilling wells in deep water .