i for detailed data for all states ) . the error of closure was 6.8 million people , substantially larger than the 1.5 million error of closure associated with the 1990 census . the error of closure for the 2000 census was four times the corresponding percentage error for the 1990 census ( 2.5 percent compared with 0.6 percent ) . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of commerce ; the secretary of health and human services ; and the director , bureau of the census . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or jerry fastrup at ( 202 ) 512-7211 . major contributors to this report are gregory dybalski , elizabeth t. morrison , and michael rose . this appendix compares the postcensal population estimates for july 1 , 1999 , with the census count for april 1 , 2000 ( table 5 ) , and compares the april 1 , 2000 , postcensal population estimates ( based on the 1990 census ) with the census counts ( table 6 ) . states are listed in tables 5 and 6 by the magnitude of the percentage correction in population . this appendix contains the supporting data for our calculations of the estimated change in funding due to correcting the population estimates . specifically , for each state , we provide the funding amounts for the four programs and the estimated funding changes due to the correction in population estimates . states are listed in tables 7 through 11 by the magnitude of the percentage correction in population . the medicaid , foster care , and adoption assistance programs are open - ended entitlement programs for which states determine the level of program expenditures . the federal government reimburses states for a share of eligible state spending based on state per capita income . to calculate the effect of the population correction on the federal medical assistance percentages ( fmap ) — also called federal matching rates — we compared actual matching rates for fiscal year 2003 , based on the 2000 census , with the estimated matching rates based on the 1990 census ( shown in table 7 ) . subtracting the estimated rates from the actual fiscal year 2003 rates shows the effect on the matching rates of correcting population estimates . in general , the states that had a below - average correction in population have a decrease in federal matching rates , while the states that had an above - average correction in population have an increase in matching rates . for 13 high - income states , the correction in population had no effect or had a diminished effect because of the minimum 50 percent matching rate . ( under the matching rate formula , no state can receive less than a 50 percent matching rate. )