( recommendation 1 ) . a commercially hosted dod payload is a dod payload on a commercial satellite . in general , hosted payloads may be either experimental or operational . dod also provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the secretary of defense , the administrator of nasa , and other interested parties . several dod offices are independently conducting activities related to commercially hosted payloads , such as pursuing commercially hosted payload arrangements , developing lessons learned , and determining demand for commercial hosts . for example , mda officials told us they have developed cost and technical data and lessons learned based on mda's spacebased kill assessment payload — launched earlier this year — but have not shared it across the agency . on the other hand , the space test program , also housed within the air force's smc develops lessons learned on its payloads , which are government payloads on government host satellites and officials there told us they provide lessons learned to the hpo . in october 2017 , smc's launch office sent a request for data on hosted payloads to dod agencies , research laboratories , and universities , but the hpo was not an active participant in this request . independent efforts within dod to collect and analyze cost , schedule , and performance results from hosted payloads can create fragmentation in dod's knowledge base and can increase the risk of duplicative efforts within dod . dod does not collect or consolidate agency - wide knowledge on commercially hosted payloads and has no plans to do so . harmful interference occurs when two communication signals are either at the same frequencies or close to the same frequencies in the same vicinity , a situation that can lead to degradation of a device's operation or service . as such , a payload or satellite's specific placement in any given orbit could potentially interfere with a neighboring payload or satellite in the same orbit . in the united states , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce is responsible for establishing policy on regulating federal government spectrum use and assigning spectrum bands to government agencies . the federal communications commission ( fcc ) allocates spectrum and assigns licenses for various consumer and commercial purposes . additionally , all government and commercial satellite programs must apply for approval to operate at a given orbital location using a given band of spectrum internationally through the international telecommunication union ( itu ) . the itu is an agency of the united nations and coordinates spectrum standards and regulations . in 2011 , the air force created the space and missile systems center's ( smc ) hosted payload office ( hpo ) to provide acquisition architectures that achieve on - orbit capability more quickly and affordably . the hpo uses various resources and capabilities to meet its objectives: hosted payload solutions contract: in 2014 , smc established the hosted payload solutions ( hops ) multiple award indefinite delivery indefinite quantity ( idiq ) vehicle .