accountability . accountability is a cornerstone of results - oriented management . agencies and their leaders and managers should be accountable for providing fair and equitable workplaces , free from discrimination and reprisal . in addition , individuals need to be held accountable for their actions in cases where discrimination or reprisal for whistleblowing has occurred . notification . finally , in order for the full benefit of laws protecting the workforce to be realized , agencies need to take steps to make federal employees sufficiently aware of their protections from discrimination and reprisal for whistleblowing . in making our observations today , and as agreed with the committee , i will draw upon our work examining discrimination and whistleblower issues in the federal workplace and performance management principles embodied in the government performance and results act , particularly in regard to human capital . the federal government lacks a clear picture of the volume of discrimination and whistleblowing reprisal cases involving federal employees . the lack of a complete accounting of cases is in part a by - product of the complexity of the redress system for federal employees and the different ways in which case data are reported . the nofear act would require agencies to report the number of discrimination and whistleblower reprisal cases . executive branch civil servants are afforded opportunities for redress of complaints of discrimination or retaliation for whistleblowing at three levels: first , within their employing agencies ; next , at one of the administrative bodies with sometimes overlapping jurisdictions that investigate or adjudicate their complaints ; and , finally , in the federal courts . where discrimination is alleged , the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) hears complaints employees file with their agencies and reviews agencies' decisions on these complaints . in a case in which an employee alleges that discrimination was the motive for serious personnel actions , such as dismissal or suspension for more than 14 days , the employee can request a hearing before the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) . mspb's decisions on such cases can then be reviewed by eeoc . for federal employees who believe that they have been subject to whistleblower reprisal , the office of special counsel ( osc ) will investigate their complaints and seek corrective action when a complaint is valid . when agencies fail to take corrective action , osc or the employee can take the case to mspb for resolution . if an employee files a grievance alleging discrimination under the negotiated grievance procedure , the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) can review any resulting arbitrator's decision . a grievant may appeal the final decision of the agency , the arbitrator , or flra to eeoc . a complainant dissatisfied with the outcome of his or her whistleblower reprisal case can file an appeal to have the case reviewed by a federal appeals court . an employee with a discrimination complaint who is dissatisfied with a decision by mspb or eeoc , however , can file a lawsuit in a federal district court and seek a de novo trial .