leas . overall , among the 15 states in our study that had made lea determinations related to their state performance plan this year , all but new york , georgia , and texas had experienced an increase in the number of leas that met requirements . state officials in states that experienced such increases attributed these increases to training , technical assistance and monitoring of indicators that were problematic for leas to meet in previous years . however , officials in some states also told us they had changed the criteria in their state performance plan this year . others changed the determinations process by increasing the minimum number of students — called an “n” size or cell size — required for making calculations related to the state performance plan , which could effectively prevent some leas with small numbers of students from being evaluated in certain areas . if an lea has fewer than the minimum number of special education students required for a particular target , the lea's data on that target would be considered “not applicable” and would not have bearing on the determination of whether the lea met requirements . officials in states that changed their determinations processes or criteria said that doing so made their plans and targets comparable to other states' targets and helped ensure that expectations placed on leas were reasonable . three states changed their determinations criteria and experienced large increases in the number of leas meeting requirements — arizona , michigan , and ohio — while two others that increased their minimum “n” size also experienced large increases — california and illinois . ( see table 5. ) officials in ohio told us that they changed the determinations criteria with the goal of increasing the number of leas that were determined to meet requirements , thereby giving most leas in the state the option to reduce their local spending . states have some discretion over their determinations process and criteria , but the secretary of education issued a letter to state education officials in october 2009 encouraging them to implement the lea determinations process in a rigorous manner , with a focus on improving results for students with disabilities and ensuring that appropriate special education and related services are provided . according to some state officials , some leas were hesitant to utilize the reduced local expenditure flexibility in the past , because the increase in their allocation — and the amount of local or state funding that could be “freed up” — was small . however , this year , the amount of funding that can be “freed up” is larger than in prior years , and using this flexibility will give leas , some facing budgetary pressures , more flexibility in deciding how to spend their local funds . according to state officials , leas that take advantage of this flexibility will not necessarily reduce their local spending by the entire 50 percent allowed under the law , but some state officials said that some leas may reduce local spending because they have concerns about creating unsustainable funding commitments for special education , because services cannot be easily cut after recovery act funds are gone .