lotteries . tickets for lotteries can be sold in almost any location , other than in the street , including at people's homes and over the telephone , but they cannot be sold by machine . the gaming board has taken the position that running a lottery entirely by computer over the internet amounts to selling tickets by machine and has refused to authorize such lotteries . however , some companies that manage lotteries have presented proposals to the gaming board for lotteries that would use the internet as a means of communication , much like a telephone . the gaming board has approved two of those proposals . finally , the report outlined what it saw as the three main policy options for internet gambling regulation in the u.k.: retaining the status quo , encouraging measures to prevent offshore internet gambling , and creating legislation to permit regulated and taxed internet gambling . another report , “gambling review report of 2001” ( “the budd report” ) , commissioned by the home office , recommended that on - line gambling be regulated and that the activity “be seen as just another way of delivering a service.” according to the budd report , the key objectives of gambling laws and regulations are that gambling should be free of crime , honest , and conducted in accordance with regulation ; that players should know what to expect and be confident that they will get it without being exploited ; and that children and other vulnerable persons should be adequately protected . the budd report recommendations would potentially permit the following in the u.k.: on - line gaming and betting ( including in football pools ) , remote gaming on live games , and betting on the national lottery . according to a u.k. government official , the u.k. is developing a timetable for introducing new gambling legislation sometime between 2003 and 2004 . the new legislation will contain a number of major gambling reforms , including provisions covering internet gambling . we conducted a survey of internet gambling web sites to gather data about the payment options offered to those wishing to gamble . we were primarily interested in the way these sites presented information about credit cards and other payment options . internet gambling , as defined for this survey review , is an activity that takes place through a non - redirected , live web site that allows monetary transactions in one or more of the following categories of gaming: casinos , lotteries , sports betting , or horse and dog racing . to conduct this survey , we reviewed a simple random sample of internet gambling web sites . for our purposes , we defined the universe of internet gambling sites using the most recent list , published in 2002 , of internet gaming urls compiled and published by the river city group llc , christiansen capital advisors llc , for the gaming industry . from this list of 1,783 unique gaming web addresses , we selected a representative random sample of 202 for our review . this number was based on a conservative estimate of the number of “live” sites as well as on a precision level .