( see app . ii for a more detailed description of the accreditation process. ) according to the program manager , the program office is most interested in accrediting entities that have lead roles in critical infrastructure protection — such as the departments of agriculture , energy , and the treasury . however , the program manager noted that accreditation is voluntary and some of these agencies may not be interested . in addition , according to the program manager , the program office will continue to accredit other entities , such as states and other federal agencies , that express an interest in pcii . figure 1 summarizes the efforts related to implementation of the cii act . dhs faces challenges in implementing the cii act through the pcii program . these challenges include better defining specific government needs for cii , determining how the information will be used , assuring the private sector that the information will be protected and who will be authorized to have access to it , and demonstrating to critical infrastructure owners the benefits of sharing the information . by overcoming these challenges , dhs and other users may make strides toward reducing critical infrastructure owners' lack of trust in the government's ability to use and protect their sensitive information . we compared what was expected under the cii act with what had been accomplished by dhs . as of january 2006 , the program office had received 289 submissions , of which 266 were validated as pcii , 8 were in the process of being validated , 14 were rejected , and 1 was withdrawn . the validated submissions include risk and vulnerability assessments about individual infrastructure assets from a variety of critical infrastructure sectors , such as the energy , agriculture and food , banking and finance , and chemical sectors . in addition , entities have submitted data on their operations and on security methods used to protect their assets . according to program officials , submissions were rejected or withdrawn generally because they did not meet the program's requirements , such as not being submitted with an express statement or not being cii as defined in the law , even after the program office contacted the submitters for additional information to try to resolve this problem . in october 2005 , the national infrastructure advisory council also made the point that when requesting information , the government must clarify why they need the information . in addition , defining the needs for information requiring protection is what drives potential users to participate in the program . for example , maryland and california initiated the accreditation process because , according to responsible officials , they had defined specific information needs that required protection . determining how information will be used: the act broadly defines how pcii may be shared with other government entities and used to issue advisories , alerts , and warnings . the interim rule provides procedures on how information will be shared with other entities for the same broad uses . however , potential users within dhs have not specified how they will use the information .