use agreements . in pennsylvania and west virginia , states have entered into road - use agreements with energy companies making the companies responsible for their damage to the roads and maintaining them . companies must also pay a bond as part of the agreement . officials told us these agreements have helped make companies more responsible for their impact . for example , in pennsylvania , officials told us industry had invested over $750 million in roadway infrastructure improvements . public awareness . texas launched a public education campaign to alert drivers to the need to use caution when driving through energy - related work zones . other actions have been taken subsequently . fra issued a final rule in january 2014 revising track inspection requirements to increase the standard for track used to transport hazardous materials . and , as discussed , railroads entered into a voluntary agreement with dot in february 2014 to improve the safety of crude oil trains . in their comments in response to phmsa's september 2013 advance notice of proposed rulemaking on rail safety , several shippers noted that recent incidents have generally been caused by defective track , railroad equipment or operational issues , and supported improvements in these areas . ntsb's accident report for the aforementioned 2011 derailment of ethanol tank cars noted that although problems with tank cars were a contributing factor , the probable cause of the accident was a broken rail . phmsa has also noted that addressing the causes of derailments , not just upgrading tank cars , is important for improving the safety of transporting crude oil by rail . this has resulted in an increase in demand for tank cars . phmsa's july 2014 notice of proposed rulemaking to address safety of transporting crude oil by rail includes a number of other provisions in addition to those already discussed for trains carrying 20 or more tank carloads of flammable liquids , including a routing analysis , enhanced braking , and codifying the may 2014 emergency order requiring notification to emergency responders about crude oil shipments . the advent of new oil and gas production technologies has created a new energy boom for the united states . however , with this increase in production comes the responsibility to move those flammable , hazardous materials safely . while the department of transportation has worked to identify and address risks , its regulation has not kept pace with the changing oil and gas transportation environment . gathering pipeline construction has increased , but some of these new pipelines in rural areas fall outside the current safety framework , despite operating at the size and pressure ( and therefore similar risk ) as federally regulated transmission lines . dot began a rulemaking to address this issue in 2011 but did not issue proposed rules . subsequently , new gathering pipeline infrastructure has continued to grow , with industry predicting such growth will continue for the foreseeable future , raising concerns where such pipelines are not subject to safety regulations . the growth in the use of rail to move crude oil has likewise revealed risks not fully addressed by the current safety framework , particularly in ensuring that oil is properly tested and packaged for shipping .