budget . the proposals had to contain a detailed 1-year budget and budget outline for subsequent years , among other things . for funding opportunity announcements that nist published after it issued its 2008 strategic plan , these criteria were to be discussed in the context of the proposer's ability to align the proposal with the program's strategic objectives . the announcements stated that , after scoring the proposals , nist would select award recipients based upon their score ranking and other factors such as availability of federal funds and the need to assure appropriate regional distribution . after centers were established , their subsequent cooperative agreement awards have remained at the historical amount when they were renewed each year . according to nist officials , in some instances , centers' cooperative agreements are not renewed and are instead opened to recompetition ; during fiscal years 2009 to 2013 , eight cooperative agreements were opened to recompetition . nist officials told us that recompetitions typically occur because the existing center has voluntarily closed or the organization has decided its mission no longer supports running a mep center . according to nist's funding opportunity announcements , nist used the same evaluation criteria discussed above to select new centers and establish their awards . unlike renewed cooperative agreement awards , which remain at the historical amount each year , recompeted awards are based on , but can be greater than , the historical amount . nist officials told us that they use the historical amounts as a baseline in establishing the recompeted award amounts , but they may make additional funding available for the recompetitions . this was the case for all but one of the eight recompetitions that took place during fiscal years 2009 to 2013 . according to nist officials , during these years , nist reserved additional funds for seven of the recompetitions to accommodate compelling proposals such as those that identified increased matching funds or broadened the work historically done in the service area . all but one of those seven recompetitions led to award amounts greater than the historical amount . in addition to renewing existing awards and recompeting awards when a center has closed , nist officials told us that nist recently added a new center to the nationwide system and based the new award on the historical amount awarded for the area . specifically , in 2012 , a new center was added in south dakota . previously , the mep center located in north dakota served both north and south dakota and received separate cooperative agreement awards for each . serving both states proved to be difficult for the center , however , and most of its activity was focused in north dakota . according to nist officials , the state of south dakota suggested to nist the addition of a new south dakota center . through a competitive process , the new south dakota center received an award equal in amount to the award that the north dakota center previously received to serve south dakota . the north dakota center received an award equal in amount to the award it previously received to serve north dakota .