” “what is the language ? ” “how well does this person speak english ? ” for our purposes , we included in the limited english proficiency estimate individuals over the age of 18 who self - reported that they speak english “not well” or “not at all.” because the american community survey data are a probability sample based on random selections , this sample is only one of a large number of samples that might have been selected . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples that could have been drawn . in this report , all public user microdata area - level percentage estimates derived from the 2008-2010 american community survey have 95 percent confidence levels of plus or minus 4.5 percentage points or less , unless otherwise noted . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to describe the potential effects on financial literacy from limited english proficiency , we reviewed our prior work and relied on those findings . the work conducted for the prior report included ( 1 ) reviewing relevant literature related to financial literacy among immigrants and people with limited english proficiency ; ( 2 ) conducting interviews with and gathering relevant studies and educational materials from federal agencies , organizations that provided financial literacy and education , and organizations that serve or advocate for populations with limited english proficiency ; and ( 3 ) conducting a series of 10 focus groups to discuss the barriers that individuals with limited english proficiency may face in improving financial literacy and conducting their financial affairs . we against class action communication materials for homeowners , construction workers , and product liability suits developed by the fjc . the fjc developed illustrative notices of proposed class action certification and settlement by studying empirical research and commentary on the plain language drafting of legal documents , testing notices with nonlawyers for comprehension , evaluating them for readability , testing their effectiveness before focus groups composed of ordinary citizens from diverse backgrounds , and conducting a survey . we also reviewed guidelines available from the national association of consumer advocates ( naca ) on the form and content of notices for class action settlements . these guidelines address issues such as the scope of class member releases , attorneys' fees , and notice of settlement . naca maintains the comprehensive standards and guidelines for litigating and settling consumer class actions 176 f.r.d . 375 , first published in 1998 , and fully updated in 2006 , to help ensure that class actions do not lead to restrictions on challenging abusive business practices . the guidelines were intended to be used by consumer class action attorneys as a standard for how to properly proceed , manage , and settle a class action case . they were also intended to be used by courts as a guidepost to judge the merits of cases before them . the standards and revised standards were drafted by a committee of consumer attorneys .