greatest . cms sends co - ops a formal written notice , and if a correction action plan and / or enhanced oversight plan cannot resolve the issue , cms may consider terminating the co - op from the program or taking other enforcement measures , such as withholding loan disbursements . as of november 9 , 2015 , cms officials had identified an issue of greatest concern at two co - ops . for one co - op , it required a corrective action plan , and for the other co - op , it issued a termination letter . how does cms monitor the co - ops' performance and sustainability ? how did premiums for co - op health plans change from 2014 to 2015 , and in 2015 , how did they compare to premiums for other health plans ? how did enrollment in co - op health plans change from 2014 to 2015 , and in 2015 , how did it compare to projections ? to examine how cms monitors the co - ops' performance and sustainability , we reviewed cms policies and procedures regarding its monitoring activities , as well as documentation from cms related to the implementation of those activities . in particular , we reviewed documentation regarding eight co - ops selected to reflect differences in the total amount of loan awards , the total amount of loan awards disbursed , actual enrollment in early 2015 , geographic location , and the type of health insurance exchange ( i.e. , a federally facilitated or state - based exchange ) operated in the state or states where the co - op offered health plans . we also interviewed officials from cms regarding the agency's oversight activities from 2013 , prior to the first enrollment period , through the beginning of the open enrollment period in november 2015 , including their monitoring of the 12 co - ops that ceased operations and other co - ops the agency considered at risk . we assessed cms monitoring activities in the context of internal control standards . to examine how 2015 premiums for co - op health plans differed from 2014 premiums , we analyzed data regarding premiums on the health insurance exchanges of the 23 states where co - ops operated in 2015 . this data included premium data that we obtained from cms for the 16 states that either had a federally facilitated exchange or a federally supported state - based exchange where co - ops participated during the 2015 open enrollment period ( november 15 , 2014 , through february 15 , 2015 ) . we also obtained comparable premium data from the 7 states that had state - based exchanges where co - ops participated .