i for more information ) . however , the effect of using data adjusted for household size on a reform targeted at married couples , such as a change in spousal benefits , is that the change in benefits resulting from the program modification is shared by both the husband and the wife . thus , population data based on the adjusted measure describe the number of people whose household had a benefit change resulting from the modification . ( see fig . the difference in men's and women's longevity has decreased over the past 25 years , and that difference is expected to remain stable throughout much of the 21st century . the benefit of this reform is capped at the average pia for all new retirees . in order to consider the potential upper bound of impact for a modification that would ensure full rollover of retirement assets at preretirement job terminations , we modeled a full rollover of retirement balances into qualified accounts . in both cohorts , never - married women had the largest median change in benefits . the effect of this change was also broad ; for both birth cohorts , it affected the largest number of beneficiaries , both men and women , of any of our simulations . minimum benefit proposals aim to ensure social security benefit adequacy for low earners . under current law , social security includes a special primary insurance amount ( also referred to as the special minimum benefit ) intended to reduce poverty among retired lifetime low - wage workers . the special primary insurance amount targets retirees with a low benefit based on a steady , long - time , low wage work record , rather than on those with a low benefit based on intermittent workforce attachment ; the special primary insurance amount makes this distinction by basing the calculation on years worked rather than earnings level . very few people currently receive benefits based on the special primary insurance amount ; however , the majority of those who do are women . additionally , the benefit provided by the special primary insurance amount is less than the official poverty level for aged persons , and because the benefit is indexed to price inflation rather than wage growth , it has provided a less generous benefit over time relative to the traditional wage - indexed social security benefit . because of this , ssa has projected that the special primary insurance amount will phase out as early as 2013 . a newly designed minimum benefit could expand benefits for low earners across all demographic groups , including women , who are more likely than men to be at the bottom of the income distribution . expanded minimum benefits may also be of renewed importance to benefit adequacy as part of a broad social security reform scenario that reduces benefits for all beneficiaries , including low earners . several social security reform proposals include a new minimum benefit that would guarantee a benefit equal to a set percentage of the poverty level , dependent on the number of years worked across a lifetime . for example , estimated oasdi financial effects of the “bipartisan retirement security act of 2005” — legislation introduced as h.r .