most of these requests were made by licensees . commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , interior , usda's forest service , the hydropower reform coalition , and the national hydropower association provided comments on the report and generally agreed with the report's recommendations . while forest service , interior , and noaa generally agreed with our recommendation that they file a written statement with ferc on their reasons for not accepting a proposed alternative , they all cited a circumstance in which they believed that they were not required to do so . the requests for hearings in 14 of the 18 projects were withdrawn when nonfederal stakeholders and resource agencies reached a settlement agreement before the alj made a ruling , and 1 request is pending as of may 17 , 2010 , because the licensee is in negotiations to decommission the project . prior to a trial - type hearing , an alj holds a prehearing conference to identify , narrow , and clarify the disputed issues of material fact . the alj must issue an order that recites any agreements reached at the conference and any rulings made by the alj during or as a result of the prehearing conference , which can include dismissing issues the alj determines are not disputed issues of material fact . for the three projects that have completed trial - type hearings , the number of issues in these projects was reduced from 96 to 37 after prehearing conferences . in addition , in a fourth project in which the federal resource agencies and the licensee eventually reached a settlement before going to a hearing , the number of issues was reduced from 13 to 1 after the prehearing conference . as table 5 shows , the three trial - type hearings were held for the klamath project , in california and oregon ; the spokane river project , in idaho and washington ; and the tacoma project , in colorado , all of which are nontransition projects . in addition to the licensees requesting hearings , one nongovernmental organization and one tribe requested a hearing for the klamath project . the spokane river and tacoma hearings were completed in 90 days , the time allotted by the interim rule , while klamath required 97 days . as table 5 shows , of the 37 issues presented , the alj ruled in favor of the federal resource agency on 25 issues , ruled in favor of the licensee on 6 issues , and offered a split decision on 6 issues . the stakeholders we spoke with also had several suggestions that were specific to their interests , which included the following: a couple of licensees noted that while the provisions of section 241 may be used after preliminary conditions and prescriptions are issued , they would like to be able to use these provisions after the issuance of final conditions and prescriptions because of concerns that the final conditions and prescriptions could differ from the agreed - upon terms that were arrived at through negotiations . these licensees assert that if they do not have this option , their only recourse is to sue in an appeals court , after the license has been issued .