staffing inspections . a formal evaluation plan could help reac determine if its pilot program for staffing inspections in difficult geographic areas is a success or whether changes are needed before moving from a pilot to a permanent process . field training . the last phase is a 5-day field training course that culminates in a field examination . reac quality assurance inspectors lead and provide instruction for the first 4 days of field training . inspector candidates independently conduct a mock inspection using the uniform physical condition standards protocol on the fifth day , and a quality assurance inspector evaluates the candidate's performance . reac has made changes to training in recent years . for example , reac began using actual hud - assisted properties , rather than simulated properties , for the mock inspection . some quality assurance staff and property owner associations told us they regarded the changes made in recent years to be beneficial . participants in three of the four discussion groups we held with quality assurance supervisors and inspectors , as well as two representatives of property owner advocacy organizations , said that , in addition to classroom training , field training on a physical property helped to assess the competency of inspector candidates . in addition , stakeholders — including property managers , contract inspectors , and reac staff — told us the mock inspections have been effective at providing training to new inspectors , and that the professionalism of contract inspectors has improved . reac contracts with a private vendor to provide the contract inspector online training , and the vendor provides data and reports that reac staff use to track inspector candidates' progress through the online training modules . reac officials told us they use this information to identify areas of the training where candidates struggle and to help revise the training material . in addition , reac solicits feedback from contract inspector candidates on the online training . reac also uses key performance indicators to track the number of inspector candidates who enroll and whether they pass or fail training . however , reac does not currently have formal metrics or use data to track the effectiveness of its three phases of training . for instance , reac does not track key measures of performance that could provide management with information to improve the training process , such as how individuals score in each section of the in - class training examination and their field examinations . reac also does not track the resources spent on training , either in terms of funds spent or number of quality assurance inspectors who participate . according to key practices we have identified for training and development , agencies should have processes to systematically track the cost and delivery of training and measure the effectiveness of those efforts . reac officials said that they would like to have such mechanisms and have developed a proposal to consolidate training functions and better align training to reac's strategic goals . however , the proposal does not include performance measures for evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of training .