any willing provider . in contrast with private payers' reliance on selective contracting with providers and suppliers , the traditional medicare program has generally allowed any hospital , physician , or other provider willing to accept medicare's reimbursements and requirements to participate in the program . with respect to drug purchasing in particular , private plans determine the extent of their enrollees' access by the choices they make about the size of their participating pharmacy network and breadth of their drug formulary . allowing any pharmacy willing to meet medicare's terms to participate or allowing all therapeutically equivalent drugs equal coverage on a formulary would restrict the program's ability to secure advantageous prices . moreover , health plans and pbms currently make formulary determinations privately . in contrast , medicare's policies have historically been open to public comment . administrative rate - setting . whereas private health plans typically rely on price negotiations to establish payment rates , medicare generally establishes payment rates administratively . as discussed earlier , medicare's rates often exceed market prices and this is the case for some of the few outpatient prescription drugs covered by medicare . the program's method of paying for these drugs is prescribed in statute: in essence , medicare pays 95 percent of a drug's “average wholesale price” ( awp ) . despite its name , however , awp is not necessarily a price that wholesalers charge and is not based on the price of any actual sale of drugs by a manufacturer . awps are published by manufacturers in drug price compendia , and medicare bases providers' payments on these published awps . other public and private purchasers typically use the leverage of volume and competition to secure better prices . by statute , medicaid , the nation's health insurance program for certain low - income americans , is guaranteed manufacturers' rebates based on prices charged other purchasers . certain other public payers can pay at rates set in the federal supply schedule , which uses verifiable confidential information on the prices drug manufacturers charge their “most favored” private customers . manufacturers agree to these prices , in part , in exchange for the right to sell drugs to the more than 40 million medicaid beneficiaries . low - budget program administration . duplicating the type of controls pbms have exercised over private - sector drug benefits would likely involve devoting a larger share of total expenditures to administration than is spent by medicare currently . medicare's administrative costs historically have been extremely low , averaging about 2 percent of the cost of the services themselves . this level of expenditure may not be consistent with the level needed to review the volumes of claims data associated with prescription drugs for the elderly or acquire and maintain the on - line systems and databases pbms use to employ such utilization controls as real - time claims adjudication . the number of prescriptions for medicare beneficiaries could easily exceed the current number of claims for all other services combined , or over 1 billion annually .