( see app . iii for a list of disqualifying medical conditions. ) the ame may deny certification when the applicant does not meet the medical standards . when the ame defers or denies the application for a medical certificate or issues a certificate under an authorization for special issuance , the application is routed to faa application examiners who decide whether to issue or deny the certificate . faa established a computer system that prioritizes application review procedures in order to target its resources toward applications that it determined needed the most review . faa's computer system , called document imaging workflow system ( diws ) , initially processes all medical certification applications and designates each one as either a priority or a non - priority application . see table 2 for definition of priority and non - priority applications . in 2007 , of the 438,152 medical certification applications received , diws designated 34,590 applications as priority applications , 399,962 applications as non - priority , and 3,600 as in process . faa's computer system identifies and closes most non - priority applications . in 2007 , for example , faa automatically processed and closed the applications where ames issued medical certificates — about 88 percent of all medical applications . after ames submit the applications , diws routes priority applications to application examiners for review . these examiners review the medical certification applications , supporting documentation , and any previous medical issues in a pilot's medical file . they follow faa regulations , guidance , and consult with faa physicians in order to decide whether to issue or deny the certificate . in 2007 , faa application examiners evaluated all 34,590 priority applications ( see fig . in 2006 , as a result of growing concern by pilots and faa's management about the length of time to review priority applications , faa established a goal of completing each application review in 30 days . according to faa , as of february 2008 , the average time to process a priority application is 24 days . 0.82% in process ( 3,600 ) 71.2% ( 34,590 ) priority applications ( deferred , denied , and special issuances ) 28.8% ( 13,967 ) non - priority applications with potentially disqualifying medical conditions ( 48,557 ) faa's computer system also evaluates non - priority applications ( applications where the ame decided to issue a certificate ) and identifies ones where the pilot or ame indicated one or more potentially disqualifying medical conditions on the application . from this computer database , faa provided 2007 data about the number of medical certification applications that it received and that diws identified as priority , non - priority , and non - priority with potentially disqualifying medical conditions . based on these data , faa officials noted that application examiners reviewed all of the priority applications in 2007 . as a result its investigation , dot ig recommended that faa work with ssa and other disability benefits providers to implement a strategy to check pilots against disability benefits recipients . according to faa officials , faa has not implemented this recommendation because of litigation resulting from the investigation .