( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . dhs provided comments , which are reproduced in full in appendix iii and technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dhs concurred with our recommendation and noted that the assistant secretary for cwmd will coordinate with the dhs under secretary for strategy , policy , and plans and other stakeholders to develop a strategy and implementation plan that will better integrate and direct dhs chemical defense programs and activities . dhs estimated that it will complete this effort by september 2019 . these actions , if fully implemented , should address the intent of this recommendation . these were the office of health affairs' ( oha ) chemical defense program ; the science and technology directorate's ( s&t ) chemical and biological defense division and chemical security analysis center ( csac ) ; and the national protection and programs directorate's ( nppd ) chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) program and sector outreach and programs division . each component had dedicated funding to manage the particular chemical defense program or activity ( with the exception of the sector outreach and programs division because this division funds dhs activities related to all critical infrastructure sectors , including the chemical sector ) . on december 7 , 2017 , dhs established the countering weapons of mass destruction ( cwmd ) office , which incorporated most of oha and selected elements of s&t , together with other dhs programs and activities related to countering chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats . according to dhs , the cwmd office was created to , among other things , elevate and streamline dhs's efforts to prevent terrorists and other national security threat actors from using harmful agents , such as chemical agents , to harm americans and u.s. interests . oha , which was subsumed by the cwmd office in december 2017 , was responsible for enhancing federal , state , and local risk awareness and planning and response mechanisms in the event of a chemical incident through the chemical defense program . this program provided medical and technical expertise to oha leadership and chemical defense stakeholders including dhs leadership , dhs components , the intelligence community , federal interagency partners , and professional and academic preparedness organizations . the strategy also identified the principal actions needed to fill these gaps .