steinman . we reviewed mcc's activities in its first 15 months of operations , specifically its ( 1 ) process for determining country eligibility for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , ( 2 ) progress in developing compacts , ( 3 ) coordination with key stakeholders , and ( 4 ) establishment of management structures and accountability mechanisms . to examine mcc's country selection process , we analyzed candidate countries' scores for the 16 quantitative indicators for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , as well as the selection criteria for the fiscal year 2004 threshold program . we used these data to determine the characteristics of countries that met and did not meet the indicator criteria and to assess the extent to which mcc relied on country scores for eligibility determination . we also reviewed the source data for the indicator scores posted on mcc's web site to identify issues related to public access and to determine whether we could reproduce the country scores from the source data . our review of the source data methodology , as well as the documents of other experts , allowed us to identify some limitations of the indicator criteria used in the country selection process . for these and other data we used in our analyses , we examined , as appropriate , the reliability of the data through interviews with mcc officials responsible for the data , document reviews , and reviews of data collection and methodology made available by the authors . we determined the data to be reliable for the purposes of this study . to describe mcc's process for developing compacts , including plans for monitoring and evaluation , we reviewed mcc's draft or finalized documents outlining compact proposal guidance , compact proposal assessment , and fiscal accountability elements . we reviewed eligible countries' compact proposals and concept papers to identify proposed projects , funding , and institutional frameworks , among other things . to summarize the projects that countries have proposed and that mcc is currently assessing , we developed categories and conducted an analysis of countries' proposal documents and mcc's internal summaries . we also reviewed madagascar's draft compact to identify projects , funding , and framework for program implementation and fiscal accountability . we met with mcc officials to obtain updates on the compact development process . in addition , we interviewed representatives of nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) in washington , d.c. , and honduras , as well as country officials in honduras , to obtain their perspectives on mcc's compact development process . to assess mcc's coordination with key stakeholders , we reviewed interagency agreements to identify the types of formal assistance that mcc is seeking from u.s. agencies and the funding that mcc has set aside for this purpose . we also reviewed mcc documents to identify the organizations , including other donors , with which mcc has consulted . in addition , we interviewed mcc officials regarding their coordination with various stakeholders . we met with officials from the u.s. agencies on the mcc board ( departments of state and treasury , usaid , and ustr ) to assess the types of assistance that these agencies have provided to mcc .