terminal area congestion . terminal airspace is a critical component in the efficient use of airport capacity . in instances where volume has increased and the current airspace structure is the limiting factor , redesigning arrival and departure procedures , including the addition of area navigation and required navigation performance procedures , will allow more efficient use of constrained terminal airspace . what are some of the challenges in reducing flight delays and enhancing capacity ? what other options are available to address flight delays and enhance capacity ? to answer these questions , we obtained and analyzed information from faa , airports council international , and air transport association on the status and impact of initiatives to reduce flight delays that were identified in our december 2001 report . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . several initiatives to reduce flight delays , such as those shown in figure 1 , and enhance capacity are ongoing . many of these initiatives are reflected in faa's february 2005 operation evolution plan which is a 10-year plan to increase capacity and efficiency of the national airspace system and focuses on airport congestion , air traffic management flow efficiency , en route congestion , and terminal area congestion at 35 of the busiest airports in the united states . faa acknowledges , however , that the oep is not intended as the ultimate solution to congestion and delay problems . seven more runways and one runway extension are scheduled to open by the end of 2008 with the potential to accommodate 889,000 more annual operations . in addition to building runways , several new systems or technologies were implemented . for example , in january 2005 , faa implemented the domestic reduced vertical separation minimum which is designed to increase available high altitude routes which gives pilots and air traffic controllers more choices so that aircraft can fly more direct routes at the most fuel - efficient altitudes . faa is also pursuing some additional solutions for flight delays that are not in the oep . to reduce flight delays at some of the delay - prone airports such as new york la guardia and chicago o'hare , faa is also exploring administrative and market - based options . for example , faa is considering auctioning off landing and take off rights and using congestion pricing at new york la guardia and limiting the number of takeoffs and landings during peak periods at chicago o'hare . a number of challenges in reducing flight delays and enhancing capacity remain . chief among them is obtaining funding for many of the initiatives mentioned above ; their successful implementation is predicated on the availability of funding from several sources , including faa , airlines , and airports . however , since 2000 , the financial condition of the aviation industry has changed significantly . many structural changes , such as the growth of the low cost carriers which led to lower average fares and external events ( e.g . global recessions and a steep decline in business travel ) have caused a dip in demand for air travel and resulted in sharp decreases in airline industry revenue and the amount of revenues flowing into the airport and airway trust fund .