there is widespread corruption in iraq . reconstruction efforts have not taken the risk of corruption into account when assessing the costs of achieving u.s. objectives in iraq . the international monetary fund , the world bank , japan , and the european union officials cite corruption in the oil sector as a special problem . in addition , according to state officials and reporting documents , about 10 percent of refined fuels are diverted to the black market , and about 30 percent of imported fuels are smuggled out of iraq and sold for a profit . future international contributions for iraq may be limited . most of the u.s. funds have been obligated and about 70 percent of the $13.6 billion in international pledges are in the form of loans . the new u.s. embassy will be costly . the embassy is projected to cost about $592 million , but the full cost of establishing a diplomatic presence across iraq is still unknown . additional funds are needed to train and equip afghan security forces . the united states , other donors , and the new afghan government face significant challenges to establishing viable afghan army and police forces . although dod and state have not yet prepared official cost estimates , the army and police programs could cost up to $7.2 billion to complete and about $600 million annually to sustain . moreover , slow progress in resolving other afghan security problems — the lack of an effective judiciary , the substantial illicit narcotics industry , and the continued presence of armed militias — threaten to undermine overall progress made toward providing nationwide security and ensuring the stability of the afghan government . training and equipping the afghan national army . the united states led the international effort to train and equip the afghan national army , which is crucial to both long - term security and u.s. counter - terror efforts . about 26,500 troops have been trained and equipped and the defense force is projected to reach up to 70,000 military and civilian personnel , according to state reporting . the administration has received $1.9 billion in the fiscal year 2006 supplemental appropriation to further prepare afghan security forces to operate without u.s. support . the u.s. government also funds a variety of other programs that indirectly support gwot . for example , congress provides funding for security assistance on a worldwide basis to help train or equip foreign security forces ( military and police ) . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you and the subcommittee members may have . ( see table 1. ) for fiscal year 2007 , dod has requested another $50 billion in bridge funding for military operations and other u.s. government agencies have requested $771 million for reconstruction and stabilization activities . the $386 billion dod has received to fund military operations supporting gwot also includes funding for homeland defense under operation noble eagle . this operation was funded through supplemental appropriations for dod until fiscal year 2005 , when it was moved into dod's baseline budget .