gao - 10-213 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 . recovering servicemembers: dod and va have jointly developed the majority of required policies but challenges remain . gao - 09-728 . washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2009 . these staffing shortages contributed to delays in the ides process . two of the sites we visited — fort carson and fort stewart — were particularly challenged to provide staff in response to surges in caseload , which occurred when army units were preparing to deploy to combat zones . through the army's predeployment medical assessment process , large numbers of servicemembers were determined to be unable to deploy due to a medical condition and were referred to the ides within a short period of time , overwhelming the staff . these two sites were unable to quickly increase staffing levels , particularly of examiners . as a result , at fort carson , it took 140 days on average to complete the single exam for active duty servicemembers , as of august 2010 , far exceeding the agencies' goal to complete the exams in 45 days . exam summaries: issues related to the completeness and clarity of single exam summaries were an additional cause of delays in the va rating phase of the ides process . officials from va rating offices said that some exam summaries did not contain information necessary to determine a rating . as a result , va rating office staff must ask the examiner to clarify these summaries and , in some cases , redo the exam . va officials attributed the problems with exam summaries to several factors , including the complexity of ides pilot cases , the volume of exams , and examiners not receiving records of servicemembers' medical history in time . the extent to which insufficient exam summaries caused delays in the ides process is unknown because dod and va's case tracking system for the ides does not track whether an exam summary has to be returned to the examiner or whether it has been resolved . medical diagnoses: while the single exam in the ides eliminates duplicative exams performed by dod and va in the legacy system , it raises the potential for there to be disagreements about diagnoses of servicemembers' conditions . for example , officials at army pilot sites informed us about cases in which a dod physician had treated members for mental disorders , such as major depression . however , when the members went to see the va examiners for their single exam , the examiners diagnosed them with posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) . officials told us that attempting to resolve such differences added time to the process and sometimes led to disagreements between dod's pebs and va's rating offices about what the rating should be for purposes of determining dod disability benefits . although the army developed guidance to help resolve diagnostic differences , other services have not . moreover , peb officials we spoke with noted that there is no guidance on how disagreements about servicemembers' ratings between dod and va should be resolved beyond the pebs informally requesting that the va rating office reconsider the case .