omb bulletin no . 01-02 states that auditors shall perform tests of the entity's compliance with ffmia . in providing guidance on reporting on substantial compliance with ffmia , omb bulletin no . 01-02 states that auditors should report that “the results of our tests disclosed no instances in which the agency's financial management systems did not substantially comply” . in contrast , ffmia requires the auditors to “…report whether the agency financial management systems comply with the requirements of .” this is an important distinction because under auditing standards the terminology “disclosed no instances” means that the auditor is providing negative assurance . under generally accepted government auditing standards , only limited incidental testing is necessary for an auditor to give negative assurance . however , to “report whether,” or to provide positive assurance , auditors need to perform sufficient testing to draw a conclusion . auditors for the five agencies that were not reported to be noncompliant with ffmia provided negative assurance in accordance with omb guidance . if the readers of the report do not understand this distinction , they may have a false impression that the systems have been reported to be substantially compliant by the auditors . today for most agencies , because their systems deficiencies are well known and well documented and based on other audit work the auditor may have performed outside of the financial statement audit , the auditor may have sufficient knowledge to conclude that an agency is not in substantial compliance with ffmia without performing additional testing beyond that needed for the financial statement audit opinion . the auditors for the 19 agencies that reported agencies' systems to be noncompliant with ffmia for fiscal year 2000 told us they relied on knowledge obtained from prior years' audits or the internal control and compliance with laws and regulation testing performed during the current year financial statement audits . however , to provide positive assurance when assessing substantial compliance with ffmia requirements , sufficient testing is needed . some of the promising audit procedures noted during our review included the use of detailed audit programs and an assessment of financial systems' functionality . for example , auditors for 7 of the 24 agencies — the department of energy , aid , nsf , epa , hud , nrc , and opm — designed and used separate ffmia audit programs to test for compliance . other procedures that auditors could perform to provide positive assurance when assessing compliance with ffmia include using the gao and jfmip checklists that were developed as assessment tools . for example , the auditors for nrc used the gao checklist to determine systems' compliance with jfmip systems requirements , while the auditors for the department of labor used the jfmip checklist to determine the agency's core financial system's compliance with ffmia . for both agencies , the auditor reported that the agency systems were not compliant with ffmia . gao and the president's council on integrity and efficiency ( pcie ) recently issued a joint financial audit manual ( gao / pcie fam ) . this manual provides the methodology for performing financial statement audits of federal entities .