we believe that dod misunderstood our recommendation . the joint strategy initiative that dod is actively pursuing , according to documentation provided by dod , is focused on commodity management , not on developing strategic relationships to reduce lead times . our recommendation calls for the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to work closely with the army and navy to move beyond simply managing the acquisition of individual parts , and to form strategic partnerships with key suppliers for ranges of items in situations where it would be possible to leverage these relationships to reduce lead times . documentation from dod further states that dod's commodity management plan acknowledges that service initiatives will produce improvements , and that it respects those initiatives . our recommendation , for the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to work closely with the army and navy to develop similar initiatives to those already underway by dla and the air force , is not duplicative of ongoing efforts , but would complement them . until the army and the navy begin initiatives to develop strategic relationships with suppliers , they may be unable to realize the potential benefits from improved supplier relationships and may continue to experience lower rates of lead time reductions than dla and the air force . therefore , we continue to believe that the recommendation to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics is valid . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on armed services ; the subcommittee on readiness and management support , senate committee on armed services ; the subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations ; the house committee on armed services ; the subcommittee on readiness , house committee on armed services ; and the ranking minority member , subcommittee on defense , house committee on appropriations . we are also sending copies to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; the director of dla ; and the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . copies will be made available to others upon request . should you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact william m. solis , director , at ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to address our objectives , we reviewed relevant documents , guidance , reports , and other information , as available , which related to acquisition lead times for class ix spare parts and any initiatives the department of defense ( dod ) or the military components were undertaking in this area .