disclosure requirement . representatives from some publicly traded financial institutions with whom we spoke expressed frustration over sec's requirement that they publicly disclose their intent to bid on their own shares and the amount of capital they raised to do so . representatives from these institutions — which had internal , nonpublic information available to them — said that this disclosure requirement signaled to other bidders that the shares were an attractive investment , raising the prices . some financial institution representatives also felt that they were at a disadvantage because the other bidders knew , through the disclosure required by sec , the amount of capital the participant had available for bidding on its shares . conversely , the financial institutions had no knowledge about the capital available to the other potential bidders . while the disclosures may have resulted in higher returns to treasury , representatives from some of these institutions said the disclosures put them at a disadvantage compared to the other bidders . according to sec officials , the purpose of the disclosure was to protect investors by alerting them to the fact that the clearing price for the securities offered in the auction could be affected by the institution's bids . the officials also said that this information was particularly relevant because even assuming the institution has disclosed all material , non - public information to investors , the institution is always better informed about its performance and prospects than any bidder or other third party . no matching bids . a number of financial institutions told us that they would have preferred the option of matching the winning bid to be able to retain ownership of their shares . however , treasury officials said that changes to the process benefitting the financial institutions would make the process less competitive to potential bidders and less beneficial for the taxpayer . in particular , treasury officials said that giving the institution the right to match the winning bid would make other bidders less competitive , and could , in turn , discourage potential bidders from participating . some of the concerns with the auction process cited by auction participants with whom we spoke may have been caused by a difference in motivations . according to a banking association , banks generally like to retain ownership . treasury officials said that their goal was to create a competitive and transparent process that would maximize returns to taxpayers . treasury said that the auctions had been successful in helping treasury to wind down cpp and transfer ownership of the preferred shares to the private sector . we provided a draft of this report to treasury for its review and comment . treasury provided written comments that we have reprinted in appendix ii . in its written comments , treasury noted that the report provided a helpful overview of its strategy to wind down cpp . it also noted that treasury had realized a positive return of $17.8 billion on its cpp investments as of june 28 , 2013 , and that 143 institutions remained in the program representing a remaining investment of $5.5 billion . treasury also emphasized tarp's effectiveness in preventing a collapse of the financial system and in restarting economic growth .