( see app . i for more detailed information on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted our work from november 2002 to february 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government accounting standards . in 1956 , congress established the judgment fund — a permanent , indefinite appropriation — to pay judgments against federal agencies that are not otherwise provided for in agency appropriations . among other things , the fund is intended to allow for more prompt payments to claimants , thereby reducing the assessment of interest against federal agencies ( where allowed by law ) during the period between the rendering and payment of an award . in 1961 , legislation was enacted allowing the fund to pay department of justice settlements of ongoing or imminent lawsuits against federal agencies . the no fear act requires federal agencies to reimburse the judgment fund for payments of judgments , awards , or settlements that the fund makes to employees , former employees , or job applicants in connection with litigation alleging violation of certain federal laws . all of these claims were for court judgments and settlements . during this period , the fund also processed 304 cda claim payments and paid about $713 million . this included payments for court judgments and settlements and board of contract appeals awards . the fund did not make any payments for whistleblower protection claims as these payments were typically made by agencies . the no fear act requires that we review the financial impact on the treasury of administering both the no fear act and cda . based on this requirement and discussions with committee staff , this report provides information on ( 1 ) treasury's estimates of costs to process cda and discrimination payments for fiscal year 2003 and its estimates to process and seek reimbursement for no fear act claim payments in fiscal year 2004 , ( 2 ) differences in payment processing under cda and the no fear act , and ( 3 ) the extent of federal agencies' compliance with cda's reimbursement requirement and treasury officials' view of how effective the reimbursement collection efforts under the no fear act may be . fms does not review the merits underlying the claim nor certify the merits of the judgment or award . fms estimates that in fiscal year 2003 it spent about $334,000 to certify , pay , and seek reimbursement for cda claim payments and about $240,000 to certify and pay discrimination claims ( see tables 1 and 2 ) . fms estimates that it will have to allocate approximately $171,500 for personnel costs to seek reimbursement for discrimination claims under the no fear act in fiscal year 2004 ( see table 3 ) . this estimate includes about $119,500 in costs to set up and administer accounts receivable and seek reimbursement for no fear act payments . fms estimates that it will also incur a one - time start - up cost of about $52,000 for its information technicians to upgrade computer systems to create and track no fear act accounts receivable . fms expects no increase in either the number of personnel or budgeted funds to handle no fear act reimbursements .