the officials must then determine what projects are needed . many forest service regions have no specific guidance for this step , and officials rely on the guidance available in program handbooks and legislation . for example , the trails management handbook includes guidance for planning projects , such as how to assess trail conditions against height , width , and other trail construction standards , depending on whether the trail is designated primarily for use by hikers or by pack animals as well . in addition , some laws include requirements or provisions that guide agency officials' actions when planning projects . for example , after a 2001 wildland fire at the tahoe national forest in california , the forest service spent a year preparing a plan , finalized in 2002 , that proposed harvesting and selling burned timber both outside and within a roadless area to help finance needed rehabilitation work . the agency began harvesting timber outside the roadless area and had virtually completed doing so by july 2004 . however , in response to a lawsuit , a federal district court issued a preliminary injunction in august 2004 , prohibiting the forest service from harvesting timber inside the roadless area . in february 2006 , the agency settled the case , agreeing not to harvest timber in the roadless area . by that point — 4-1 / 2 years after the fire — agency officials said that the value of the timber had declined to the point that it was no longer feasible to sell it . faced with repeated decisions about harvesting burned timber , some forest service officials expressed concern that there is insufficient scientific evidence to support one action or another , and further noted that little research is being done to address the question . in a 2004 report entitled “strategy for post - fire recovery,” an interregional group of forest service officials noted that there is “very limited scientific information on long - term effects of uncharacteristically severe fires , the effectiveness of post - fire rehabilitation and restoration treatments , or the impacts of post - fire timber harvesting.” without such information , they concluded , “policy choices are often based on ideology and emotion rather than objective scientific information.” according to one forest service scientist , there is an urgent need for more information on salvage logging — especially information about the effects of logging operations under various conditions and in different geographic locations because such effects vary widely depending on the type and extent of logging , site conditions , and climatic conditions . moreover , such research is needed to improve the models used by agency decision makers to predict the potential impacts of proposed actions such as locations and rates of erosion because , currently , none of them account for the effects of salvage logging on the postfire environment . the 2002 biscuit fire in oregon , which has been a focal point for recent debates about harvesting burned timber , has also drawn attention to the role of scientific research . after the fire , a study was published stating that removing dead and dying trees from the biscuit fire area would reduce the risk of recurring large - scale fires in the area .