federal cio . we have since completed three successive reviews of the data on the it dashboard and reported that while it is an important tool for reporting and monitoring major it projects , the cost and schedule ratings were not always accurate for selected agencies . we made recommendations to improve the accuracy of the data and , in our most recent report , found that the accuracy had improved . gao , information technology: omb needs to improve its guidance on it investments , gao - 11-826 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 29 , 2011 ) . that omb update its guidance to establish measures of accountability for ensuring that cios' responsibilities are fully implemented and require agencies to establish internal processes for documenting lessons learned . omb officials generally agreed with our recommendations and , in august 2011 , issued a memo to agencies emphasizing the cio's role in driving the investment review process and responsibility over the entire it portfolio for an agency . the memo identified four areas in which the cio should have a lead role: it governance , program management , commodity services , and information security . omb and key federal agencies have made progress on selected action items identified in the it reform plan , but there are several areas where more remains to be done . of the 10 key action items we reviewed , 3 were completed and the other 7 were partially completed by december 2011 . cloud computing . in may 2010 , we reported on multiple agencies' efforts to ensure the security of governmentwide cloud computing . we noted that while omb , gsa , and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) had initiated efforts to ensure secure cloud computing , significant work remained to be completed.omb had not yet finished a cloud computing strategy ; gsa had begun a procurement for expanding cloud computing services , but had not yet developed specific plans for establishing a shared information security assessment and authorization process ; and nist had not yet issued cloud - specific security guidance . we made several recommendations to address these issues . specifically , we recommended that omb establish milestones to complete a strategy for federal cloud computing and ensure it addressed information security challenges . omb subsequently published a strategy which addressed the importance of information security when using cloud computing , but did not fully address several key challenges confronting agencies . we also recommended that gsa consider security in its procurement for cloud services , including consideration of a shared assessment and authorization process . gsa has since developed an assessment and authorization process for systems shared among federal agencies . finally , we recommended that nist issue guidance specific to cloud computing security . nist has since issued multiple publications which address such guidance . more recently , in october 2011 , we testified that 22 of 24 major federal agencies reported that they were either concerned or very concerned about the potential information security risks associated with cloud computing . these risks include being dependent on the security practices and assurances of vendors and the sharing of computing resources . we stated that these risks may vary based on the cloud deployment model .