we disagree . while we acknowledge that there are high - level business functions and activities in the business model , the model did not define business processes . element satisfied ? a business assessment that includes the enterprise's purpose , scope ( eg , organizations , business areas , and internal and external stakeholders' concerns ) , limitations or assumptions , and methods . the architecture does not contain a business assessment or gap analysis results . a gap analysis that describes the target outcomes and shortfalls , including strategic business issues , conclusions reached as a result of the analysis ( eg , missing capabilities ) , causal information , and rationales . however , the architecture recognizes the need to perform a business assessment and project - specific gap analyses . it also identifies possible concerns ( eg , inefficiencies in business function and technology ) that may be addressed by the department . a business strategy that describes the desired future state of the business , the specific objectives to be achieved , and the strategic direction that will be followed by the enterprise to realize the desired future state . the architecture does not have a business strategy that adequately describes the desired future state of the business , the objectives to be achieved , and the strategic direction to be followed . however , the architecture does address to a limited degree the characteristics of a business strategy , as discussed below . a vision statement that describes the business areas requiring strategic attention based on the gap analysis . the architecture does contain a vision statement ; however , this statement does not highlight opportunities for strategic change to business processes , nor does it present a consistent view of the national responsibilities for homeland security at the various levels ( i.e. , federal , state , local , and international ) . a description of the business priorities and constraints , including their relationships to , at a minimum , applicable laws and regulations , executive orders , departmental policy , procedures , guidance , and audit reports . the architecture recognizes that homeland security processes , procedures , and decisions about it management should comply with applicable laws , regulations , and guidance , particularly those associated with privacy requirements . the architecture also specifically mentions the national strategy for homeland security . however , the architecture does not explicitly identify , reconcile , prioritize , or align the applicable laws , regulations , and guidance . as a result , business priorities and constraints are not identified . element satisfied ? a description of the scope of business change that is to occur to address identified gaps and realize the future desired business state . the scope of change , at a minimum , should identify expected changes to strategic goals , customers , suppliers , services , locations , and capabilities . the architecture does not explicitly identify what will be changed in the “as is” environment . it also does not explicitly identify key customers , suppliers , products , services , locations , and capabilities for homeland security at the national level . a description of the measurable strategic business objectives to be met to achieve the desired change .