we did not independently verify this information . the defense inspector general has cited system deficiencies and internal control weaknesses as major obstacles to the presentation of financial statements that would fairly present the defense working capital fund financial position for fiscal years 1993 through 2000 . our review was performed from september 2000 through april 2001 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . however , we did not validate the accuracy of the accounting and budget information , all of which was provided by the army , navy , and air force . we requested comments on a draft on this report from the secretary of defense or his designee . we have reprinted the comments in appendix iii of this report . dod's carryover guidance does not address how certain items should be treated and / or calculated and , as a result , it is a contributing factor to the military services' inconsistent implementation of dod's formula for determining the number of months of carryover . this appendix discusses the different methods the services used to determine compliance with dod's 3-month carryover standard . prior to the fiscal year 2002 budget , the air force did not make any adjustments to its figures when determining the number of months of carryover and whether the air force had exceeded the 3-month standard . an air force official said they did not implement the 1996 carryover guidance sooner because the deductions would have had little or no impact on the number of months of carryover . beginning with the fiscal year 2002 budget , the air force official informed us that they were making the adjustments so that the air force would be in compliance with dod's 1996 carryover policy . in making the adjustments for the fiscal year 2002 budget , the air force reduced its year - end carryover figure by the amount associated with certain types of orders , such as orders from foreign countries and non - dod sources . however , unlike the navy and army , as discussed below , the air force ( 1 ) did not make adjustments for contractual obligations such as outstanding requisitions for material and ( 2 ) reduced the revenue figure used in the calculation by the amount of revenue related to those certain types of orders excluded from the carryover figure . an air force official told us that they adjusted the revenue figure so that the air force would be consistent in making the adjustments . that is , they reduced both the numerator ( the carryover figure ) and denominator ( the revenue figure ) part of the equation . the navy has been making the allowable adjustments to its year - end carryover figures since 1996 . the navy has been reducing orders carried over into the next fiscal year for ( 1 ) carryover associated with certain types of orders , such as orders from foreign countries and non - dod sources and ( 2 ) any contractual obligations incurred against those orders , which includes contracts with private industry , outstanding material requisitions with dod supply activities , and orders placed with other working capital fund activities .