these changes are identified in the report . while the results provide some confidence that apparent fluctuations in our results across years are likely attributable to sampling error , the inability to detect significant differences may also be related to the nature of our sample , which was relatively small and was designed only for cross - sectional analysis . a bonferroni adjustment is a statistical adjustment designed to reduce the chance of making a type 1 inferential error , that is , concluding that a difference exists when it is instead an artifact of sampling error . the adjustment raises the threshold for concluding that any single difference is “statistically significant” so that overall the chance of making at least one type - 1 error when making multiple comparisons does not exceed a specified level . population value for 95 percent of the samples that we could have drawn . the percentage estimates for ld - 2 reports have a 95 percent confidence intervals of within plus or minus 12.1 percentage points or less of the estimate itself . we contacted all the lobbyists and lobbying firms in our sample and , using a structured web - based survey , asked them to confirm key elements of the ld - 2 and whether they could provide documentation for key elements in their reports , including the amount of income reported for lobbying activities ; the amount of expenses reported on lobbying activities ; the names of those lobbyists listed in the report ; the houses of congress and federal agencies that they lobbied and the issue codes listed to describe their lobbying activity . after reviewing the survey results for completeness , we conducted interviews with the lobbyists and lobbying firms to review documentation they reported as having on their online survey for selected elements of their ld - 2 report . prior to each interview , we conducted a search to determine whether lobbyists properly disclosed their covered position as required by the lda . we reviewed the lobbyists' previous work histories by searching lobbying firms' websites , linkedin , leadership directories , legistorm , and google . prior to 2008 , lobbyists were only required to disclose covered official positions held within 2 years of registering as a lobbyist for the client . the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 amended that time frame to require disclosure of positions held 20 years before the date the lobbyists first lobbied on behalf of the client . lobbyists are required to disclose previously held covered official positions either on the client registration ( ld - 1 ) or on an ld - 2 report . consequently , those who held covered official positions may have disclosed the information on the ld - 1 or a ld - 2 report filed prior to the report we examined as part of our random sample .