our review of star is ongoing . specifically , we plan to analyze star data and processes to assess whether any types of claims are systematically underrepresented in accuracy reviews . in addition , we are further considering the implications of a more efficient sampling methodology on developing issue - based accuracy estimates . in addition to its star reviews , vba's quality assurance framework includes other complementary activities , some of which have been enhanced to help meet its 98-percent goal for fiscal year 2015 . for example , vba established qrts in regional offices as a means of strengthening its focus on quality at regional offices , where claims are processed . qrt personnel — like star reviewers — are required to pass an annual skills certification test . in addition to conducting individual quality reviews to determine whether claims processors are achieving individual accuracy targets , qrt personnel are charged with conducting in - process reviews of claims not yet finalized , looking for specific types of errors commonly made . quality reviewers are also responsible for providing feedback to claims processors on the results of their quality reviews , including formal feedback from the results of individual quality reviews and more informal feedback from the results of in - process reviews . typically , feedback on quality reviews is provided as reviews are completed . in addition , at the four offices we contacted , quality reviewers are available to answer questions and provide guidance to claims processors as needed . during our site visits , however , we identified shortcomings in qrt practices and implementation that could reduce their effectiveness . with respect to assessing individual performance , we learned that three of the four offices we contacted have agreements with their local unions that prevent qrt personnel from reviewing claims processed during overtime . as a result , regional offices would be limited in their ability to address issues with the quality of work performed during overtime . vba officials told gao they do not know how many regional offices include or exclude claims processed during overtime , or the extent to which excluding cases worked during overtime occurs nationally . according to vba data , claims processed on overtime represented about 10 percent of rating - related claims completed nationally in fiscal year 2013 . in our ongoing work , we plan to review the extent to which this practice is followed at other regional offices and how claims processed during overtime are identified . in addition , regional offices we contacted told us that they face a challenge in conducting in - process reviews as required because vba's veterans benefits management system lacks the capability to pause the process and prevent claims from being completed while a quality review is still underway . in our ongoing work , we will continue to review the extent to which claims are decided before in - process reviews are finalized and whether this causes rework or other problems . vba's efforts to assess consistency of claims decisions have also expanded in recent years .