pub . 100-418 , § 1908 ( b ) , 102 stat . 1107 , 1315 ( codified as amended at 19 u.s.c . § 1555 ( b ) ) . the act does not identify any quantity amount with respect to personal use but defines personal use quantities as quantities that are only suitable for uses other than resale and includes reasonable quantities for household or family consumption as well as for gifts to others . discussion of this topic occurred as part of congressional consideration of senate bill 1420 , the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1987 . one senator highlighted the potential for economic harm to communities adjacent to the u.s. - mexico border if the provision precluding duty - free sales in wholesale quantities were applied to land border stores . congress passed the omnibus foreign trade and competitiveness act of 1987 , but the president vetoed the bill , and a vote to override the veto failed in the senate . ( see h.r . 3 , 100th cong . s. 1420 was incorporated into h.r . the provision limiting the concept of “personal - use quantities” to airports was in the omnibus foreign trade and competitiveness act of 1988 , which congress passed and the president signed . pub . 100-418 , § 1908 ( b ) , 102 stat . at commerce , census is responsible for collecting , compiling , and publishing export trade statistics . aes is the primary instrument for collecting export trade data . census takes steps to ensure compliance by aes filers , including duty - free store operators , through training and follow - up on unusual transactions , according to census officials . at dhs , cbp and ice are the components with roles related to duty - free cigarette exports . cbp is responsible for oversight of duty - free stores , including the requirements for establishment of stores and ensuring stores' compliance with various requirements for operations and lawful sales . duty - free stores are regulated as a type of bonded warehouse . cbp port directors ensure that duty - free stores establish operating procedures . according to cbp officials , the agency is also responsible for enforcing the foreign trade regulations , including consideration of enforcement action when an aes filer submits incorrect information regarding a shipment of merchandise being exported . such enforcement action may include the issuance of penalties or the seizure of the merchandise intended for export . ice enforces u.s. laws related to tobacco smuggling for cases in which it has investigative jurisdiction , including related offenses such as money laundering . according to agency officials , ice also coordinates with cbp on enforcement efforts , such as seizures of merchandise due to violations of u.s. laws or customs regulations .