identified fraud risks . ( app . i describes the key elements of a fraud risk profile. ) instead , uscis's completed and planned risk assessments span multiple years and were developed as separate documents and reports , and uscis lacks a unifying document that consolidates these findings and informs the specific control activities managers design and implement . a senior fdns official told us that fdns is beginning the development of a fraud - management plan to help guide efforts for the program , but these efforts were in their early stages . moreover , the official stated that they did not anticipate incorporating a fraud risk profile as part of their fraud - management plan . without a profile , managers may lack an important tool that can serve as an internal benchmark in assessing the performance of fraud - control activities . further , a profile can provide additional assurances to stakeholders and decision makers on the fraud risks to programs as well as steps taken to manage those risks . this fraud risk profile can include all elements of the prior risk assessments and any updates , serving as a central reference document that can inform and help initiate actions . absent a fraud risk profile , uscis may not be well positioned to identify and prioritize fraud risks in the eb - 5 program and ensure the appropriate controls are in place to mitigate these risks . uscis has taken a number of steps recently to enhance its fraud - detection capabilities throughout the eb - 5 program . however , the anticipated benefits of these steps may take time to realize . in the meantime , the agency continues to be hindered by a reliance on time - consuming reviews of paper files that preclude certain potential fraud - detection activities such as the use of text analytics to help identify indicators of potential fraud in the applications and petitions of regional - center principals and immigrant investors . the continuation of planned efforts to digitize the files , including the supporting evidence submitted by applicants and petitioners , could help uscis better identify fraud indicators in the program . moreover , uscis has incorporated several leading fraud risk management practices into its efforts , including committing to creating an organizational culture that combats fraud risks and assessing those risks through regular risk assessments . however , uscis would be better positioned to prioritize and respond to evolving fraud risks by adopting an approach that is guided by a fraud risk profile , as called for by the fraud risk framework . to strengthen uscis's eb - 5 program fraud risk management , we recommend the director of uscis develop a fraud risk profile that aligns with leading practices identified in gao's fraud risk framework . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for its review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dhs concurred with our recommendation and stated that uscis will develop a fraud risk profile as described with estimated completion by september 30 , 2017 . we will continue to monitor the agency's efforts in this area .