gao - 16-22 . washington , d.c.: oct. 28 , 2015 . doe and nnsa project management: analysis of alternatives could be improved by incorporating best practices . washington , d.c.: mar . gao - 15-37 . we provided a draft of this report of this report to nga for review and comment . the weighting and final decisions are shown in table 1 . the nga director selected the st. louis city site as the agency - preferred alternative . it was identified in the publication of the final environmental impact statement and finalized with the issuance of the record of decision in june 2016 . we compared nga's aoa process for selecting a site for the new nga west campus to our aoa best practices and determined that nga's process substantially met three and partially met one characteristic of a high - quality , reliable aoa process . although nga's aoa process substantially met most of the characteristics , we did find areas where the process could have been strengthened if nga had more fully incorporated the aoa best practices . see table 2 for a summary of our assessment and appendix i for additional details on our scoring of nga's alignment with each of the 22 best practices . nga's aoa process for selecting a site for the new nga west substantially met the well - documented characteristic of a high - quality , reliable aoa process , although we did find areas for improvement . for example , nga's aoa body of work demonstrated that the assumptions and constraints for each alternative for the site selection process were documented . nga west's prospective sites master plan included a set of overall assumptions that guided the preliminary planning process and provided specific assumptions and constraints for each alternative . specifically , the plan identified various assumptions and constraints for the four final sites , such as calculations of the site boundaries , the estimated number of parking spaces , the square footage of the buildings and estimates of the building's height , site utilities , and environmental constraints , among other things . in one instance , the plan documented the assumption that if the mehlville site were to be used , all utilities would need to be removed from within the property line and existing buildings , parking lots , and roads would have to be demolished . in another example , the corps of engineers conducted a schedule and negotiation risk assessment and recorded scores for each site and some mitigation strategies for specific issues . the assessment documented risks to meeting the site acquisition schedule with the st. louis site because , among other reasons , the site needed environmental cleanup that was expected to take six months . the fenton site had high negotiation risks , in part because the asking price of the site was significantly higher than the appraised value . however , nga did not provide information on other risks , such as technical feasibility and resource risks , and did not rank the risks or provide over - arching mitigation strategies for each alternative .