appendix i further describes the fssis we reviewed . to determine the extent to which savings and other benefits have been achieved through the seven fssis , we collected , reviewed , and assessed the reliability of agency reported data on spending , saving , and adoption . for the gsa fssis which report spending based on vendor reported transactional data , we obtained documentary and testimonial evidence on the internal controls used by vendors , the fssi teams , and the fssi program management office to ensure the accuracy of the spending data . for three of the six gsa fssis , we also collected and reviewed a non - generalizable sample of transactional data reports . for information retrieval , we reviewed quarterly spending reports and interviewed relevant officials about the process used to collect and review data . we determined that the spending data for the gsa fssis were sufficiently reliable for our purposes but that the spending data for information retrieval lacked internal controls , were inconsistent , and contained errors . while many of the lessons learned during the course of the fssi program have been reflected in the initial category management efforts , neither the april 2016 leadership council charter nor the leadership council's may 2015 category management guidance establish expectations and a process for setting agency - specific targets and measures to assess adoption of solutions and performance . moreover , since the category management cap goal provides regular updates on progress , agency accountability for results would be enhanced by including agency specific progress against targets and performance measures . given the low agency usage of the fssis , without such actions , and ensuring these targets and measures are set , omb , and specifically the office of federal procurement policy , will lack the means to monitor progress and hold large procurement agencies accountable for using existing fssis or best in class solutions identified under subsequent category management efforts . considering the magnitude of spending targeted by category management , taking these actions will increase the likelihood that category management will deliver on its promise to substantially change the federal procurement landscape and generate substantial savings and other benefits for federal customers . at a tactical level , the gsa fssi program management office is responsible for ensuring oversight of the fssis , including monitoring compliance with fssi standards . in two cases , more engagement by the office may be beneficial . for example , the library of congress's information retrieval fssi collects transactional data to only a limited extent and does not use that data to calculate savings . gsa fssi program management office officials , however , indicated that they had not , until recently , engaged with the information retrieval fssi to ensure compliance with fssi standards . since government - wide spending figures are estimates and not actual performance , we reviewed the methods used to formulate them and found them to be reasonable and the data sufficiently reliable for providing appropriate context for the actual spending that went through the fssi vehicles . we also reviewed program documents and interviewed fssi program officials to better understand the basis and rationale for spending excluded from addressable spending .