the services and defense agencies also conduct isr activities . the military services each have their own isr plans and roadmaps that focus on their respective isr activities and are not integrated with other services' plans . for example , the air force maintains its own isr plan and metrics separate from dod's isr integration roadmap and the other service roadmaps , and the other services have developed several roadmaps outlining isr priorities and capability gaps . because of the broad scope of isr and the multiple agencies involved , dod's isr enterprise is funded through several budgetary sources , including both dod and non - dod organizations . in response to both of these requirements , dod issued an isr integration roadmap . while these efforts are positive , we maintain that formally expanding the scope of current efforts to include identification of efficiencies in isr collection activities would help ensure that these efforts receive continued management priority . dod also partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the usd ( i ) to collaborate in developing decision support tool ( s ) , such as the joint staff's emergent decision support tool , and to establish implementation goals and timelines for completion of such efforts . dod responded that it is exploring different portfolio management tools and will consider goals and timelines when the efficacy of such tools is verified . we agree that assessing options is an important part of developing the most effective and efficient decision support tool . however , dod did not explain in its comments how it would consider the efficacy of the tools it plans to assess , or when it expects to choose and begin implementation of such a tool . establishing goals and timelines for assessing the efficacy of decision support tools and taking actions to implement the selected tool could help ensure that these efforts will be fully implemented in a timely manner . dod disagreed with our suggestion that congress consider establishing additional accountability measures in legislation , such as conditioning funding , to encourage the department to address all the management elements congress required in its 2004 legislation calling for an integrated isr roadmap . in its written comments , dod interpreted our matter as proposing the withholding of funds for isr activities , and dod stated that withholding funds for isr would be counterproductive . however , we did not suggest withholding funding ; rather we proposed that congress consider using the conditioning of funding as a tool to provide an incentive for compliance with legislative requirements that have been in place since 2004 — specifically , establishing fundamental isr goals and an integrated isr investment strategy . since 2004 , none of the isr roadmap updates dod has issued has fully addressed these congressionally required elements . we believe that given the substantial resources allocated to dod's isr enterprise , completion of an integrated isr roadmap that includes an investment strategy could help dod and congressional decision makers ensure that dod is effectively using its isr resources . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , and the secretary of defense .