pub . 108-173 , § 101 , 117 stat . 2066 , 2071-2152 ( to be codified at 42 u.s.c . although beneficiaries may obtain drug coverage through either stand - alone pdps or medicare advantage ( medicare's private health plan option ) drug plans , this report addresses only stand - alone pdp sponsor call centers . about 90 percent of medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in traditional medicare , rather than medicare advantage . therefore , most beneficiaries will be making choices among stand - alone pdps . other sources of information about part d and specific pdps include sponsors' web sites , and cms's medicare.gov web site and 1-800-medicare toll - free help line . annual open - enrollment period , sponsor call centers will continue to play a significant role in informing current and prospective enrollees . you were interested in the quality of the service and information provided to beneficiaries by pdp sponsor call centers , as inaccurate or misleading benefit information could lead beneficiaries to choose a pdp that does not meet their needs . in this report , we examined ( 1 ) whether pdp sponsors provide prompt , courteous , and helpful service to medicare beneficiaries and others accessing their toll - free call centers , and ( 2 ) the extent to which pdp sponsors provide accurate and complete information to medicare beneficiaries and other callers . to address these objectives , we made 900 calls to 10 of the largest pdp sponsor call centers , all of which operate in 30 or more pdp regions and offer two or three pdps per region . as of april 27 , 2006 , each of these sponsors served at least 100,000 beneficiaries . each of our 10 sponsors has one toll - free call center , which we contacted from march 2 through march 31 , 2006 . we posed one of five questions about their part d plans during each call , asking each question a total of 180 times — 18 times to each of the 10 pdp sponsors . we developed scenarios with zip codes and fictional relatives for each of the questions . to make them sound realistic and provide needed information , we specified additional details , such as drug dosage and frequency information , lack of current drug coverage , low - income subsidy eligibility , and preference for retail purchasing , if asked . in developing our five questions , we examined those addressed by the frequently asked questions section of cms's medicare.gov web site . we also reviewed materials from policy analysts that identified information critical to making a choice among competing plans . in addition , we spoke with representatives of beneficiary advocacy groups about the types of information beneficiaries need to consider when selecting a pdp plan . finally , we asked cms officials what types of information they required or expected call center customer service representatives ( csr ) to be able to provide the public and developed our questions from this information .