each of the services conducts this process for its servicemembers . the army has three pebs located at fort sam houston , texas ; walter reed army medical center in washington , d.c. ; and fort lewis , washington . the navy has one peb located at the washington navy yard in washington , d.c . the air force has one peb located in san antonio , texas . the first step in the peb process is the informal peb — an administrative review of the case file without the presence of the servicemember . the peb makes the following findings and recommendations regarding possible entitlement for disability benefits: fitness for duty: the peb determines whether the servicemember “is unable to reasonably perform the duties of his or her office , grade , rank , or rating,” taking into consideration the requirements of a member's current specialty . fitness determinations are made on each medical condition presented . only those medical conditions that result in the finding of “unfit for continued military service” will potentially be compensated by dod . we did not verify the accuracy of these data . however , we interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and we determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . out of the army's 35 treatment facilities , we visited 4 — walter reed army medical center ( washington , d.c. ) , brooke army medical center ( fort sam houston , texas ) , carl r. darnell army medical center ( fort hood , texas ) , and madigan army medical center ( fort lewis , washington ) — that are near the 3 sites where the army conducts physical evaluation boards ( peb ) to talk with army officials about efforts to improve the disability evaluation process for servicemembers , and to obtain views from servicemembers about how these efforts are affecting them . to help assess legal outreach and other supports to servicemembers , we also spoke with officials from 5 treatment facilities that are not located near any of the army's peb sites . these 5 facilities were selected on the basis of varying size ( small , medium , and large ) and representation from the different geographic areas of the army's medical organization . these facilities were bassett army community hospital ( fort wainwright , alaska ) , dwight d. eisenhower army medical center ( fort gordon , georgia ) , keller army community hospital ( west point , new york ) , munson army health center ( fort leavenworth , kansas ) , and tripler army medical center ( honolulu , hawaii ) . in addition , we spoke with officials from the army's community based health care organization ( cbhco ) system and visited a cbhco location in massachusetts to learn about issues that concern reservists entering the disability evaluation process from the cbhco system .