turnaround . in addition to implementing many requirements of the transformation model , turnaround schools must use locally adopted competencies to screen existing staff and rehire no more than 50 percent of the existing staff . restart . the district must reopen the school under the management of a contractor , such as a charter school operator , charter management organization , or education management organization . closure . the district must close the school and enroll its students in a higher achieving school within a reasonable proximity . ( 2 ) how do education and state guidance and procedures for screening potential contractors and reviewing contractor performance compare with leading practices ? ( 3 ) to what extent are education's technical assistance and oversight activities effectively supporting sig implementation ? to identify aspects of sig that pose challenges to successful school turnaround , we administered a survey to the 50 states and the district of columbia , and received a 100 percent response rate.education documents and interviewed education officials . we gathered in - depth information from eight states that were selected to represent a range of size , geographic diversity , and the intervention models being used . in each of the states , we also interviewed school district and school officials from one to three districts that had sig schools . to collect information about policies and procedures for screening potential contractors and reviewing contractor performance , we examined education guidance and state monitoring policies . we also interviewed education officials and state and local officials from our site visit states . we identified leading practices for screening and reviewing contractors based on our past work . to evaluate education's technical assistance and oversight efforts , we reviewed relevant documents , such as sig monitoring protocols , and interviewed relevant education officials . we also gathered information from states through our survey and state site visits . we interviewed several education - funded technical assistance providers that served our site visit states and various stakeholders , such as teachers' union officials . for more information about our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from january 2011 to april 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . education's changes to sig requirements in 2010 have led to new responsibilities for the agency , states , and school districts . these entities all play key roles in the sig award and implementation process , with education supporting and overseeing state sig efforts . before awarding formula grants to states , education reviews each state's application and approves the state's proposed process for competitively awarding sig grants and monitoring implementation . as part of the state application process , states identify and prioritize eligible schools into three tiers: tier i schools .