rfp . in the rfp phase , the contracting officer — the official in the contracting office who has the authority to enter into , administer , modify , and terminate contracts — issues the rfp , the proposals . award . in the award phase , the program and contracting offices are responsible for evaluating proposals and awarding a contract to the offeror representing the best value to the government based on a combination of technical and cost factors . to monitor the contractor's performance under the contract after award , the contracting officer officially designates a program office official as the contracting officer's representative ( cor ) , who acts as the liaison between the contracting officer and the contractor and is responsible for the day - to - day monitoring of contractor activities to ensure that the services are delivered in accordance with the contract's performance standards . the draft monitoring plan for the upcoming pharmacy services contract includes 30 standards — related to timeliness of claims processing , retail network access , and beneficiary satisfaction , among other things — against which the contractor's performance will be measured . rfps include a description of the contract requirements , the anticipated terms and conditions that will be contained in the contract , the required information that the prospective offerors must include in their proposal , and the factors that will be used to evaluate proposals . dod has department - wide acquisition training and experience requirements for all officials who award and administer dod contracts , including the pharmacy services contract , as required by law . training is primarily provided through the defense acquisition university , and is designed to provide a foundation of acquisition knowledge , but is not targeted to specific contracts or contract types . in addition , all cors must meet training and experience requirements specified in dod's standard for certification of contracting officer's representatives ( cor ) for service acquisitions issued in march 2010 . see appendix i for more information on the certification standards for and experience of officials who award and administer the pharmacy services contract . in september 2010 , dod issued guidance to help improve defense acquisition through its better buying power initiative . dod's better buying power initiative encompasses a set of acquisition principles designed to achieve greater efficiencies through affordability , cost control , elimination of unproductive processes and bureaucracy , and promotion of competition ; it provides guidance to acquisition officials on how to implement these principles . the principles are also designed to provide incentives to dod contractors for productivity and innovation in industry and government . dod used market research to align the requirements for the upcoming pharmacy services contract with industry best practices and promote competition . dod also identified changes to the requirements for the upcoming and current contracts in response to changes in legislation , efforts to improve service delivery , and contractor performance . dod solicited information from industry during its acquisition planning for the upcoming pharmacy services contract through the required market research process , including issuing rfis and a draft rfp for industry comment , to identify changes to requirements for its pharmacy services contract .