ntia . ntia has developed and is beginning to implement a postaward framework to ensure the successful execution of btop . this framework includes three main elements: ( 1 ) monitoring and reporting , ( 2 ) compliance , and ( 3 ) technical assistance . ntia will use desk reviews and on - site visits to monitor the implementation of btop awards and ensure compliance with award conditions by recipients . ntia plans to provide technical assistance in the form of training , webinars , conference calls , workshops , and outreach for all recipients of btop funding to address any problems or issues recipients may have implementing the projects , as well as to assist in adhering to award guidelines and regulatory requirements . ntia has provided training to recipients in grant compliance and reporting , and has also developed a recipient handbook with a number of checklists to assist recipients with performance and compliance under their federal awards . ( 2 ) to what extent did ntia's and rus's due - diligence reviews substantiate information in the awardees' applications ? ( 3 ) what challenges , if any , do ntia and rus face in awarding the remaining broadband stimulus funds ? ( 4 ) what actions , if any , are ntia and rus taking to oversee grant and loan recipients ? to address these questions , we reviewed ntia and rus program documentation and interviewed relevant officials about the agencies' efforts to implement the broadband stimulus programs . to determine the results of the first funding round , we obtained program and funding data directly from the agencies , and from the agencies' web sites and press releases . we are reporting publicly available data that ntia and rus provided on the first round broadband stimulus awards with the intent to describe the number of awards , the entities receiving first round funding , and the types of projects . this information is presented for descriptive purposes . to determine the extent to which ntia's and rus's due - diligence reviews substantiated information in awardees' applications , we reviewed a judgmental sample of application files for first - round grant and loan recipients . in choosing our sample , we considered the award amount , type of applicant , geographic location of the project , and type of project . we then reviewed the selected application files electronically and compared the information in those files to the requirements of the first - round funding notice . we did not evaluate the agencies' decisions to award or deny applications or the potential for success of any project . rather , we assessed the extent to which ntia and rus developed and implemented a due - diligence review process . to determine the challenges , if any , that ntia and rus face in awarding the remaining broadband stimulus funds , we studied the requirements set forth in the recovery act , evaluated changes between the first - and second - round funding notices , and interviewed agency officials and representatives of five telecommunications associations .