these include differences in patient populations . va serves mostly older men , while dod also serves younger men as well as women and children . va and dod officials state that different populations result in dissimilar patterns of drug use and demand among their respective beneficiaries , resulting in fewer opportunities to combine drug requirements and solicit joint contracts . however , increasing numbers of military retirees and expanded dod benefits are lessening differences between va and dod drug needs . in fiscal year 2000 , close to 70 percent of military pharmacies' drug costs was for retirees' prescriptions . another difference between the two systems that complicates joint procurement efforts is the scope of va's and dod's formularies . cmops reduce costs through economies of scale . specifically , cmop automated technologies have enabled each full - time cmop employee to dispense between 50,000 and 100,000 prescriptions annually , compared to about 15,000 prescriptions dispensed by va pharmacy employees . in addition , dod's hospitals , its national mail pharmacy , and its retail pharmacy networks maintain their own separate formularies . my comments are based on work we have previously done for you and other congressional requesters . as part of that work , we used va and dod's definition of cost avoidance to describe potential savings from their joint procurement or purchasing efforts to contract for drugs from manufacturers . the departments define cost avoidance as the difference between the theoretical cost that would have occurred if contracts were not awarded and the actual cost incurred for the drugs affected by each contract . in summary , we identified four important factors that have contributed to reduced pharmacy spending in va and dod . first , the two departments have used formularies to encourage the substitution of a lower - cost drug that is determined to be just as effective as a higher - cost drug . second , va and dod have been able to effectively employ different arrangements to pay for or purchase prescription drugs at substantial discounts . third , va has significantly reduced the cost of dispensing prescription refills by using highly automated and less expensive consolidated mail outpatient pharmacy ( cmop ) centers to handle a majority of the pharmacy workload instead of va hospital and clinic pharmacies . fourth , va and dod have reduced costs by leveraging their combined purchasing power by jointly buying prescription drugs . nevertheless , va and dod face continuing challenges in reducing pharmacy costs . one of the most important challenges is the joint procurement of brand name drugs . although brand name prescription drugs account for the bulk of prescription drug expenditures , most of va / dod joint contracts have been for generic drugs . generic drugs are easier to contract for because these products are already known to be chemically and therapeutically alike . contracting for brand name drugs is more difficult because of the scientific reviews needed to gain clinical agreement on therapeutic equivalence of competing drugs . joint purchasing of brand name drugs also is more difficult due to the significant differences between the va and dod health care systems .