plutonium facility 4 . this facility began operations in 1978 and is the nation's only high - hazard , high - security , fully operational plutonium facility that produces pits . plutonium facility 4 is also used to support the production of plutonium - 238 heat sources used for nasa spacecraft missions as well as the development of methods for fabricating advanced nuclear fuels . radiological laboratory utility office building ( radiological lab ) . nnsa began operations in the radiological lab in 2014 . nnsa built the radiological lab — consisting of office space , training areas , utilities , and laboratory space for analysis — to complement the previously approved cmrr nuclear facility . the radiological lab has the capacity to handle small plutonium samples for use in analytical chemistry analysis to support plutonium program missions in plutonium facility 4 . several doe and nnsa program offices conduct plutonium analysis in the three main plutonium facilities at los alamos . the following are the primary users of plutonium analysis capabilities at los alamos . this office is responsible for maintaining the reliability , security , and safety of the nuclear weapons stockpile by assessing the reliability of existing nuclear weapon pits and producing new pits to replace those destroyed in the testing process , among other activities . the majority of funding and scope associated with plutonium work at los alamos supports the office of defense programs' missions . pit production relies on plutonium analysis to produce war reserve pits — pits that are certified for inclusion in the nuclear weapons stockpile — in support of life extension programs . los alamos has used its analytical chemistry equipment to support pit production more than to support all other program activities combined . however , we also state that , according to nnsa documents , one of the primary functions of these analysis capabilities is to support nnsa's efforts to produce new plutonium pits for life extension programs that are critical to nuclear modernization efforts . as such , the revised cmrr project plays a key role in supporting nnsa's pit production plans . we agree that the success of the cmrr project should not be measured in terms of actual pits produced , but rather in terms of the plutonium analysis capacity the project provides in support of production efforts and other stockpile stewardship needs . as a result , we continue to believe that it is important for the agency to be clear about how well the cmrr project will support nnsa's pit production plans . in addition , nnsa stated that the report does not reflect the depth and breadth of steps nnsa has taken in the last 2 years to improve project management in accordance with the secretary of energy's new policies . as we state in the report , we are pleased with the steps that nnsa has recently taken to improve project management , including the secretary's new policies , and we are hopeful that they will lead to improved outcomes . concerning our recommendations , in its written comments nnsa outlined planned actions that are responsive to two of our seven recommendations .