a minimum number of providers . to determine the minimum number of providers required , cms considers such county - specific factors as the total number of medicare beneficiaries and historical data on ma market share in similar counties . cms sets minimum provider ratios per 1,000 beneficiaries by provider type in each county , for both primary care ( including geriatrics and internal medicine ) and specialty care ( such as cardiology , gastroenterology , and oncology ) . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , and the cms administrator . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) uses two criteria for determining network adequacy in medicare advantage ( ma ) : minimum number of providers and maximum travel time and distance . there are several key elements cms uses each year to update its requirements . one key element is the provider types that ma organizations ( mao ) must include in their networks . lewin — the agency contractor that developed the criteria — explained that cms had an original list of provider types that it reviewed to see if the categorizations were appropriate . they found that cms's list was mostly aligned with frequently used facility types . the 55 provider types required in contract year 2016 are listed in table 4 . for the minimum number of providers , cms requires that maos demonstrate that their networks have a sufficient number of providers based on county characteristics . the five county classifications are based on population and density estimates from u.s. census bureau and office of management and budget data . a county must meet both the population and density indicators to be included as that county type . cms then multiplies three variables to determine the minimum number of providers . the first variable is the 95th percentile of ma market penetration rates for each county type . cms chose the 95th percentile to estimate market share through work conducted by lewin , which examined the market penetration in managed care and network - based private fee - for - service ( ffs ) plans . the percentiles are updated each year based on current enrollment . county type classifications and each county's respective percentile for contract year 2016 are listed in table 5 . the second variable in the formula is the number of medicare beneficiaries — those in ma and ffs — in a specific county . each year , cms updates the total number of beneficiaries in each county .