these are detailed below . three agencies fulfilled the requirement in ipera and the related omb guidance by submitting proposals for reauthorization or statutory change to congress , although they did not always submit them within the required time frames . for example , when the treasury ig reported in its fiscal year 2013 report that the internal revenue service's eitc program had been noncompliant with ipera criteria each year since 2011 because it reported error rates exceeding 10 percent , the agency submitted proposals to congress in response . however , this action was not taken until august 2014 , surpassing the 30-day period for submission that began in april 2014 when the treasury ig issued its compliance determination in its report . although the agency fulfilled the requirement in ipera to submit legislative proposals to congress , the treasury ig further recommended that the agency submit a more comprehensive plan to congress , including corrective actions to be implemented to correct noncompliance in the eitc program . this plan was submitted to congress in june 2015 . dol's unemployment insurance program had first reached 3 consecutive years of noncompliance in fiscal year 2013 and was again found to be noncompliant in fiscal year 2014 . after 3 consecutive years of noncompliance for the program as of fiscal year 2013 , dol officials stated that they began preparing a legislative package ; however , this package was never transmitted to congress . when the agency's unemployment insurance program was deemed noncompliant for 4 consecutive years as of fiscal year 2014 , dol produced legislative proposals and sent a letter to congress , although its submissions also surpassed the 30-day deadline following the ig's report . specifically , dol submitted a letter to congress regarding unemployment insurance improper payments on september 30 , 2015 , and submitted legislative proposals to omb in november 2015 , which were later included in the president's budget for fiscal year 2017 that was transmitted to congress . hhs accounted for two programs that were noncompliant with ipera criteria for 3 or more consecutive years as of fiscal year 2014: the medicare fee - for - service program and tanf . hhs submitted letters to congress containing legislative proposals and information on corrective actions for both programs , and also stated that it is working with omb to develop an alternative approach for devising an improper payment estimate for tanf , which has been unable to report an estimate in any year because of statutory limitations that prevent hhs from requiring states that administer the program to participate in improper payment measurement . although ipera and omb guidance require agencies to submit proposals for reauthorization or statutory changes after 3 consecutive years of a program's reported noncompliance with the act's criteria , four agencies did not do so because they concluded that reauthorization or legislative changes were not necessary . we were told by certain agency officials that implementing corrective actions at the agency level is the only way to bring their programs into compliance under ipera because legislative provisions , in some cases , are not responsible for agencies failing to meet the ipera criteria . additionally , we were told that reauthorization of a program is not always practical or necessary for every program .