our study had some limitations . we reported results only for those msas in which we had a sufficient number of episodes to ensure the reliability of our results for each procedure , but our results included msas that constituted a majority of the u.s. population . depending on the procedure , 60 to 63 percent of the u.s. population lives in the msas included . in addition , although we chose procedures that were commonly performed and associated with high levels of national spending , our results may not be generalizable to other procedures not included in our analysis . also , while the data used for our analyses were from one of the largest private insurance data sources , the data did not include all private payers and are not necessarily representative of the private health insurance market in the united states . as such , our findings may not be generalizable to this broader private health insurance market . for example , in 2009 and 2010 , the percentage of enrollees in the data were disproportionately from large self - insured firms , which tend to have more generous benefit packages compared with other payers , and they were also disproportionately from the south . finally , 2009 and 2010 data do not reflect the impact of more recent policy or other changes potentially affecting private sector health care spending , such as the implementation of the patient protection and affordable care act . we conducted our work from january 2012 to december 2014 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product . private sector data have become increasingly available to researchers , and several studies have established that significant geographic variation in spending exists in the private sector . for example , in a recent comprehensive assessment of geographic variation in private sector spending , the institute of medicine ( iom ) reported on the presence of substantial spending variation , concluding that a large amount of the variation remained unexplained after adjusting for enrollee demographic and health status factors , insurance plan factors , and market - level factors , and suggesting that inefficiency is one of the causes of the current levels of variation . using private sector claims data from two nationwide databases from 2007 through 2009 , iom found unadjusted spending for the area at the 90th percentile was 36 to 42 percent higher than the area at the 10th percentile , depending on the database used . the spending differences existed at all levels of geography iom studied , including msas , and these differences persisted over time . iom also found that price is a major determinant of geographic variation in the private sector , and estimated that , after adjusting for underlying costs , price accounted for 70 percent of the geographic variation in private sector spending .