the comments are reprinted in appendix i . the bureau had no agencywide standards or guidelines in place to guide decisions about disseminating data from the 2000 census . instead of agencywide , written guidance , professionals within the different parts of the bureau primarily used their judgment and program - specific practices to decide when and whether data should be released and what supporting information , if any , should accompany them . this led to instances when ( 1 ) data were released with uncorrected and undisclosed quality problems , ( 2 ) inconsistent decisions were made on whether to release data sets with similar quality problems , and ( 3 ) the reasons for certain data dissemination decisions were inadequately communicated . at the time the bureau was making decisions about disseminating data from the 2000 census , it did not have written , agencywide guidelines or standards to help inform its decisions on whether the data were of sufficient quality to be released . although bureau officials emphasized that the bureau has a long tradition of high standards and procedures that yield quality data , they acknowledged that these practices were primarily part of the agency's institutional knowledge . according to one official , key individuals in each program area , relying primarily on professional judgment , determined whether the quality of the data was acceptable for release to the public . the official explained that the program areas develop their own guidance and procedures for ensuring data quality . sometimes their guidance and procedures were written , but more often they were not . further , the bureau had no central inventory or repository of the guidance and practices of the different divisions . as noted earlier , decennial census data are used to apportion and redistrict congress . as release of data for each of these purposes is required by statute , they are known collectively as “public law” data . the bureau had a number of quality assurance programs and procedures for assessing the accuracy of , and correcting errors in , public law and other data prior to their release . however , the lack of standard procedures and guidelines for dealing with quality problems contributed to lost opportunities to correct errors in the count of the population identified before the data were disseminated . one such quality assurance program we reviewed was known as demographic full count review , in which analysts were to identify , investigate , and document suspected data discrepancies or “issues” in order to clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release . the bureau contracted out some of the analysts' work because it lacked sufficient staff to conduct the full count review on its own . bureau reviewers were to determine whether and how to correct the data by weighing quality improvements against time and budget constraints . analysts identified 4,809 possible discrepancies , such as instances when the location , population count , demographic characteristics , or a combination of these for housing units and group living facilities differed from what analysts expected . according to bureau officials , only 5 of the 4,809 issues were investigated and corrected prior to the release of the public law data .