lack of testing . fema does not perform ongoing national - level tests of the daisy chain relay system to ensure that it would work as intended during a national - level alert . fcc requires stations to test their eas equipment and fema is required to perform weekly tests of connections to the 35 pep stations , but there is no requirement for a national - level test of the relay system . in january 2007 , in response to our ongoing work at that time , fema conducted a national - level eas test . according to fema , the test demonstrated an effective satellite connection to public radio stations . however , three pep stations failed to receive and effectively rebroadcast the national - level test message due to hardware and software issues , which fema stated have since been resolved . we also spoke with representatives of state and local emergency management offices , industry stakeholder organizations , and public and private sector alert and warning experts . stakeholders we interviewed included the society of broadcast engineers , the primary entry point advisory committee , the national center for accessible media , the association of public safety communications officers , the emergency interoperability consortium , the eas - cap industry group , the association of public television stations , the telecommunications industry association , and ctia - the wireless association . to obtain information on the challenges of implementing fema's ipaws , we interviewed a broad set of government and industry stakeholders , as indicated above , and obtained information through our survey of state of emergency management directors . in addition to stakeholders previously mentioned , we conducted interviews with state and local officials and with organizations involved with the public alert and warning , such as the international association of emergency managers . we also conducted interviews with officials from state participants in fema's ipaws pilot programs and state emergency managers . additionally , we interviewed private sector stakeholders and participants in public alert and warning , including broadcasters , the wireless industry , emergency alert technology companies , and consumer advocacy groups . information on ipaws challenges from each state was collected as part of our survey of state emergency management directors and select local emergency management officials . we conducted this review from september 2008 to september 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our review objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact above , other key contributors to this report were sally moino , assistant director ; ryan d'amore ; simon galed ; andrew stavisky ; and mindi weisenbloom . dhs had also stated that fema would begin to conduct new quarterly “over - the - air” tests , but these have not taken place . in addition , fema has no plans for testing the relay distribution system .