adverse action requirements . it is important to note that an agency cannot take an adverse action , such as suspending for more than 14 days or removing an employee before taking certain procedural steps outlined in law . these procedural steps are described below . prior to proposing an adverse action , an agency may place an employee on administrative leave in situations when the employee should be kept away from the workplace when the agency believes the employee poses a threat to his or her own safety or the safety of others , to the agency mission , or to government systems or property while an investigation is pending . for example , one dhs employee believed to be involved in alien smuggling and considered a risk was placed on administrative leave while the component collected evidence against the employee . an option could include assigning the employee to duties where he or she is no longer a threat to safety , the agency mission , or government property , if feasible . after proposing an adverse action , agencies are required to provide employees with at least 30 days advance written notice of proposed adverse action ( eg , notice of proposed indefinite suspension , notice of proposed removal ) , unless there is reasonable cause to believe the employee has committed a crime for which a sentence of imprisonment may be imposed , in which case a shorter notice may be provided . for example , the notice period was shortened to a 7-day notice period for a case in which an employee was indicted for extortion and bribery , among other things . after a proposed removal notice was issued , the employee resigned . in another case , there were two 30-day proposed suspension notice periods because the employee was indefinitely suspended , reinstated , and then indefinitely suspended a second time . further , during the adverse action process , if new facts come to light it may be necessary to provide additional notification to the employee and provide them the opportunity to reply to that new information that will be considered in the final decision . for example , in one case the component issued a proposed removal notice in march 2014 because of the employee's lack of candor under oath . the employee responded in writing and orally over the next few months , raising issues that required clarification by the agency . ultimately , the removal was finalized in november 2014 , nearly 8 months after the original proposal . in addition , an employee or representative may request an extension of time to reply and has a right to review the information that the agency is relying upon . for example , in a case involving an employee accused of aggravated assault , the employee designated an attorney and requested time for the attorney to review the case before responding . further , the component twice provided the employee with new information and time to respond . the original indefinite suspension proposal was issued in march 2014 , but with the addition of the attorney and new evidence introduced , the oral response was not submitted until october 2014 .