( see app . iii for a listing of the use of miscellaneous obligations by visn , and app . iv for a listing of the use of miscellaneous obligations by station. ) supplie inclding dr , medicine , hopitsupplie , lood prodct , nd prothetic supplie . service inclding fee base phyicin , ning , dentl , hopitliztion , rerch , nd prothetic repir . according to vha contracting and fiscal service officials , using miscellaneous obligations tends to reduce administrative workload and facilitates the payment for contracted goods and services , such as drugs , medicines , and transportation , and for goods and services for which no pre - existing contracts exist , such as fee - basis medical and dental service and utilities . vha officials stated that miscellaneous obligations facilitate the payment for contracted goods and services when the quantities and delivery dates are not known . a miscellaneous obligation can be created for an estimated amount and then modified as specific quantities are needed or specific delivery dates are set . when a purchase order is created , however , the obligated amount cannot be changed without a modification of the purchase order . according to vha officials , the need to prepare num modifications to purchase orders could place an undue burden on the limited contracting personnel available at individual centers and could also require additional work on the part of fiscal services personnel . our preliminary observations on va policies and procedures indicate they were not designed to provide adequate controls over the use of miscellaneous obligations . according to gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , agency management is responsible for developing detailed policies and procedures for internal control suitable for their agency's operations and ensuring that they provide for adequate monitoring by management , segregation of duties , and supporting documentation for the need to acquire specific goods in the quantities purchased . we identified control design flaws in each of these oversight areas , and we confirmed that these weaknesses existed at the three locations where we conducted case studies . collectively , these control design flaws increase the risk of fraud , waste , and abuse ( including employees converting government assets to their own use without detection ) . new guidance for the use of miscellaneous obligations was released in january 2008 and finalized in may 2008 . we reviewed the new guidance and found that while it offered some improvement , it did not fully address the specific control design flaws we identified . furthermore , va officials told us that this guidance was not subject to any legal review . such an analysis is essential to help ensure that the design of policies and procedures comply with all applicable federal appropriations law and internal control standards . we reviewed 42 miscellaneous obligations at the three case study locations and developed illustrative , more detailed information on the extent and nature of these control design flaws . table 2 summarizes the locations visited , the miscellaneous obligations reviewed at each location , and the extent and nature of control design deficiencies found .