we believe they are . the concurrent development approach dictated by the directed fielding date and enabled by considerable flexibility to lower goals and defer capability has resulted in delivering fewer assets than planned . accountability has been very broadly applied as to mean delivering some capability within funding allocations . while recognizing this approach did successfully accelerate fielding , to the extent it continues to feature concurrency as a means for acceleration , it may not be affordable for the considerable amount of capability that is yet to be developed and fielded . while the effects of this approach were perhaps most keenly felt with the block 2004 capability , signs of its continuance can be seen in the developmental activities that were deferred during fiscal year 2005 . it is possible for mda to return to a knowledge - based approach to development while still fielding capability in blocks . to its credit , mda instituted its own audits and is heeding the results of those audits in taking a number of steps to correct the quality assurance and testing problems encountered thus far . yet these corrective actions have not gone far enough to put all of the bmds elements on a knowledge - based approach to development and fielding . mda's experience during block 2004 shows that it may not always be possible to deliver a capability in a 2-year time frame . clearly , a block or stepped approach to fielding a new system is preferable to attempting a single step to full capability . however , a primary tenet of a knowledge - based acquisition strategy is that a program should be event - rather than schedule - driven . this philosophy is consistent with the evolutionary acquisition approach preferred by dod in its acquisition regulations . it also provides a better basis for holding mda accountable for what it can deliver within estimated resources . to better ensure the success of future mda development efforts , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the director , mda , to take the following three actions . direct all bmds elements to implement a knowledge - based acquisition strategy that provides for demonstrating knowledge points for major events or steps leading up to those events . these knowledge points should be consistent with those called for in dod's acquisition regulations . for example , markers could be established that would demonstrate that programs have the knowledge to meet design review standards and are ready to hold those reviews . assess whether the current 2-year block strategy is compatible with the knowledge - based development strategy recommended above . if not , the secretary should develop event - driven time frames for future blocks . events could represent demonstrated increases in capability , such as the addition of software upgrades , stand - alone components , or elements . adopt more transparent criteria for identifying and reporting on significant changes in each element's quantities , cost , or performance , such as those that are found in dod's acquisition regulations . coupled with a more knowledge - based acquisition strategy , such criteria would enable mda to be more accountable for delivering promised capability within estimated resources .