training effectiveness . the marine corps does not consistently evaluate the effectiveness of its virtual training devices to accomplish operational training . without a well - defined process to consistently evaluate the effectiveness of virtual training devices for training , the marine corps risks investing in devices whose value to operational training is undetermined . in our september 2017 report , we recommended that the marine corps develop guidance for the development and use of virtual training devices to address these gaps . dod concurred with the recommendation and stated it would work with the commandant of the marine corps in its development and implementation actions associated with the use of virtual training devices . the navy and marine corps have taken some steps to improve coordination between the two services , to include issuing strategic documents that discuss the importance of improving naval integration and establishing mechanisms to coordinate their amphibious operations training capabilities . however , in our september 2017 report we found that the services have not fully incorporated leading collaboration practices that would help drive efforts to improve naval integration . our prior work on interagency collaboration has found that certain practices can help enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies . i would like to highlight a few practices that would especially benefit the navy and marine corps' efforts to improve integration for amphibious operations . common outcomes and joint strategy . high pace of deployments . five of 23 marine corps units told us that the high pace of deployments and need to prepare for upcoming deployments limited their opportunity to conduct training for amphibious operations . in our september 2017 report , we identified some steps that the navy and marine corps have taken to mitigate the training shortfall for their amphibious operations priorities , such as by better defining the amount of amphibious operations capabilities and capacity needed to achieve the services' wartime requirements . however , we found these efforts are incomplete because the services' current approach for amphibious operations training does not incorporate strategic training and leading risk - management practices . specifically , we found that: the marine corps does not prioritize all available training resources . for marine corps units not scheduled for a meu deployment , officials described an ad hoc process to allocate any remaining available amphibious ship training time among home - station units . specifically , officials stated that the current process identifies units that are available for training when an amphibious ship becomes available rather than a process that aligns the next highest - priority units for training with available amphibious ships . the navy and marine corps do not systematically evaluate a full range of training resource alternatives to achieve amphibious operations priorities . given the limited availability of amphibious ships for training , the navy and marine corps have not systematically incorporated selected training resource alternatives into home - station training plans . during our review , we identified a number of alternatives that could help mitigate the risk to the services' amphibious capability due to limited training opportunities .