grant expiration dates . beginning in 2005 , to encourage expeditious use of funds , oia established 5-year expiration dates in the terms and conditions of new capital improvement project grants . beginning in 2008 , oia also notified insular area officials of expiration dates for grant projects that had been ongoing for more than 5 years with no or limited progress . oia officials explained that while the expiration dates have not yet pushed all of the insular areas to complete projects , they have encouraged some areas to do so . the officials also stated that the expiration dates have helped oia grant managers administer and manage grants — which they believe has improved accountability — and have been useful for insular area grantees whose agencies have high staff turnover and were unaware of the status of older grants . technical assistance projects have shorter grant terms than capital improvement projects , with expiration dates within 1 to 2 years ; we found that oia extended the grant expiration date at least once for 18 of the 49 technical assistance grant projects in our sample . actions to improve insular area grant management continuity . oia has also taken steps to help with the continuity of grant administration at the insular level . for example , in march 2008 , oia awarded a $770,000 grant for capital improvement project administration in the cnmi , which provided funding for positions in the local central grant management office in that insular area . according to the grant manager for cnmi capital improvement projects , the grant was given to help ensure that the central grant management office had the staff necessary to help move implementation of projects forward . currently , oia's policies for granting project redirection requests vary across insular areas . specifically , in american samoa , project redirection is limited to changes within a priority category because the insular area's grants are issued by priority areas . these internal control weaknesses have been documented in several reports between 2000 and 2009 . internal control is an integral component of an organization's management that provides reasonable assurance that operations are effective and efficient , financial reporting is reliable , and applicable laws and regulations are complied with . internal control also serves as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and preventing and detecting errors and fraud . under the federal standards for internal control , federal agencies are to employ internal control activities — the policies , procedures , techniques , and mechanisms that enforce management's directives — that are integral to the accountability for stewardship of government resources and achieving effective results , and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks . examples of such internal control activities include accurate and timely recording of transactions and events and controls over information processing . oia agreed with our report and told us that it will implement these recommendations . in conclusion , madam chairwoman , oia has made important strides in implementing grant reforms , particularly in its efforts to establish disincentives for insular areas that do not complete grant projects in a timely and effective manner .