these steps are consistent with our recommendation . regarding our second recommendation , hhs stated that fda will consider whether it would be possible or appropriate to differentiate in its database those compounding pharmacies that register voluntarily from conventional manufacturers of fda - approved drugs that are required to register . these conventional manufacturers are already subject to routine inspections by fda and are required to list the fda - approved products they manufacture . therefore , these entities should already be known to fda . hhs also commented that fda will provide information to the public about what it means — and does not mean — to voluntarily register with fda . hhs further stated that fda has recommended that congress require pharmacies engaged in nontraditional compounding in the united states to register with fda and list the drugs they are compounding , all of which is consistent with our recommendation . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs are on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to identify actions planned or taken by states , we interviewed representatives of the state pharmacy regulatory bodies from four states: california , connecticut , florida , and iowa . we chose these states to provide insight into how a range of states approach the oversight of drug compounding ; however , the approaches and experiences of these states are not generalizable to all 50 states . we selected these states to reflect a range of characteristics , including census region , population , number of licensed pharmacies , and variation in compounding regulations . table 1 lists select data for each selected state . amendments to the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fdca ) enacted in 1997 , and a series of federal court decisions regarding the validity of those amendments , have resulted in several significant shifts in fda's authority and approach to the regulation of drug compounding over the last two decades . differences in these court decisions have resulted in inconsistent fda authority to oversee drug compounding , which , according to the agency , has prompted it to apply three different regulatory approaches to compounded drugs depending upon the federal court jurisdiction in which the drugs are compounded . this appendix describes these legal developments . in 1992 , fda issued a compliance policy guide that articulated the agency's approach to applying the fdca's new drug , adulteration , and misbranding provisions to compounded drugs .