ambassador . a state department economic officer has been assigned responsibility as the focal point for such issues and has been supported in this role by the actions of other u.s. agencies . the commercial law center , funded by usaid , and the commercial law development program of the u.s. department of commerce have provided technical advice to ukraine as it crafted intellectual property laws . a u.s. private sector association reported that it had worked closely with usaid on projects related to commercial law development . ukrainian legislative officials reported that training opportunities and technical assistance provided by the united states had facilitated the creation of ip legislation . training is also focused on enforcement , including training of a ukrainian judicial official by uspto in washington , d.c. , during 2003 . the state department has trained police and plans further police training in ukraine during 2004 . further , department of commerce officials maintain contact with u.s. firms and collect information on intellectual property issues for state and ustr . ukraine has made improvements in its legal regime for ipr protection . according to ukrainian officials , ukraine passed a new criminal code with criminal liability for ipr violations , as well as a new copyright law . ukrainian officials report that the laws are now trips compliant . u.s. government documents show that ukraine implemented an optical disk law in 2002 , although it was deemed “unsatisfactory,” and sanctions remain in place based on ukraine's failure to enact and enforce adequate optical disk media licensing legislation . in addition , ukraine has pursued enforcement measures to combat counterfeiting , although enforcement overall is still considered weak . ustr reported that administrative and legal pressure by the ukrainian government led to the closure of all but one of the major pirate cd plants . some pirate plants moved to neighboring countries . according to u.s. and private sector officials in kiev , remaining optical plants have switched to legitimate production . however , pirated optical media are still prevalent in ukraine , imported from russia and elsewhere , with little effort to remove them from the market . in a visit to the petrovska market in kiev , we found a well - organized series of buildings where vendors sold movies , music , software , and computer games from open - air stands . the price for a pirated music cd was $1.50 , compared to legitimate cds that were sold for almost $20 in a music store located near the market . according to ustr , ukraine is a major trans - shipment point and storage location for illegal optical media produced in russia and elsewhere . a ukrainian law enforcement official reported that the number of ipr crimes detected has risen from 115 in 2001 to 374 in 2003 . he noted that to date , judges have been reluctant to impose jail time , but had used fines that are small compared to the economic damages . a u.s. government official also reported that the fines are too small to be an effective deterrent .