sprinkler systems . sprinkler systems , which can be installed inside or outside a structure , lower the risk of ignition or damage . for example , the california governor's blue ribbon commission recommended adding internal attic sprinklers to revised building codes as a response to lessons learned from the 2003 wildland fires . chemical agents . firefighting chemical agents , such as foams and gels , are temporary protective measures that can be applied as an exterior coating shortly before a wildland fire reaches a structure . foams , typically detergent based , are combined with water or forced air . gels are polymers ( plastics ) that can hold many times their weight in water . both are designed to be sprayed onto a structure , coating it with a protective outer shield against ignition ( see fig . for example , california division of forestry and fire protection officials estimated that in 2003 , using gels helped save between 75 and 100 homes from the paradise fire and more than 300 homes from the cedar fire in san diego county . the disadvantages of using foams and gels are that they often need to be applied to a structure by a homeowner or firefighter . chemical agents may also need to be periodically reapplied or sprayed with water to remain effective , and they can be difficult to clean up . sprinklers , however , require reliable sources of water and , in some cases , electricity to be effective . several firefighting officials told us that during wildland fires , power and water services may not be adequate for sprinklers to function properly . for example , an investigation after california's 1991 oakland hills fire noted that external sprinkler systems might have saved some homes if water flow and pressure had been adequate . in addition to technologies aimed at protecting individual structures , symposium experts and fire officials we met with told us that one important technology exists , geographic information systems ( gis ) mapping , that can reduce the risk of wildland fire damage to an entire community . gis is a computer - based information system that can be used to efficiently store , analyze , and display multiple forms of information on a single map . gis technologies allow fire officials and local and regional land managers to combine vegetation , fuel , and topography data into separate layers of a single gis map to identify areas in need of vegetation management or to set priorities for fuel breaks . state and county officials we met with emphasized the value of gis in community education and community - planning efforts to protect structures and communities from wildland fire damage within their jurisdictions . for example , the state of florida has developed the florida risk assessment system . this interactive gis provides florida division of forestry officials a detailed visual representation of data on fuels , topography , and weather . displaying these data on one map helps officials determine which communities are at high risk and identify which areas near these communities need treatments to reduce fuels ( see fig .