pt . 121 letter mail monopoly 18 u.s.c . §§ 601-06 mailbox monopoly 18 u.s.c . § 1725 collective bargaining 39 u.s.c . §§1004,1206-07 benefit programs 39 u.s.c . §§ 8348 ( h ) , 8423 , 8909a level of benefits 39 u.s.c . § 1005 ( f ) comparability 39 u.s.c . §§ 101 ( c ) , 1003 ( a ) workers' compensation 39 u.s.c . § 1005 ( c ) for many years , provisions in annual appropriations acts have stated “hat 6-day delivery and rural delivery of mail shall continue at not less than the 1983 level.” usps is required to establish modern service standards for each market - dominant product ( eg , delivery of first - class mail within the continental united states in 2-3 delivery days ) ; these service standards are defined in the code of federal regulations . usps's letter delivery monopoly is codified in criminal and civil laws known as the private express statutes . these laws generally prohibit anyone from establishing , operating , or using a private company to carry letters for compensation on regular trips or at stated periods over postal routes or between places where mail regularly is carried . restricts access to mailboxes by prohibiting anyone from knowingly and willingly placing mailable matter without postage in any mailbox , providing usps exclusive access to mailboxes . usps negotiates collective bargaining agreements with its labor unions . if the parties are unable to reach an agreement , binding arbitration by a third - party panel will ultimately be used to establish agreement . usps is also required to consult with postal supervisory and managerial organizations concerning changes in pay , benefits , and other programs that affect their membership . usps is required to participate in federal pension and health benefit programs , with specific provisions regarding the required level of usps's funding of these programs . for example , usps is required to prefund both postal pension benefits and postal retiree health benefits , each with payments that fully cover usps's share of future benefit costs . the law requires usps's fringe benefits to be at least as favorable as those in effect when the postal reorganization act of 1970 was enacted , unless variation of benefits is collectively bargained . compensation for usps officers and employees is required to be comparable to the rates and types of compensation paid in the private sector of the u.s. economy . usps policy also is required to maintain compensation and benefits for all officers and employees on a standard of comparability to comparable levels of work in the private sector . usps is required to participate in the federal workers' compensation program , which covers postal and other federal employees and provides compensation to federal employees , as well as dependents , in the event of an employee's death . citation ( s ) access to facilities 39 u.s.c . § 403 ( b ) legal requirements usps is required to establish and maintain postal facilities of such character and in such locations , that postal patrons throughout the nation will , consistent with reasonable economies of postal operations , have ready access to essential postal services .