gao - 07-88 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2007 . how can these actors be held accountable and by whom ? what costs should be borne by federal , state , and local governments or the private sector in preparing for , responding to , and recovering from disasters large and small — whether the acts of nature or the deliberate or accidental acts of man ? to what extent and how should the federal government encourage and foster a role for regional or multistate entities in emergency planning and response ? these issues are enormously complex and challenging for all levels of government . it is important to view preparedness for and response to major disasters as a national system with linked responsibilities and capabilities . this is because effective preparedness for and response to major disasters requires the coordinated planning and actions of multiple actors from multiple first responder disciplines , jurisdictions , and levels of government as well as nongovernmental entities . parochialism must be put aside and cooperation must prevail before and after an emergency event . the experience of hurricane katrina illustrated why it is important to tackle these difficult issues . the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( post - katrina reform act ) requires major changes designed to increase the effectiveness of preparedness and response . the act has established new leadership positions and position requirements within the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , establishes new missions for fema , requires the transfer of preparedness functions to it , and requires the fema administrator to undertake a broad range of activities before and after disasters occur . however , as the comptroller general testified last month on dhs's high - risk status and specifically disaster preparedness and response , dhs must overcome continued challenges , including those related to clearly defining leadership roles and responsibilities , developing necessary disaster response capabilities , and establishing accountability systems to provide effective services while protecting against waste , fraud , and abuse . my testimony today ( 1 ) summarizes our key findings regarding leadership , response capabilities , and accountability controls ; ( 2 ) discusses the organizational changes provided for the in the post - katrina reform act ; and ( 3 ) highlights several disaster management issues for continued congressional attention . my comments today are based on our hurricane katrina work on disaster and emergency management and our review of recent emergency management reform legislative changes . we conducted our audit work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i contains a selected list of gao reports related to my statement . several federal legislative and executive provisions support preparation for and response to emergency situations . the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) primarily establishes the programs and processes for the federal government to provide major disaster and emergency assistance to state , local , and tribal governments , individuals , and qualified private nonprofit organizations . fema , within dhs , has responsibility for administering the provisions of the stafford act .