conducting exercises . exercises are to be conducted at least once every two years , consistent with available funding . this requirement may be waived if an actual emergency response was conducted during the two - year period that was of sufficient magnitude to have adequately trained emergency team members and other personnel . establishing adequate command and control facilities . divisions , districts , and other corps groups should provide a dedicated facility for an emergency operations center that will be able to provide command and control for emergency / disaster response and recovery activities . maintaining supplies , tools , and equipment . divisions and districts are expected to maintain equipment and supplies that can be readily available for use by the emergency operations center , disaster field offices , disaster field teams , planning response teams , and similar entities . equipment should be stockpiled for use during emergency operations and exercises . managing inspections of flood control projects . the corps is responsible for ensuring that the levees are properly maintained to perform as designed during flood events . the corps may take advance measures prior to a flooding event to protect against loss of life and significant damages to urban areas and public facilities . in the case of imminent danger of levee failure or overtopping , the corps can also take corrective actions to ensure the stability , integrity , and safety of the levee . advance measures include the following: 1 . technical assistance: providing technical review , advice , and recommendations to state and local agencies before an anticipated flood event . for example , the corps may provide personnel to inspect existing flood control works to identify potential problems and solutions , evaluate conditions to determine the requirements for additional flood control protection , and recommend the most expedient construction methods ; provide hydraulic , hydrologic , and geotechnical analysis ; and provide information readily available at corps districts to local entities for use in the preparation of local evacuation and contingency flood plans . direct assistance: providing supplies , equipment , and contracting for the construction of temporary and permanent flood control projects . examples of emergency contracting work include the construction of temporary levees ; the repair , strengthening , or temporary raising of levees or other flood control works ; shore protection projects ; and removal of stream obstructions , including channel dredging of federal projects to restore the design flow . advance measures taken by the corps are intended to supplement ongoing or planned state and local efforts , and are designed to deal with a specific threat . to implement advanced measures , the governor should make a written request to the corps . the local sponsor for the advance measure assistance must agree to execute a cooperative agreement and , at no cost to the corps , when the operation is over , remove all temporary work constructed by the corps or agree to upgrade the work to standards acceptable to the corps . in addition , the local sponsor is responsible for providing traditional items of local cooperation , such as lands , easements , rights - of - way , and disposal areas necessary for the work .