these criteria vary with the benefit . for instance , states determine maximum earned income limits for tanf , but to receive food stamps , the federal poverty guidelines are generally used in determining eligibility . shortly after the passage of the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 , aousc added the denial of federal benefits sentence enhancement to the pre - sentence report monograph , which provided information to probation officers about the availability of the dfb as sanction along with its requirements . aousc also developed a standard form for federal judges to use in reporting the imposition of the denial of federal benefits sanctions ; the form is part of the judgment and commitment order that is completed by the court upon sentencing . the united states sentencing commission promulgates federal sentencing guidelines and collects data on all persons sentenced pursuant to the federal sentencing guidelines . after the passage of the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 , the ussc prepared a guideline for this sanction and included it in the sentencing guidelines manual . annually , ussc distributes the sentencing guidelines manual to federal court officials . in general , the educational attainment levels of persons convicted of drug offenses is less than that of persons in the general population . this results in proportionately fewer persons eligible for these education benefits than in the general population . our analysis of data from the only national survey of adults on probation that also reports on their educational attainment indicates that among drug offenders on probation during 1995 , less than half had completed high school or obtained a general equivalency degree ( ged ) — prerequisites for enrolling in a postsecondary institution . by comparison , according to a bureau of justice statistics report , about 18 percent of adults in the general population had less than a high school degree . more recent data from the u.s . sentencing commission on roughly 26,000 drug offenders sentenced federally during 2003 indicate that half of them had less than a high school degree , about one - third had graduated from high school , and about 18 percent had at least some college . in addition , our analysis of bjs data on drug offenders released from prisons in 23 states during 2001 indicate that about 57 percent of these drug offenders had not completed high school by the time they were admitted into prison ; about 36 percent had completed high school or obtained a ged as their highest level of education completed ; and the remainder had completed some postsecondary education . we obtained data from 17 of the largest phas in the nation on the decisions that they made to deny federally assisted housing benefits to residents or applicants during 2003 . federal law disqualifies students who have been convicted of controlled substance offenses , in accordance with the period of ineligibility in table 12 , from receiving federal higher education assistance . as currently implemented by the department of education , disqualifying convictions are those drug convictions on a student's record at the time the student's eligibility is being determined , using the rules on the fafsa worksheet .