capacity . operators procure capacity — long - term commitments to provide specific amounts of electricity generation to ensure that there will be sufficient electricity to reliably meet consumers' expected future electricity needs . procuring capacity may involve operators of power plants committing that existing or new power plants will be available to generate electricity , if needed , at a particular future date . to provide for potential unexpected increases in demand or any problems that prevent some power plants from providing electricity or transmission lines from delivering electricity as expected , the commitments to provide electricity may exceed expected demand by a specified percentage or safety margin . ancillary services . operators procure several ancillary services to maintain a reliable electricity supply . ancillary services encompass several highly technical functions required for grid operators to ensure that electricity produced can be delivered and used by consumers . some ancillary services help ensure that electricity can be delivered within technical standards — for example , at the right voltage and frequency — to keep the grid stable and be useful for consumers who may have equipment that needs to operate at specific voltage and frequency levels . over the last 2 decades , some states and the federal government have taken steps to restructure the regulation of their electric systems with the goals of increasing the roles of competition in markets , lowering prices , and giving consumers access to a wider array of services . the electricity industry was historically characterized by integrated utilities that oversaw the four functions of electricity service — generation , transmission , distribution , and system operations — in a monopoly service territory in exchange for providing consumers with electricity at regulated retail prices . in certain parts of the country , states and the federal government restructured the electricity industry to one in which the wholesale price for electricity generation is determined largely by supply and demand in competitive markets . more specifically , historically , at the retail level , integrated monopoly utilities provided consumers with electricity at regulated prices , and state regulators generally set retail electricity prices based on a utility's cost of production plus a fair rate of return on the utility's investment in its infrastructure , including power plants and power lines . however , beginning in the late 1990s , some states chose to restructure the retail markets they oversee to allow the price of electricity to be determined largely by supply and demand in competitive markets . in parts of the country where electricity markets have restructured , new entities called retail service providers compete with existing utilities to provide electricity to consumers by offering electricity plans with differing prices , terms , and incentives . at the wholesale level , ferc is required by law to ensure that the rates it oversees are “just and reasonable” and not “unduly discriminatory or preferential,” among other things . prior to restructuring the wholesale electricity markets in the late 1990s , ferc met this requirement by approving rates for transmission and wholesale sales of electricity in interstate commerce based on the utilities' costs of production plus a fair rate of return on the utilities' investment .