to do this , we calculated the monthly prices paid by farmers for nitrogen fertilizer . first , the estimates of total supply and total demand , which reflect the combination of data from several independent sources , differ only slightly . second , the trends in consumption from the trade source are consistent with those in the related census bureau series . manufacturers supply nitrogen that is consumed in both the agricultural and industrial sectors . table 1 below provides estimates of nitrogen supply and demand in the united states over the last 7 years , including the nitrogen nutrient content in fertilizer products consumed by the agricultural sector . as the price of natural gas , the key component in the manufacturing of nitrogen spiked in 2001 , nitrogen production fell . as shown in table 1 , u.s. manufacturers produced 25 percent less nitrogen in 2001 than in 2000 . despite the significant decline in domestic production of nitrogen in 2001 , supplies of nitrogen fertilizer were adequate to meet farmers' demand that year primarily because of an increase in imports . usda collected additional survey information from april to june 2001 to determine whether farmers were facing problems in obtaining nitrogen fertilizer . the results of this survey show that the supply of nitrogen fertilizer was adequate to meet farmers' 2001 demand . as shown in figure 5 , while nitrogen fertilizer supplies were below normal in several states in april 2001 , they had returned to normal levels in all but one state by june of that year . nationally , nitrogen fertilizer supplies were at 92 percent of normal levels in early april 2001 , while only 12 states reported supplies at less than 90 percent of normal levels . only two states — pennsylvania and new jersey — reported supplies at less than 80 percent of normal levels . however , by early june nitrogen fertilizer supplies were at 97 percent of normal levels nationally , and all but one state reported supplies at 95 percent or more of normal levels . by june 30 , 2001 , usda officials concluded that there were sufficient supplies of nitrogen fertilizer , and they stopped the survey . furthermore , usda did not conduct a similar survey in 2003 , when gas prices and fertilizer prices again increased , because it was unaware of any concerns about the availability of nitrogen fertilizer . the results of usda's survey are consistent with our analysis , which found that although domestic production of nitrogen declined 25 percent in 2001 , the overall demand was met primarily because imports increased by about 43 percent . as shown in table 1 , nitrogen imports increased from 6.3 million tons in 2000 to approximately 9 million tons in 2001 . although most nitrogen fertilizer imported into the united states has for the past several years come from canada , the amount of nitrogen fertilizer imported from canada decreased by almost 13 percent in 2001 . on the other hand , nitrogen fertilizer imports from trinidad tobago , venezuela , and ukraine increased by 19 percent , 59 percent , and 469 percent , respectively , in 2001 .