the office of nuclear risk reduction . this office has led work with russia under the elimination of weapons grade plutonium production program to facilitate the permanent shutdown of the three remaining russian weapon - grade plutonium production reactors — which collectively produced approximately 1.2 metric tons of weapon - grade plutonium each year — by refurbishing existing and constructing new replacement fossil - fuel - based sources of power . the last reactor was shut down in april 2010 , and the program is to come to an end in fiscal year 2011 . the office of fissile materials disposition . this office has two major missions: the disposition of surplus u.s. weapon - grade heu , and the elimination of u.s. and russian plutonium no longer needed for defense programs . under this latter mission , the fissile material disposition program will assist russia in modifying reactors that will dispose of 34 metric tons of russian weapon - grade plutonium . in april 2010 , the united states and russia concluded a revised agreement laying the groundwork for both countries to begin this process by 2018 . the two other u.s. agencies that conduct major nuclear nonproliferation programs and activities overseas are dod and state . dod administers the ctr program , which has facilitated the removal of nuclear weapons from ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan and has helped russia and ukraine meet their arms control commitments by assisting in the elimination of strategic delivery systems . ctr has also provided assistance to secure russian nuclear warheads , destroy the russian chemical weapons stockpile , reduce biological proliferation risks across the former soviet union , and combat wmd smuggling in the region . the ctr program has expanded its geographic scope in recent years , notably helping albania eliminate its chemical weapons . state manages its own nonproliferation programs , provides support to nnsa and other u.s. agency nuclear nonproliferation programs working overseas , and conducts bilateral and multilateral diplomacy to address proliferation threats around the world under the bureau of international security and nonproliferation . among other things , state's nuclear nonproliferation programs include efforts to enhance international export controls and border security ; counter nuclear smuggling ; redirect wmd expertise in iraq , libya , and other countries to peaceful research ; and sustain a nonproliferation and disarmament fund that provides supplemental funding to address nonproliferation contingencies and other urgent threat reduction efforts . nsc staff have the principal role in coordinating the implementation of nnsa , dod , state , and other agency nonproliferation programs . while nsc oversees development of general policy and establishes guidelines for u.s. nonproliferation programs , it does not implement programs or control their budgets . nsc officials approved a governmentwide strategy for the president's 4- year initiative to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials worldwide . in addition , u.s. agencies — including nnsa , dod , and state — have identified individual plans in varying levels of development and specificity describing how they intend to contribute to the 4-year initiative .