iv ) . although contributions and revenues from both cooperating associations and friends groups increased considerably over the 5-year period , the increase in friends group contributions and revenues is most dramatic . this increase may be explained by recent increases in the number of friends groups as well as by the relative newness of friends groups compared to cooperating associations . according to park service data , the number of cooperating associations changed little from 1996 to 2001 , rising from 64 to 66 and then dropping to 65 as 2 associations merged . in contrast , friends groups are recent additions to the park scene and are expanding more rapidly throughout the park system . while the park service does not have historical data on friends groups , in the six parks we visited the years of incorporation for friends groups operating in these parks generally ranged from 1988 to 2001 , with only one dating to 1959 . by comparison , the years of incorporation for cooperating associations ranged from 1923 to 1961 ( see table 6 ) . during this period , the association operated that facility , providing visitor convenience items in addition to interpretive materials . table 5 notes that association financial contributions include a dollar value assigned to information assistance provided by association staff to visitors and that the park service allows associations to claim up to 50 percent of association sales staff salaries . however , we agree that additional detail would provide a clearer picture of the composition of association contributions . we added language to tables 5 and 11 that 25 percent of association contributions were for information assistance . we also added that information assistance is a primary type of park support to the discussion on p. 2 . the issues addressed in this report do not provide a basis for making these recommendations . associations have appointed concessioner officials to their boards of directors . this was the case , for example , at grand canyon np and yellowstone np . we believe that deciding who should serve on its board of directors is a decision best left to the private cooperating association . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . moreover , while the median date of incorporation for associations also is 1941 , the median incorporation date for the friends groups is 1995 .