epa . according to epa officials , epa has conducted outreach to ensure state agencies understand their ability to provide mats extensions and epa officials also review information from nacaa on the status of mats extension requests . in addition , epa has updated its power sector modeling tool — a model epa uses to analyze the impact of policies , regulations , and legislative proposals on the power sector — to reflect mats requirements along with changes in other market conditions . ferc . ferc officials told us that they monitor information from several sources including the nerc reliability assessments,capacity additions , and information from nacaa on the status of mats extension requests . in addition , ferc obtained industry information on eia data on reliability challenges through a technical conference that it convened to obtain information on the effect of recent cold weather events on the rtos . recent and pending actions on the four existing regulations , as well as epa's recently proposed regulations to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from existing generating units , may require additional agency effort to monitor industry's progress in responding to the regulations and any potential impacts on reliability . doe , epa , and ferc officials told us that , in light of these changes , their coordination efforts may need to be revisited . specifically , one epa official noted that the agencies may need to reexamine their coordination efforts , as appropriate , in light of changing conditions , including newly proposed epa regulations . in addition , according to ferc officials , since not all the regulations have been finalized , conditions will continue to change , making continued monitoring of potential reliability or resource adequacy challenges important . furthermore , in april 2014 , a ferc commissioner testified before congress about concerns and uncertainty related to potential reliability and price impacts associated with environmental regulations.specifically , the commissioner expressed concerns about the reliability of data on which generating units are retiring and the resources to replace those retiring generating units and called for a more formal review process including ferc , epa , and others to analyze the specific details of retiring units , as well as the new units and new transmission that will be needed to manage the transition and ensure reliability of the nation's electricity sector . rto officials and other industry stakeholders also told us that recent and pending actions on regulations could have impacts on the industry's ability to reliably deliver electricity . officials from several rtos told us that , while widespread reliability concerns are not anticipated , some regions may face reliability challenges including challenges associated with increasing reliance on natural gas . officials from several rtos said that their efforts to monitor reliability impacts will include evaluating the recently proposed regulations to reduce carbon dioxide emissions , which may present challenges in the future . doe . doe is offering technical assistance to state public utility commissioners , generating unit owners and operators , and utilities on implementing the new and pending epa regulations affecting the electric utility industry .