gao - 08-65 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2008 . our study had four objectives . these included describing practices that selected states have adopted to address the challenges of ( 1 ) identifying health care needs , ( 2 ) ensuring delivery of appropriate health services , and ( 3 ) documenting and monitoring the health care of children in foster care . in addition , we describe technical assistance the department of health and human services' administration for children and families ( acf ) provides to states to help improve their performance in providing for the health care needs of these children . to gain an initial understanding of the types of practices states have adopted , we reviewed relevant reports and interviewed various experts and researchers . we reviewed information on promising practices listed on acf's web site that were identified during acf's reviews of state performance and a list of state practices that acf provided to us . we also interviewed several prominent child welfare experts and researchers , including individuals affiliated with the american academy of pediatrics , the center for health care strategies , the chapin hall center for children , the georgetown university child development center , and the national academy for state health policy to obtain additional information on practices to improve the delivery of health care to children in foster care . to update information on practices described in available publications and to obtain additional examples that may not have been reported in publications , we e - mailed requests for information on current practices they believed were noteworthy efforts to address children's health care needs to representatives of child welfare agencies in 50 states and the district of columbia . to minimize the burden on state representatives , we suggested that they could limit the number of practices they described . we sent our e - mail requests in october 2007 , and representatives for 42 of the 51 child welfare agencies provided responses . to gather more detailed examples of these practices , we selected 10 state child welfare agencies for further review — conducting visits to 3 states and telephone interviews with 7 . in selecting states and their practices for further review , we considered descriptions of each state's practices obtained from the states and other research . for practical reasons , in order to collect sufficient examples from each category while limiting the number of distinct states we would contact , we also considered whether a state had more than one practice it considered noteworthy and whether it encompassed practices in at least two of our five broad categories . we also gave some weight to the level of context and information the state had provided about its practices and generally limited our consideration of practices to those that states indicated they had begun to implement . in addition , we made efforts to include states that had achieved a strong rating on the acf reviews for children's physical and mental health indicators and to achieve some distribution in geographic location and administrative structure .