liquidity requirements . prudential regulators have adopted or proposed rules to impose minimum liquidity requirements and the federal reserve conducts supervisory liquidity stress tests on bhcs to help ensure that they have or can raise the funds needed to meet their near - term obligations , including from derivatives . exchange trading . title vii requires certain swaps subject to mandatory clearing to be traded and executed on a regulated trading platform , including an organized exchange or swap execution facility , unless no facility offers the swap for trading . mandatory reporting . title vii requires all swaps to be reported to a registered swap data repository or , if no such repository will accept the swap data , to cftc or sec , and requires that transaction and pricing data for newly executed swaps be reported to the public . mandatory clearing . title vii imposes mandatory clearing requirements on certain swaps , but it exempts , among other things , certain end users that use swaps to hedge or mitigate commercial risk . figure 3 illustrates these reforms and some of the differences between swaps traded on exchanges and cleared through clearinghouses and noncleared swaps . our analysis shows that of the 15 u.s. banks covered by section 716 , 4 had to take steps to comply with the amended provision compared to 11 that would have had to take steps to comply with the original provision . approximately 1,400 u.s. banks reported holding swaps or other derivatives in the second quarter of 2015 , and 15 of them , about 1 percent , had registered with cftc as swap dealers and were thus covered entities under both versions of section 716 . as shown in figure 4 , as of september 30 , 2016 , the 15 covered banks collectively held a total notional amount of around $176 trillion in derivatives , which represented around 99 percent of the derivatives held by all u.s. banks . however , this activity was concentrated among four banks , which collectively held a total notional amount of about $159 trillion in derivatives , or around 90 percent of the derivatives held by the 15 u.s. bank swap dealers . the amended section 716 affected four u.s. bank swap dealers that conducted structured finance swap activities , and we estimated that these banks “pushed out” about $265 billion of such swaps in notional value ( or less than 1 percent of the banks' total derivatives ) . because originally covered swaps generally included credit , commodity , and equity swaps , the original section 716 would have affected 11 banks that are swap dealers in these markets . we estimated that these banks continue to hold about $10.5 trillion of such swaps in notional value ( or around 6 percent of their total derivatives ) due to the section 716 amendment . our analysis shows that of the 15 u.s. banks registered as swap dealers , 4 of the banks were dealers in structured finance swaps and had to stop such swap activity by july 16 , 2015 , or lose access to federal assistance under the amended section 716 . as discussed in more detail later , the four banks moved their structured finance swap activity to their nonbank affiliates .