the other agencies did not provide any comments . in its written comments , dhs agreed with all seven of our recommendations . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the reliability of transition assistance program ( tap ) data on participation levels and the factors that affect coast guard servicemembers' participation , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the coast guard measures tap performance and monitors key areas of tap implementation . to address these questions , we surveyed coast guard installations with full - time tap operations ; reviewed coast guard data on tap participation for fiscal years 2012 to 2017 ; visited one coast guard installation and interviewed tap managers from two additional coast guard installations selected for diversity in location , among other reasons ; and interviewed coast guard officials responsible for overseeing tap implementation for the coast guard . to what extent does the coast guard measure tap performance and monitor key areas of transition assistance program implementation ? to address these questions , we surveyed 12 coast guard installations with on - site tap managers and achieved a 100 percent response rate . we reviewed coast guard data on tap participation for fiscal years 2012 to 2017 and interviewed coast guard officials in headquarters responsible for overseeing tap implementation for the coast guard . we interviewed 3 of the coast guard's 13 tap managers — one in person and two by phone — selected for diversity in location of the regions they oversee . we visited one coast guard installation where , in addition to interviewing the on - site tap manager , we interviewed additional tap staff as well as 25 coast guard servicemembers ( including both officers and enlisted personnel ) who had participated in the program . we assessed the reliability of the coast guard's tap participation data and , based on interviews with agency officials knowledgeable about the data , determined these data were not sufficiently reliable due to limitations with the coast guard's data collection system , which does not have sufficient controls to ensure data are complete and accurate . we discuss the issues with data reliability in our report . we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , policies , documents , and publications . information in this report is current as of the date gao received formal agency comments from dhs . for more information on our methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .