we do not agree . to the contrary , there is strong evidence that shows that dhs's ability to respond is negatively impacted by the use of separate centers , rather than a single integrated and merged entity . specifically , our past work has shown that overlapping responsibilities for incident response have adversely affected dhs's ability to prioritize and coordinate incident response activities . for example , private - sector firms have reported that in responding to a critical incident , dhs made time - consuming and duplicative requests for information without identifying how this information would be beneficial in helping respond to the event . in addition , the dhs - commissioned expert task force on the subject recently reported that without an organizationally integrated center , the department will not have a comprehensive operating picture of the nation's cyber and communications infrastructure and thus not be able to effectively implement activities necessary to prepare , protect , respond , and recover this infrastructure . further , our interviews with private - sector cyber and communications infrastructure executives performed as part of this engagement found that they also favor a merged organization that includes broad industry participation . this evidence calls for dhs to take a closer look at the issue of whether to merge the centers . dhs also commented on the report's description of the roles and responsibilities of ncc and us - cert . specifically , dhs noted that our original characterization of ncc as dealing with voice systems and us - cert with data systems was not totally accurate . instead , dhs offered that a more accurate distinction would be that ncc deals with communication infrastructure , including voice and data networks , and us - cert deals with the security of systems and data using the networks , which dhs commonly refers to as cyber situational awareness and response . we agree with this comment and have incorporated it in the report where appropriate . in addition to its written response , the department also provided technical comments that we have incorporated in the report where appropriate . we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objective was to determine the status of department of homeland security ( dhs ) efforts to integrate the activities of its national cyber security division ( ncsd ) and national communications system ( ncs ) in preparing for and responding to disruptions in converged voice and data networks .