usda officials acknowledged that they did not follow the guidance . usda currently does not have a process in place that would help ensure this guidance is followed . according to federal standards for internal control , internal control activities help ensure that management directives , such as those incorporated in the investigation guidance , are carried out . the control activities should be effective and efficient in accomplishing the agency's control objectives . one example of a control activity would be establishing a process for documentation of the justification and approval of any deviation from the directions . without appropriate control activities , usda cannot have reasonable assurance that the guidance will be followed in future outbreaks . amid mounting concerns about the spread of the diseases and the associated economic losses , usda took additional actions to manage secd beginning in june 2014 . in particular , usda issued a federal order imposing reporting and planning requirements , and it provided financial assistance to states and producers . usda cites progress in addressing secd , but stakeholders we interviewed have questioned the usefulness of some of usda's actions . in addition , usda is retrospectively conducting a study of potential ways ped could have entered the united states and has identified potential preventive strategies based on its findings . in june 2014 , usda issued a federal order to help manage the diseases . according to usda documents , the order followed a winter in which secd appeared to spread at increasing rates , leading to mounting producer concerns about economic losses from pig deaths . the order includes two basic requirements that remain in place at the time of this report . first , it requires anyone with knowledge of the diseases , including producers , veterinarians , and diagnostic laboratories to report all new secd incidents to usda or state animal health officials , providing specific information , including premises identification numbers . it also requires that , before a herd is considered confirmed positive for secd , the herd with positive testing results also has at least one case of a pig with a history of clinical signs consistent with secd . according to usda , routine , standard reporting for secd helps determine the magnitude of the diseases in the united states and documents progress in managing the diseases . second , the order requires producers reporting secd incidents to work with a veterinarian — either their herd veterinarians , or usda or state animal health officials — to develop herd management plans . in addition to the individual named above , mary denigan - macauley ( assistant director ) , sushil sharma ( assistant director ) , leslie ashton , kevin bray , mark braza , allen chan , barbara el osta , cynthia norris , dan royer , amber sinclair , and elaine vaurio made key contributions to this report . to develop a process to help ensure that its guidance for investigation of foreign or emerging diseases is followed , usda stated that the intended refinement and expansion of the guidance for responding to emerging animal diseases will address when and how emerging diseases may be investigated differently from the procedures in its current investigation guidance .