we did the same for the oversight process . when there were variances between the criteria and what dod enterprise and the military departments had done , we interviewed cognizant dod enterprise - level and military department - level officials on the causes and impacts . to determine whether the department was certifying and approving business system investments with annual obligations exceeding $1 million , we reviewed and analyzed all defense business systems management committee certification approval memoranda as well as irb certification memoranda issued prior to the defense business systems management committee's final approval decisions for fiscal year 2010 and compared the results to those certification actions described in the annual report to identify differences . we also reviewed dod irb guidance to understand the types of actions related to certification of business system modernizations . we interviewed officials from the business transformation agency and irbs to discuss any discrepancies . we conducted this performance audit at dod and military department offices in arlington , virginia , from january 2011 to june 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were gerard aflague , mathew bader , carl barden , shaun byrnes , debra conner , elena epps , rebecca eyler , nancy glover , neelaxi lakhmani ( assistant director ) , anh le , lori martinez , gary mountjoy , freda paintsil , david powner ( director ) , christine san , sylvia shanks , donald sebers , teresa smith , jennifer stavros - turner , and adam vodraska . the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 designated the deputy secretary of defense position as the chief management officer for dod and created a deputy position to assist the chief management officer . the chief management officer's responsibilities include developing and maintaining a departmentwide strategic plan for business reform and establishing performance goals and measures for improving and evaluating overall economy , efficiency , and effectiveness , and monitoring and measuring the progress of the department . the deputy chief management officer's responsibilities include recommending to the chief management officer methodologies and measurement criteria to better synchronize , integrate , and coordinate the business operations to ensure alignment in support of the warfighting mission . the business transformation agency supports the deputy chief management officer in leading and coordinating business transformation efforts across the department . the army also used the economic viability tool to complete the analysis . in addition , in december 2010 memorandum , the army's chief management officer asserted that the economic viability analysis had been completed , and showed the investment was justified to proceed with obligating funds . in another example , on the navy enterprise resource planning system , navy used the january 2009 dod guidance to comply with the economic viability analysis requirement and used the economic viability tool to complete the analysis .