iii ) . as there was no consensus among the irac representatives as to how to resolve spectrum policy disputes between government and commercial interests , we chose not to make a recommendation on the issue . doe also stated that the report did not identify that irac representatives and ntia officials do not always share the same goals , an issue doe views as a key contention with regard to spectrum management . the existing white house policy coordinating committee should be used to address spectrum issues that could not be resolved by the previously mentioned policy and plans steering group . we did not find wide consensus for an explicit white house role in spectrum management . spectrum policy for the 21st century — the president's spectrum policy initiative: report 1 recommendations of the federal government spectrum task force , michael d. gallagher , acting assistant secretary for communications and information , u.s. department of commerce , june 2004 . body to provide advice on sensitive spectrum policy issues . uneven training and knowledge among some reps can limit irac's ability to fulfill its mission . irac reps are not satisfied with the current negotiation process for resolving disputes between competing government and commercial users , but they do not agree on how to improve the process . knowledge and training levels appropriate for irac reps , continuing education in emerging technologies , and planning for succession within irac member agencies . establish a special committee within irac comprised of senior level agency officials to be convened by the assistant secretary of commerce ( ntia administrator ) as needed to provide policy advice directly to the secretary of commerce on sensitive spectrum policy issues . this is consistent with an existing open recommendation to the secretary of commerce from a 2002 report . see gao - 02-906 . in addition to the individuals named above , keith cunningham , brad dubbs , michele fejfar , alwynne wilbur , and nancy zearfoss made key contributions to this report . spectrum management: better knowledge needed to take advantage of technologies that may improve spectrum efficiency . gao - 04-666 . washington , d.c.: may 28 , 2004 . spectrum management in defense acquisitions . gao - 03-617r . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2003 . telecommunications: comprehensive review of u.s . spectrum management with broad stakeholder involvement is needed . gao - 03-277 . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2003 . telecommunications: better coordination and enhanced accountability needed to improve spectrum management . gao - 02-906 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2002 . telecommunications: history and current issues related to radio spectrum management . gao - 02-814t . washington , d.c.: june 11 , 2002 . defense spectrum management: more analysis needed to support spectrum use decisions for the 1755-1850 mhz band . gao - 01-795 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2001 . defense spectrum management: new procedures could help reduce interference problems . he supports strategies for promoting greater involvement by agency senior executives . the government should develop training programs for spectrum specialists . telecommunications: federal communications commission spectrum management . rced - 89-62 . washington , d.c.: january 12 , 1989 .