collateral damage against a civilian convoy . nato forces struck serbian headquarters and president milosevic's private residence . first task force hawk apache helicopters arrived in tirana , albania . nato 50th anniversary summit began in washington , d.c. – alliance members stated the conditions that would bring an end to the air campaign and announced that the air campaign will intensify . all task force hawk apache helicopters in tirana , albania . u.s. f - 16 downed , pilot rescued ; nato's north atlantic council approved an expanded target list . three u.s. soldiers released by yugoslavian president milosevic . army apache helicopter crashed during training , both crewmen killed . nato alliance planes accidentally hit chinese embassy in belgrade . unintended civilian casualties in korisa . ( 2 ) what recent actions has the department of defense ( dod ) taken to address doctrinal issues related to the u.s. military's participation in the operation ? to answer our first objective , we identified significant doctrinal departures through our review of dod and service documents and discussions with principal u.s. military officials in organizations such as the u.s. european command , the joint task force noble anvil , and the nato combined air operations center . to answer our second objective , however , we focused on a wider range of doctrinal issues , drawing upon dod reviews of the lessons learned from the operation and the status of actions taken to address those lessons . the nato alliance , which consists of the united states and 18 additional nations , began air strikes on the federal republic of yugoslavia on march 24 , 1999 . ( appendix i contains a timeline of events during the planning and execution of operation allied force. ) this military campaign was the largest combat operation in nato's 50-year history . the nato alliance initially adopted a limited response envisioned to be a 2-day air strike . the nato alliance planned to use air strikes as a means to compel president milosevic to cease the violence in kosovo and allow all refugees to return to their homes , which would restore peace throughout the balkan region . ( appendix ii provides a further description of the political and military objectives of operation allied force. ) when the initial attacks did not achieve nato's objectives , the air campaign gradually grew in intensity to an around - the - clock air combat operation , which lasted for 78 days . the united states was a major participant in this nato - led operation . the united states provided about 70 percent of the aircraft to the operation and over 60 percent of the total sorties during the operation . the 19 nato member nations have disparate histories and interests , and this led to varied support for this operation , which was outside of nato's central mission to provide for the collective defense of its members . the 19 nato member nations are shown in appendix iii . for example , one member nation , which shared religious and cultural backgrounds with the kosovar albanians , was sympathetic to their plight , while another nation had historic and religious ties to the serbian yugoslavs .