we obtained a 100 percent response rate . in addition , to determine if individuals who were later charged with or pleaded guilty to terrorism - related offenses had transited spot airports and whether tsa could obtain information from these transits to enhance its understanding of terrorist behaviors , we reviewed cbp and department of justice information to ( 1 ) identify individuals who were charged with or pleaded guilty to terrorism - related offenses and ( 2 ) determine if these individuals had , prior to being charged , transited airports where spot had been deployed . for the updates , we reviewed documentation from tsa on the steps it has taken to implement the recommendations from our may 2010 report . more detailed information about our scope and methodology is included in our may 2010 report . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as discussed in our may 2010 report , tsa deployed spot nationwide before first determining whether there was a scientifically valid basis for using behavior and appearance indicators as a means for reliably identifying passengers who may pose a risk to the u.s. aviation system . a validation study by dhs's science and technology directorate is under way now , but questions exist regarding whether the study's methodology is sufficiently comprehensive to validate the spot program . specifically , dhs's plan to assess spot is not designed to fully validate whether behavior detection can be used to reliably identify individuals in an airport environment who pose a security risk . the results of an independent assessment are needed to determine whether current validation efforts are sufficiently comprehensive to validate the program , and to support future requests for increased funding . according to tsa , spot was deployed before a scientific validation of the program was completed , but tsa stated that this deployment was made in response to the need to address potential threats to the aviation system , such as suicide bombers . tsa also stated that the program was based upon scientific research available at the time regarding human behaviors . moreover , tsa stated that no other large - scale u.s. or international screening program incorporating behavior - and appearance - based indicators has ever been rigorously scientifically validated . however , a 2008 report issued by the national research council of the national academy of sciences stated that the scientific evidence for behavioral monitoring is preliminary in nature . the report also noted that an information - based program , such as a behavior detection program , should first determine if a scientific foundation exists and use scientifically valid criteria to evaluate its effectiveness before deployment . the report added that such programs should have a sound experimental basis and that the documentation on the program's effectiveness should be reviewed by an independent entity capable of evaluating the supporting scientific evidence . as we reported in may 2010 , an independent panel of experts could help dhs develop a comprehensive methodology to determine if the spot program is based on valid scientific principles that can be effectively applied in an airport environment for counterterrorism purposes .