i ) ; education did not . both agencies provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . interior agreed with all of our recommendations . in regard to our third recommendation , bie stated that , in addition to continuing to provide guidance and training to tribal groups and tribal school boards , it has developed information on the process for seeking and approving alternatives that will be posted on its web site as well as distributed to tribal groups and tribal school boards . in responding to our final recommendation , bie stated it would continue to be more proactive in its communication with tribal groups and education to resolve issues related to waivers of the state's definition of ayp , requests for technical assistance , and development of alternative definitions of ayp . moreover , as part of the project management with tribal entities that have sought technical assistance , a consultant will maintain a management document that identifies timelines , among other things . in addition to the steps bie has mentioned , we continue to believe it is important for bie to establish internal timelines to ensure more timely responses to all correspondence with tribal groups . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of education and the interior ; the director of the bureau of indian education ; representatives of tribal groups identified in the report , relevant congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . betty ward - zukerman , assistant director , and nagla'a el - hodiri , analyst - in - charge , managed this assignment . kris trueblood and tahra nichols made significant contributions to all aspects of the work . nora boretti , kimberly granger , angela jacobs , annamarie lopata , and sara pelton assisted with data collection . charlie willson and jessica orr provided assistance in report preparation ; jeffery malcolm provided expertise on indian issues ; james rebbe and doreen feldman provided legal support ; jean mcsween and john mingus provided technical support ; and lise levie verified our findings . no child left behind act: education actions could improve the targeting of school improvement funds to schools most in need of assistance . gao - 08-380 . washington , d.c.: february 29 , 2008 . no child left behind act: states face challenges measuring academic growth that education's initiatives may help address . gao - 06-661 . washington , d.c.: july 17 , 2006 . bureau of indian affairs schools: expenditures in selected schools are comparable to similar public schools , but data are insufficient to judge adequacy of funding and formulas . gao - 03-955 . washington , d.c.: september 4 , 2003 . bureau of indian affairs schools: new facilities management information system promising , but improved data accuracy needed . gao - 03-692 .