iii ) . irs agreed that better data may lead to better resource allocation decisions and improved atat enforcement efforts . of our ten recommendations , it fully agreed with seven , disagreed with one ( number 7 ) , and partially agreed with two ( numbers 8 and 2b ) . in describing actions on the recommendations with which irs had agreements , the deputy commissioner stated that irs would do the following: update the internal revenue manual's handling of reason codes for surveying or discontinuing investigations and evaluate whether any of the reason data collected warrant changing how investigations are selected ; ensure that irs uses the same databases and methodologies ( such as across irs divisions ) for public reporting on the examination results of atat issues ; develop criteria for consistently using irs examination result data and a consistent methodology for validating the data before they are released ( such as to the joint committee on taxation ) ; establish a new indicator and a process to regularly review whether filers met their disclosure obligations with otsa ; improve its next study of whether form 8886 should be filed electronically by identifying how many form 8886 filers use computers to prepare the form ; test mismatches of partnership and s corporation information with otsa information to identify potentially unfiled forms ; and formalize procedures to identify , evaluate , and follow up on incomplete disclosures . irs disagreed with our recommendation on comprehensively tracking the elapsed time for any advisors to provide investor lists when irs requests . irs commented that the information currently contained in individual case files reflects when information has been requested and received , but that resource and capability constraints may outweigh the benefits of capturing this additional information on a systematic basis . we agree that costs and benefits must be carefully weighed . in that regard , irs's data collection would not have to be elaborate . for instance , sb / se officials already send data on the investor lists received to a central list keeper . these officials also could send the dates when each list was requested and received to that same office . in that way , sb / se could see if the slowness in receiving some lists that we found is prevalent across the division , and other divisions could do the same thing . if the slowness is prevalent , irs officials would then have the information needed to make decisions on whether irs is doing all it can to quickly determine and address any harm to the government . finally , the data collection is possible in that we were able to collect such data from some revenue agents on the timeliness of investor lists received . irs partially agreed with our recommendation on two options for inducing non - material advisors to provide investor lists within a specified time . it did not fully agree with the first option . in lieu of requiring summonses to be prepared for the first meeting with non - material advisors , irs stated that its internal revenue manual would recommend that irs agents consider preparing summonses to use at initial meetings with possibly problematic non - material advisors .