, partially funded ) . the corps receives “no year” appropriations that remain available until spent . as part of the budget process , the corps has historically requested appropriations from congress to cover only those contract payments expected to be made in the upcoming fiscal year ; it generally has not requested appropriations to fully fund its civil works contracts . according to the corps , to comply with congressional direction that the agency give careful consideration to the disposition of appropriated funds to ensure that they are applied effectively , and that the agency effectively move ( reprogram ) funds from projects that are not moving forward , the corps developed policies and business practices to expend all available appropriations in the fiscal year appropriated and thereby minimize carrying appropriated funds over to following years . the alternate clause can be used for projects that are not specifically authorized , but are covered by the continuing authorities program . the corps' continuing contracts authority applies to specific types of projects , which do not include water - related environmental infrastructure and resource development projects , such as wastewater treatment , water supply , storm water retention and remediation , environmental restoration , and surface water resource protection and development . districts historically made the decision to use continuing contracts without oversight from the division or corps headquarters . in our prior reports on governmentwide funding practices , we have observed that full funding for capital asset acquisitions is the best way to ensure that all financial decisions are fully accounted for and recognized as part of the budget process , and that full funding also helps ensure that governmentwide fiscal control is maintained . unlike a project started with a partially funded continuing contract , an agency receives budget authority for the project's full estimated costs before a commitment is made for a fully funded capital project . like the corps , we treated individual task orders awarded against the base contract to carry out the work as separate contracts . because the corps does not track information on contracts that included a continuing contracts clause , we developed a methodology for identifying these contracts . of the contracts we reviewed , we identified all of the contracts for which the corps did not obligate the full contract amount . according to the corps , in order to partially fund a contract , the contract has to be either an incrementally funded contract or a continuing contract . using the data , we eliminated contracts identified by the corps as incrementally funded that used either the limitation of funds clause or the defense federal acquisition regulations supplement's incremental funding clause . we based our analyses on the most current data available and only included the federal portion of the continuing contracts' costs . we obtained from corps officials monthly interest payment information contained in the corps of engineers' financial management system . we determined , based on interviews with corps officials , comparison of data to contract files , and electronic data testing , that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .