transportation . federal , state , and local officials in 3 states we visited all said that many youth may not have access to transportation they need to pursue employment and postsecondary education . in rural areas , public transportation may be very limited , or may not be available during the time needed to get to their job site or college . availability of transportation is not always the only issue . one parent told us that using public transportation was not feasible because her child suffered from seizures . while private providers may be better prepared to serve youth with disabilities , parents and advocacy groups said that private providers were often unreliable and their services were not coordinated with public transportation systems . an advocacy official indicated that one reason why these providers are unreliable is because they generally operate on a priority system that gives medical needs a higher priority than employment needs . the 3 states we visited had not addressed transition issues related to the lack of reliable transportation in their state improvement plans . state education officials said these types of problems are outside their area of responsibility . in new york and california , however , some local areas are taking initiative to address this problem . in western new york , a collaborative endeavor involving 30 agencies provides transportation , as well as other services , to youth with disabilities to help them in career preparation activities . in california , youth workforce development centers work with the sacramento regional transit district to provide complementary transit tickets to youth with disabilities so they can come to the centers for educational and employment services . over half of state directors of special education reported that federal assistance was very helpful in assisting states address transition problems , but some stated that the timeliness or consistency of assistance could be improved . one of the ways education provides assistance to states is by providing feedback on state improvement plans that states develop and use to show how they plan to address areas of weakness in implementing idea , including transition requirements . while 39 state directors of special education found this feedback useful , some expressed dissatisfaction over education's timeliness in providing the feedback . for example , of 21 state plans submitted to education in 2002 , only one - fourth received feedback within 6 months , and at least another one - fifth did not receive formal written feedback for a year or more . ( see table 3. ) education does not have a standard response period and has not set a performance goal for providing feedback to states on their improvement plans . while education officials stated that they provide extensive informal feedback to states prior to issuing a formal written response , they also stated that they are taking action to try and expedite the agency's formal written responses . to preclude delays on the formal written feedback resulting from the agency's internal review process , education has developed standard language and written review procedures to be used in preparing feedback . according to education officials , having standard language and review procedures will decrease the time necessary to write and review the feedback report .