boundary issues . a train needs to seamlessly operate ptc when it crosses the boundary between two railroads' territories , as previously described . according to a rail industry association , as of june 2019 , there are about 20 boundaries on the northeast corridor where more work is needed to ensure seamless operation . fra officials and one industry association said boundary issues are complex and time - consuming to resolve but not insurmountable . for example , fra officials said a railroad could install its own equipment such as transponders and wayside devices across the boundary to create an overlap between their system and that of the other railroad . securing ptc wireless communication . fra requires that ptc wireless railroad communications be encrypted . however , a solution that aims to encrypt all ptc wireless communication and data transmittal among railroads operating acses in the northeast is currently in lab development . in august 2016 , amtrak received a grant from fra to create this solution for acses . amtrak originally planned to implement this solution in december 2018 , but amtrak has experienced delays and currently estimates that it will implement the solution by january 2020 . however , amtrak has reported several risks that it will need to overcome to meet this implementation deadline . further delays could affect railroads' ability to fully implement ptc in the northeast by the december 2020 deadline . fra noted it will continue to monitor and support the railroads as they implement security measures in the northeast . ten i - etms railroads that operate in the greater chicago metropolitan area received extensions to implement ptc . throughout ptc implementation , fra , industry associations , and railroads have identified chicago as a place where interoperability would be challenging due to the dense freight , passenger , and commuter operations in the area . examples of such challenges include: software issues . according to fra and railroads we interviewed , software issues have slowed interoperability work by railroads implementing i - etms . the underlying problem is the memory available on the locomotive equipment , which is needed to store its railroad's track data , according to fra and railroads we interviewed . to be interoperable , the locomotive equipment also needs to store and exchange multiple railroads' track data , causing the memory to fill up very quickly . according to railroad representatives , memory limitations for i - etms locomotive equipment prohibited railroads with large track data files — mainly the class i freight railroads — from being able to interoperate . the vendor for this equipment has been working on a software solution for this problem , and according to a few railroads we interviewed , the vendor delivered an interim software solution in march 2019 that allowed the four largest class i railroads to achieve interoperability . however , this software was delivered 7 months later than initially planned , and an additional software solution is still needed to allow the locomotive equipment's memory to store the data of all railroads operating i - etms , according to representatives from two railroads and an industry association we interviewed . other technical issues .