reports . negotiation . in addition to developing and using voluntary industry standards , some manufacturers and commercial licensees privately negotiate interference concerns . representatives of the cellular industry told us that their industry deals with interference on a daily basis , as interference problems are increasing and have become a regular part of doing business . several industry representatives highlighted the cellular industry as a sector in which the wireless companies and manufacturers work in concert to maximize efficiency ; these efforts often occur within the cellular spectrum bands and among like services . ( 2 ) what actions has the federal government taken to improve receiver performance ? ( 3 ) what are the challenges , if any , to improving receiver performance ? ( 4 ) what options have stakeholders and reports identified to improve receiver performance ? pub . 112-96 , § 6408 , 126 stat 156 , 232 ( 2012 ) . these cases involved ( 1 ) interference between cellular and public safety services in the 800 mhz band , ( 2 ) potential interference between satellite radio and wireless communication in the 2.3 ghz band , and ( 3 ) potential and realized interference with radar systems . we selected these cases to ensure variation in application or use ( eg , cellular telephone , navigation ) , federal and nonfederal users , and existence of receiver standards , among other characteristics . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2012 to february 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . efficiency ; actions taken by commercial licensees , manufacturers , and the federal government — both federal spectrum users and spectrum management agencies — to improve receiver performance ; and actions that could be taken to improve receiver performance . finally , we analyzed the actions taken by commercial licensees , manufacturers , and the federal government for a judgmental sample of cases of interference wherein receiver performance played or could play a role . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in the united states , responsibility for spectrum management is shared between two federal agencies: fcc , an independent agency , and ntia , an administration within the department of commerce . fcc manages spectrum use for nonfederal users , including commercial , private , and state and local government users . ntia manages spectrum for federal government users and acts for the president with respect to spectrum management issues . fcc and ntia , with direction from congress and the president , jointly determine the amount of spectrum allocated to federal and nonfederal users , including the amount to be shared by federal and nonfederal users . fcc and ntia manage the radio frequency spectrum in the united states through allocation and assignment: allocation involves segmenting the radio spectrum into bands of frequencies that are designated for use by particular types of radio services or classes of users .