employment . maximizing independent living . how are they doing occupationally ? and how is their living environment with their families or away from their families ? ” the panel cited research noting that any gaps or loss of services during the transition from a school - based support system to adulthood could have long - lasting detrimental effects on youths' health , employment , educational attainment , and family stability . to avoid gaps , according to the panel , the various programs for adults should have compatible eligibility requirements so that youth do not have to re - establish eligibility . specifically , the panel said there should be a single point of entry into adult services , much as the school provides a single point of entry for many services for children . the panel also suggested that transition planning start earlier — as early as middle school — and end when youth turn 25 . finally , the panel noted that autistic youth and their parents need information to help them navigate the adult service system and find the supports they need . the panel said that transitioning youth with asd should have access to the services they need regardless of their income , geographical location , race , or gender . for instance , the panel told us that low - and middle - income youth with asd whose families cannot afford to pay for their services out - of - pocket would ideally be able to rely on public programs to help them pay for their adult services — which is not always the case currently . the panel also stated that access to services should not vary depending on the states and communities where youth live . for example , in rural areas , support services like transportation or telemedicine — wherein providers serve patients remotely , such as via video conference — may help improve access to services that are more common in large cities . the panel also discussed the need to maintain a continuum of care as youth move across state lines , noting that even though eligibility rules and service provision may differ from state to state , youths' needs for services and funding do not necessarily change when they move . the panel suggested a portable and flexible funding mechanism that would allow youth to pay for services in any location . finally , in order to have equitable opportunities to pursue their adult goals , the panel said that some demographic groups , such as females or minorities , may have specific needs . for example , according to the panel , workplaces may have higher social expectations for women than men , and mentoring from other women on the spectrum could help them learn how to react to these expectations . the panel also noted that girls and minority students are diagnosed with asd at a later age than other youth , on average — sometimes after they have left high school . as a result , the panel said , they may have received fewer services and may need more help as they transition to adulthood .