( recommendation 3 ) . this damaged the company's reputation and sales . we have previously reported that poor reliability is a concern for commercial companies because their customers demand products that work , or are reliable and do not experience failure , and the companies must develop and produce high - quality products to sustain their competitive position in the marketplace . as a result of these expectations , officials stated that the contractor did not put enough resources , including a robust reliability team , toward the work that was eventually needed to improve reliability , and the contractor understaffed in this area . in the commercial sector , reliability engineers told us their companies proactively address reliability from the beginning of the development process . we reviewed documentation from these companies and the 2019 reliability and maintainability symposium and found engineers strive to identify reliability issues at the component and sub - system level early in the development process to avoid expensive rework after producing an entire system . we identified the following key practices in the commercial sector: leveraging reliability engineers early and often , establishing realistic reliability requirements — for example , not expecting a product to operate twice as long as its predecessor before failing , emphasizing reliability with their suppliers , and employing reliability engineering activities to improve a system's design throughout development . figure 4 shows some of the activities involved with these key practices . we found commercial companies in our review include reliability engineers as part of their development teams . in this role , reliability engineers implement reliability tools and methods that integrate statistics , physics , and engineering principles to help develop a reliable product . for example , hbm prenscia identified that reliability engineers from several commercial companies said it was important to initiate their assessments early in the development life cycle when there is greatest opportunity to influence product design . according to leading reliability engineers , engineering activities can add value to decision - making by providing direction and feedback that helps development teams refine designs that lead to more reliable and cost effective systems . the product was released to the market based on this successful but inadequate test . in the field , the components failed , and the company had to remove the product from the market . researchers have reported reliability engineers should be empowered to influence decisions , such as delaying overall project schedule or negotiating for more resources when necessary . in addition , our analysis of reliability engineers' documentation from the reliability and maintainability symposium and commercial companies found it important that management provide sufficient resources and time dedicated specifically to improving reliability by discovering failures , implementing corrective actions , and verifying their effectiveness . our analysis found that cost and schedule constraints can negatively influence reliability testing , which can limit development teams' ability to discover failures and improve designs through corrective actions . our analysis of documentation from the symposium also highlighted the importance of having experienced reliability engineers . for example , ford representatives told us they have a dedicated reliability engineering community that coaches the members of the company's different product development teams .