gao - 10-521r . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2010 . see table 5 . individual market plans ( 1 percent of hctc participants ) . the small number of hctc participants that have individual market plans are likely to have a plan with a lower level of actuarial value . a recent study found that about half of the plans ( 51 percent ) in the individual market have an actuarial value of less than 60 percent and another third ( 33 percent ) have an actuarial value at the 60 percent ( bronze ) level . the varied actuarial values of the hctc plans suggest that the level of coverage for many hctc participants may change after the expiration of the hctc depending on the options available to participants and the choices they make in 2014 under ppaca . also , the way that the ppaca tax credits will be calculated may incentivize hctc participants to change their level of coverage . the ppaca premium tax credits will be calculated from a reference plan at the 70 percent ( silver ) level of coverage , so individuals who choose other plans — with either higher or lower levels of actuarial value — could face higher or lower out - of - pocket costs for premiums . however , plans with higher levels of actuarial value may result in lower out - of - pocket costs for copays and deductibles , and plans with lower levels of actuarial value may result in higher out - of - pocket costs for copays and deductibles . ultimately , for any hctc participant , the overall financial effect of a change from an hctc plan to a ppaca exchange plan will be the net effect of the choice between higher or lower premium costs and higher or lower cost - sharing . further , out - of - pocket costs for premiums and cost - sharing for hctc participants will be affected by whether they are eligible for the ppaca premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies . considering these factors , current hctc participants may choose to change their level of coverage when the hctc expires . for example: some hctc participants eligible for ppaca premium tax credits could have an incentive to change to a higher level of coverage . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for purposes of this report . to determine how the coverage that will be available through the ppaca exchanges compares to the qualified health plans for hctc participants for each hctc plan type — cobra , hctc state - qualified , veba , and individual market — we compared the services that plans purchased through the ppaca exchanges will cover , and actuarial values that plans will be offered at through the exchanges , to the services and actuarial values of hctc - qualified plans . we also reviewed regulations and guidance on ehb , actuarial value , and other insurance market reforms that may affect premiums and cost - sharing in 2014 . to determine the reliability of irs's 2011 hctc program data , we reviewed relevant documentation , interviewed officials knowledgeable about the data , and conducted electronic testing of the data to identify obvious errors or outliers .