gao - 11-429t . washington , d.c.: march 11 , 2011 . agree on roles and responsibilities . establish compatible policies , procedures , and other means to operate across agency boundaries . develop mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results . reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency plans and reports . reinforce individual accountability for collaborative efforts through performance management systems . while these practices were originally developed for collaboration among federal agencies , they can apply to collaboration between fima and the offices that support it . ocio's stated function is to assist fema offices in it development and to help ensure they follow the agency's established processes for it system implementation . however , fima and ocio faced challenges in agreeing on roles and responsibilities and establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies . for example , fima officials said they had experienced difficulty in the past getting timely approvals from ocio for it programs and contracts for nfip and had sought ways to streamline the process , including using contractors rather than ocio staff . fima officials also said that ocio's certification and accreditation ( c&a ) process — which determines whether systems are certified to become operational — could be lengthy . they said they had to wait months for c&a approval for at least two mission - critical systems , one of which had been held up for about 9 months as of february 2010 . one official said this problem had arisen because the c&a process lacked a formalized structure and communication between fima and ocio was inadequate . ocio officials acknowledged that some communication problems existed and said they were aware of fima's concerns . ocio's primary concern , however , was that at times fima would perform it functions independently from ocio and believed that involving ocio would help streamline it development . for example , an ocio official said that assessing and approving a $1 million investment would require 30 to 45 days . ocio officials also said that 95 percent of fema's known systems were certified but noted that other systems , including some of fima's that affect nfip , might have been developed independently of ocio and thus lacked its approval . for example , in the past year ocio discovered five fema human resources programs that were developed without its knowledge or involvement . ocio now requires that all systems on fema's network complete the c&a process and be approved by the cio , because undocumented systems can create risks that are difficult to correct . in accordance with the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) , ocio is creating an inventory of it systems for each of fema's offices . ocio officials said that once the portfolio lists had been verified , ocio would address the backlog of pending c&as . fema also developed an acquisition review board ( arb ) to help ensure that it systems within the agency are developed with the cio's involvement , because the acquisition system requires the cio's approval at key points in the it development process .