some small agencies did not establish any goals at all . timeliness improved in fiscal year 2000 , when 11 agencies met sba's deadline . thus , no exclusions are made in practice for the wholesale supply source category . nasa's comments appear in appendix iii . we received oral comments or comments via e - mail from the departments of defense , energy , treasury , and transportation ; the general services administration ; the office of federal procurement policy ; the u.s. agency for international development ; and fpdc . the departments of defense and energy and the office of federal procurement policy concurred with our findings and had no further comments . the state department's comments appear in appendix ii . nasa concurred with our recommendations to the extent that they affect nasa as a procuring agency and noted that the agency continues to work closely with sba in establishing and exceeding its small business goals . the general services administration's office of enterprise development concurred with our findings and recommendations . the office added that , to enhance agency performance and results related to small business participation in federal procurement , it is imperative that a collaborative process , informed by reliable trend analysis , be instituted between federal agencies and sba . the administration remains committed to providing small businesses with maximum practical procurement opportunities and working with sba to implement the recommendations in the report . the department of transportation and fpdc concurred with the report's findings and offered technical comments that we have incorporated where appropriate . fpdc noted that it was unaware that the state department policy was not to report personal service contract actions . fpdc provided us with data showing that about $6.5 million had in fact been reported in fiscal year 2000 . the department of treasury had no comments on the substance of the report , but suggested the following ideas for improving the sba goaling process: ( 1 ) sba drafts a set of recommended goals for each agency based on statutory requirements , past performance , and prior goals . ( 2 ) sba sends goals to agencies for review . ( 3 ) agencies may accept goals or negotiate them based on special circumstances such as major special projects , budget , etc . the u.s. agency for international development concurred with the state department's comment about clarifying our discussion regarding contracts awarded and performed overseas . this statutory exemption is an additional reason to exclude the mint's contract actions . from fiscal year 1998 through 2000 , the excluded contracts that we could quantify accounted for about 10 percent of all federal procurement dollars . the vast majority of the exclusions are for department of defense contracts for foreign sales and contracts performed outside the united states . the excluded contract dollars are shown in table 3 . the department of state's policy is not to report its personal services contract actions to fpdc . however , according to fpdc data , some state department contracting officers did report personal services contracts , in the amount of $6.5 million in fiscal year 2000 . the department of state could not quantify the total dollar value of its personal services contract actions .