only system administrators should have these privileges . as a consequence , increased risk exists that users could perform unauthorized system activities without detection . for example , one center reported the theft of a laptop containing data subject to international traffic in arms regulations . stolen data included roughly 3,000 files of unencrypted international traffic in arms regulations data with information for hypersonic wind tunnel testing for the x - 51 scramjet project and possibly personally identifiable information . another center reported the theft of a laptop containing thermal models , review documentation , test plans , test reports , and requirements documents pertaining to nasa's lunar reconnaissance orbiter and james webb space telescope projects . the incident report does not indicate whether this lost data was unencrypted or encrypted or how the incident was resolved . significantly , these were not isolated incidents since nasa reported 209 incidents of unauthorized access to us - cert during fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . one center was alerted by the nasa soc in february 2009 about traffic associated with a seneka rootkit bot . in this case , nasa found that 82 nasa devices had been communicating with a malicious server since january 2009 . a review of the data revealed that most of these devices were communicating with a server in the ukraine . by march 2009 , three centers were also infected with the bot attack . in october 2007 , a total of 86 incidents related to the zonebac trojan were reported by nasa centers . this particular form of malware is capable of disabling security software and downloading and running other malicious software at the whim of the attacker . us - cert reported in january 2008 on nasa's ongoing problems with zonebac and other malware infestations and recommended that the agency employ consistent patching and user education practices to prevent such infections from occurring . in july 2008 , nasa found several hosts infected with the coreflood trojan that is capable of frequently updating itself and stealing a large number of user credentials that can be used to log onto other machines within a domain . investigation revealed that nasa computers were infected and communicating with a hostile command and control server . these attacks can result in damage to applications , data , or operating systems ; disclosure of sensitive information ; propagation of malware ; use of affected systems as bots ; an unavailability of systems and services ; and a waste of time , money , and labor . in response to these and other attacks , nasa has enhanced its incident response capabilities and computer defensive capabilities at nasa's centers . for example , the three centers that we reviewed had their own teams of incident responders that addressed and tracked incidents at their centers . in addition , the soc was established in 2008 to enhance prevention and provide early detection of security incidents and coordinate agency - level information related to nasa's security posture . the soc has implemented an agency hotline for security incidents and an incident management system for the coordination and tracking of agency security incidents .