we discuss these activities in our report . regarding our draft recommendation , this official indicated that dhs has provided draft agreements to safecom's federal funding partners , and added that dhs supports the need for further delineation of responsibilities and funding in future mous . until dhs reaches specific agreements with all of safecom's stakeholders , including nonfunding federal partners and state and local partners , its ability to achieve its objectives will continue to be hindered . the official also stated that dhs agrees that performance measures are essential for adequate program management , and added that safecom had developed a strategic performance management tool . however , dhs did not provide any evidence that safecom had determined the specific performance measures that will be used to assess progress against its goals , or the process for applying them . until such measures are implemented , program managers will be unable to determine the impact of their efforts . we also made technical corrections , as appropriate , in response to dhs's comments . we plan to send copies to this report to the ranking minority member , house committee on government reform ; the ranking minority member , subcommittee on technology , information policy , intergovernmental relations and the census ; and the ranking minority member , subcommittee on national security , emerging threats and international relations . in addition , we will provide copies to the secretary of homeland security and the director of omb . copies will also be available without charge on gao's web site at www.gao.gov . should you have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or john de ferrari , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6335 . we can also be reached by e - mail at koontzl@gao.gov and deferrarij@gao.gov , respectively . agile was created to coordinate interoperability research within the department of justice and with other agencies and levels of government . agile has four main activities: ( 1 ) supporting research and development , ( 2 ) testing and evaluating pilot technologies , ( 3 ) developing standards , and ( 4 ) educating end users and policymakers . with roughly 100 agencies that use radio communications in law enforcement activities , the federal government also has a need for interoperable communications , both internally among its own departments and agencies and with state and local entities . this need has grown since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , which blurred the distinctions between public safety and national security , and has placed federal entities such as the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. secret service , and the u.s. coast guard into broader public safety roles . as a result , federal public safety personnel have an increased need to be able to communicate directly with one another and with their state and local counterparts . figure 1 summarizes the challenge of achieving seamlessly interoperable communications among the many personnel and organizations responding to an emergency . in some cases , first responders have resorted to stopgap measures to overcome communications problems .