facilities . limited facilities have hampered state and local efforts to bring services together through the one - stop system . colocation of tanf services within the one - stop was not a viable option in many of the locations that we visited for a recent study . officials in several states reported that available space at one - stop centers was limited and that the centers could not house additional programs or service providers . in addition , state officials explained that long - term leases or the use of state - owned buildings often prevented tanf work programs from relocating to one - stop centers . local conditions , such as unavailability of one - stop centers in some areas and few tanf clients in other areas , may also mean that all tanf work programs are not easily colocated at one - stop centers . for example , officials in alabama reported that although welfare agencies were located in every county , one - stop centers were less prevalent in their state . they believed it was impractical to have tanf - related services colocated at one - stop centers , because one - stop centers would be inaccessible to many tanf clients . in addition , officials in illinois said that they were hesitant to coordinate the provision of work - related services for tanf clients at one - stop centers in areas where the tanf population had recently declined . because of declining tanf caseloads in illinois , state officials stressed the importance of allowing local areas the flexibility to determine how to coordinate tanf - related services with one - stop centers . information systems . the states that we visited reported that the inability to link the information systems of tanf work programs and one - stop centers complicated efforts to coordinate programs . a recent conference that we cosponsored also highlighted this issue , specifically identifying the age of information systems as inhibiting coordination efforts . the pressing need to modernize the systems stemmed from the shift in objectives under tanf — focusing more on preparing tanf clients for work than under previous welfare programs . this shift created new demands on information systems — systems that were often antiquated and limited in the ability to use new technologies , such as web - based technologies . in addition , the systems used by agencies providing services to tanf clients did not provide for sharing client data , thus hindering the case management of clients . some of these concerns were also raised during site visits and telephone interviews for our recent study . some local officials said that they could not merge or share data and were not equipped to collect information on clients in different programs . tanf clients are often tracked separately from clients of other programs , and even labor's system , the one - stop operating system ( osos ) , does not allow one - stop centers to include any programs outside of labor's programs , including tanf . in addition , other officials expressed concerns that sharing data across programs would violate confidentiality restrictions .