pub . 110-293 , 122 stat . support care for 12 million people infected with or affected by hiv / aids , including 5 million orphans and vulnerable children affected by hiv / aids . since then , congress has continued to monitor progress towards the updated goals . for example , in september 2010 , the house committee on foreign affairs held another hearing assessing pepfar's progress and challenges in addressing the global hiv / aids pandemic . in addition , reviewing various aspects of pepfar — we have issued several reports such as the selection and oversight of organizations implementing pepfar activities and global hiv / aids program monitoring — in response to directives contained in the 2008 leadership act and the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 . finally , members of congress , congressional committees , and staff can assess whether existing strategies are the most efficient and effective means for agencies to meet their goals . analyzing existing performance information can help identify new strategies that could lead to improved results . as the case study on addressing improper payments shows , when it is clear that agencies are not meeting performance expectations , congress has provided agencies with additional authorities and required alternate approaches to achieve results . occur . since fiscal year 2000 , we have issued a number of reports and testimonies , at the request of congress , aimed at raising the level of attention and corrective actions surrounding improper payments . our work has highlighted long - standing , widespread , and significant problems with improper payments across the federal government . for example , we reported in 2000 that the full extent of improper payments governmentwide remained largely unknown , hampering efforts to reduce such payments since many agencies did not attempt to identify or estimate improper payments while others only did so for certain programs . to help address these issues , congress passed the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) , which requires executive branch agencies to ( 1 ) identify programs and activities susceptible to significant improper payments , ( 2 ) estimate the amount of improper payments for those programs and activities , and ( 3 ) report these estimates along with actions taken to reduce improper payments for programs with estimates that exceed $10 million . implementation to date.rose substantially from 2004 to 2008 , the first 5 fiscal years of ipia implementation , we reported that this was a positive step in improving transparency over the full magnitude of the federal government's improper payments as more agencies and more programs reported estimates over time ( see figure 1 ) . in addition , of the 35 agency programs that reported estimates in each of the 5 fiscal years , 24 of them ( or about 69 percent ) reported reduced error rates when comparing 2008 rates to those in 2004 .