selecting appropriate suppression strategies . the agencies have also begun to improve analytic tools that assist land and fire managers identify the appropriate suppression strategy for a given fire , but shortcomings remain . federal policies encourage the use of less intensive suppression strategies when possible , strategies that may also be less costly . land and fire managers , however , may be reluctant to employ anything less than full suppression because of concerns that a fire will escape control . currently , much of the information managers use to estimate potential fire size , risks , and costs are based on their individual experiences , which can vary widely . researchers are developing a new suite of tools that will analyze fuel conditions and predicted weather conditions to model expected fire growth and behavior and provide better information for managers making fire response decisions , but as of january 2007 , these new tools were still being developed and tested . managing cost - containment efforts . the steps the agencies have taken to date to contain wildland fire costs lack several key elements fundamental to sound program management , such as clearly defining cost - containment goals , developing a strategy for achieving those goals , and measuring progress toward achieving them . first , the agencies have not clearly articulated the goals of their cost - containment efforts . fpa is being designed in two phases . for example , the agencies have established the goal of suppressing wildland fires at minimum cost , considering firefighter and public safety and values being protected , but they have not defined criteria by which these often - competing objectives are to be weighed . phase i was intended to provide information for use in allocating resources for the initial responses to fires and in developing estimates for agencies' fiscal year 2008 budgets . phase ii was to be focused on additional activities , including fuel reduction and large - fire suppression . a “midcourse review” of fpa , completed in 2006 , however , has resulted in recent endorsement by the wildland fire leadership council of what may be significant design modifications to fpa — ones that may not fulfill key project goals of ( 1 ) optimizing how resources are allocated , ( 2 ) linking fuel reduction to future preparedness and suppression costs , ( 3 ) ensuring comparability among different agencies' analyses and resulting decisions , and ( 4 ) enabling aggregation of local costs to identify national options and related budgets . agencies plan to have a prototype of phase ii , reflecting this design modification , completed by june 2007 . according to a program official , the prototype will enable project managers to assess and report to the leadership council on the planned scope , schedule , and cost of fpa , including whether or not they will meet the scheduled completion date of june 2008 . further , gaps in the data collected for fpa may also reduce its usefulness in allocating resources .