chicago . this delay caused slippages in the completion of other long - term chief of naval operations projects because employees originally scheduled to work on succeeding projects were still committed to the u.s.s . chicago . in addition , since the consolidation , chief of naval operations projects must compete for workers with other pacific fleet maintenance priorities in hawaii . short - term fleet maintenance projects and emergent repairs are given a higher priority in staffing decisions than longer , more complex maintenance projects . approximately 25 percent of the consolidated facility's workload involve short - term fleet maintenance projects or emergent repairs to operational surface ships and submarines . prior to the consolidation , chief of naval operations projects were completed by the former pearl harbor shipyard and did not compete for workers with short - term fleet maintenance projects or emergent repairs , because they were performed by the former intermediate maintenance facility's workforce . according to pearl harbor officials , they are trying to improve their performance on long - term chief of naval operations projects through better resource allocation procedures , process improvements , and resource sharing with other naval shipyards and , consequently , have reduced the time frame to complete recent long - term projects for the u.s.s . key west and the u.s.s . pasadena . although the data for this metric show a slight degradation in rework quality from 0.76 percent in fiscal year 1997 to 1.08 percent in fiscal year 1999 , these results are inconclusive because the quality of work did not deteriorate significantly as a result of the consolidation . according to the navy , the purpose of this metric was to ensure that depot - level work completed by the consolidated facility did not deteriorate from the former shipyard's historical level of work quality . in its comments on a draft of this report , dod stated that “successful performance” is indicated when there is no change in value of the metric between fiscal years . according to the navy's contractors , no specific conclusions can be drawn from comparing fiscal year 1997 and fiscal year 1999 rework indexes because the change in the overall performance was insignificant . the navy has not yet generated the rework figures for fiscal year 2000 . although data for this metric indicate a slight improvement in performance , overall results are inconclusive because the data ( 1 ) indicated both positive and negative results depending on the type of maintenance work and ( 2 ) depended significantly on the reliability of time ( labor hours ) estimated to complete the work . the stated objective of this metric is to measure the consolidated facility's schedule integrity by comparing budgeted work scheduled ( labor hours ) with the actual amount of work performed ( labor hours ) . the index decreased from 1.23 in fiscal year 1997 to 1.16 in fiscal year 1999 , indicating a slight improvement in overall performance following the consolidation in fiscal year 1999 . additionally , the fiscal year 1999 data indicated improvement in two of the three types of maintenance projects analyzed .