we found that these requirements are not being met . only the air force visits the command prior to developing total munitions requirements to support purchasing decisions . the other services do not coordinate with the command prior to generating munitions requirements . further , u.s . forces , korea , officials told us that they do not have the opportunity to review the service - generated munitions requirements prior to purchasing decisions and have no input to what munitions will be prepositioned or where those munitions will be located . while officials in the office of the secretary of defense and joint staff expressed skepticism about the way u.s . forces , korea , had developed their munitions requirements , they agreed that the proper coordination was not occurring . as a result , the needed linkage between the combatant command's needs and the munitions purchases made by the services continues to be inadequate and raises questions as to whether combatant commands will have what they need should a conflict arise . we also found that the army and air force lack reliable information on the inventory fill and maintenance condition for some prepositioned stocks . the lack of reliable inventory information may provide program managers with an unrealistic view on the preparedness of these programs . army officials told us that its information management system does not provide reliable information on the inventory levels and maintenance condition of its operational projects and sustainment stocks . army managers told us that this lack of inventory visibility has persisted for many years , and sometimes the only way to get reliable information is to contact the storage site directly . as recently as february 2005 , the army reported in the unclassified inventory information that it extracts from its main readiness reporting system that a high percentage of the combat brigade set prepositioned in south korea was fully mission capable . however , in an october 2004 army assessment , inspectors had found that a high percentage of the equipment reviewed was not mission capable . air force officials also told us that they do not have adequate information available to assess the overall readiness of their prepositioned stocks . while this information is decentralized and available in some cases to base and component commanders , information on inventory levels and maintenance condition is not available to air force managers overseeing the war reserve materiel program . dod partially or fully concurred with our recommendations . however , in its response , dod disagreed with the implementation of two of our recommendations because it had already taken actions to address them . in subsequent discussions with dod , officials indicated that this disagreement was not related to the substance of our recommendations . in fact , the department has already initiated several actions to address our recommendations including conducting an assessment of risk , improving requirements and inventory visibility , and conducting a departmental assessment on future prepositioning . further , dod agreed that oversight policy as discussed in its directive does not reflect appropriate oversight roles and responsibilities . to address this issue , dod plans to clarify policy and roles and responsibilities for oversight .