we recognize this concern . our report states that shapiro's work did not measure the value of the monopolies as the reduction in usps's net revenues if they were to be eliminated , but rather focuses on other financial implications of the mailbox monopoly . we further state that the shapiro work is not comparable to that conducted by prc . regarding our summary of selected laws that apply differently to usps and its competitors , usps found it to be relatively thorough , but offered a series of technical comments and suggested additional laws that could be added to the summary . we incorporated technical comments to this section , as appropriate . what are the financial effects of laws that apply differently to usps and its private competitors on both usps and its private competitors ? as these questions demonstrate , a study's objectives can become increasingly complex , requiring more and varied sources of information . defining the scope of any study is critical because , according to the government auditing standards , the scope defines aspects of the subject matter to be studied and other key data collection considerations — such as the period of time reviewed and the type of data to be collected , among other things . scoping considerations for this type of study would include , for example: ( 1 ) which laws to include , ( 2 ) whether to include data already studied or collect new data , ( 3 ) how to address the difficulty in quantifying some effects , and ( 4 ) how to handle differing stakeholder views on scope . many laws apply differently to usps than to its competitors many laws apply differently to usps and its competitors ( see table 2 ) . ftc found that some laws have positive financial effects on usps , while others have negative financial effects . these laws also affect private competitors ; for example , usps's letter and mailbox monopolies limit the types of items competitors can deliver and where they can leave items . the number and type of laws to be included in such a study would affect its approach and eventual results . for example , significant time and resources would be required for a study to estimate the financial effects for all laws that apply differently to usps and its competitors — as well as the net effect of these legal differences . if results were needed more immediately — or if financial resources were limited — decisions would need to be made to narrow the scope . the analysis of what laws to include and their impact on usps's operations is further complicated because while some laws appear to provide usps with financial advantages , whether or not they actually do may depend on how they are interpreted and applied in practice . for example , ftc's 2007 report stated that , although some jurisdictions refrain from ticketing its vehicles , usps has agreed to pay parking fines in other jurisdictions ; it is unclear whether usps vehicles are exempt from being ticketed . in another area , the ftc report found that usps benefits from “disparate customs treatment,” but did not offer explanation for the reasoning behind this finding .