, 5 percent report ) . formulas in the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) govern the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) apportionments to states for the highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) . fhwa bases its hsip apportionments initially on the amounts authorized by safetea - lu for the program and the related apportionment factors . fhwa then applies other adjustments based on factors not related to safety . first , safetea - lu added a requirement that fhwa apportion hsip funds to individual states based on three equally weighted factors: ( 1 ) lane miles of federal - aid highways in each state , ( 2 ) total vehicle miles traveled on federal - aid highways in each state , and ( 3 ) number of fatalities on the federal - aid system in each state . fhwa then adjusts the hsip apportionment for other factors identified in safetea - lu and other laws related to federal appropriations in general . adjustments made because of safetea - lu provisions include the equity bonus program ; the state planning and research set - aside ; and , as applicable , revenue - aligned budget authority . other laws include rescissions due to appropriations acts . the equity bonus program , authorized by safetea - lu , creates the largest adjustment that fhwa makes to state hsip apportionments . the equity bonus program provides funding to states based on equity criteria , such as a minimum return on contributions to the highway trust fund . because of the equity bonus program , fhwa increased states' hsip apportionments by $281 million in fiscal year 2006 , $281 million in fiscal year 2007 , and $301 million in fiscal year 2008 . it added 23.6 percent to the amount safetea - lu authorized for hsip in fiscal year 2008 . see appendix i for details of our scope and methodology . during 2006 , about 43,000 traffic fatalities occurred on the nation's roads and 290,000 people were seriously injured . overall , the number of fatalities has remained fairly constant over the last decade , although the fatality rate declined by about 17 percent , from 1.69 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles traveled in 1996 to 1.41 in 2006 . dot has a goal of lowering the fatality rate to 1.0 per 100 million vehicle miles traveled by 2011 . through safetea - lu , congress increased funding for hsip with the goal of significantly reducing traffic fatalities and serious injuries on all public roads . hsip's funding authorizations , which totaled $5.1 billion for fiscal years 2006 through 2009 , nearly doubled from pre - safetea - lu levels . safetea - lu authorized funding for three major highway safety programs , as follows ( see fig . 1 ) : over $950 million per year , on average , for the long - standing hsip safety construction program , which funds safety infrastructure projects — such as intersection improvements and other safety enhancements — on any public road .