measurement readiness . the coast guard is developing a tool to track the agency's readiness capabilities with up - to - date information on resource levels at each coast guard unit as well as the certification and skills of all coast guard uniformed personnel . framework for analyzing risk , readiness , and performance . the coast guard is developing a model for examining the links among risk , readiness management , and agency performance . this model is intended to help the coast guard better understand why events and outcomes occur , and how these events and outcomes are related to resources . while the coast guard appears to be moving in the right direction and is about done with some of these efforts , it remains too soon to determine how effective the coast guard's larger efforts will be at clearly linking resources to performance results . these initiatives are not expected to be fully implemented until 2010 . the 2008 budget request reflects a multiyear effort to reorganize the coast guard's command and control and mission support structures . three efforts are of note here — reorganizing shore - based forces into sector commands , placing all deployable specialized forces under a single nationwide command , and consolidating acquisitions management programs . each of these efforts faces challenges that merit close attention . as we reported for the last 2 years , the coast guard has implemented a new field command structure that is designed to unify previously disparate coast guard units , such as air stations and marine safety offices , into 35 different integrated commands , called sectors . at each of these sectors , the coast guard has placed management and operational control of these units and their associated resources under the same commanding officer . coast guard officials told us that this change helped their planning and resource allocation efforts . for instance , coast guard field officials told us the sector command structure has been valuable in helping to meet new homeland security responsibilities , and in facilitating their ability to manage incidents in close coordination with other federal , state , and local agencies . our follow - up work found , however , that work remains to ensure the coast guard is able to maximize the potential benefits of sector realignment . in particular , coast guard officials reported that some sectors had yet to colocate their vessel tracking system ( vts ) centers with the rest of their operational command centers . according to field officials , the lack of colocation has hindered communications between staff that formerly were from different parts of the agency . according to coast guard officials , competing acquisition priorities are limiting the progress in obtaining funding needed to colocate these facilities . the fiscal year 2008 budget does not provide funds to colocate the vts centers and command centers . coast guard headquarters officials told us they would work to address this challenge as part of the capital investment plan to build interagency operational centers for port security , as required under the safe port act , but they had not yet developed specific plans , timelines , and cost estimates .