postal service . while ntia and its contractors have demonstrated the capacity to process and issue large numbers of coupon requests over short periods , they have yet to establish specific plans to manage a potential spike or a sustained increase in demand leading up to the transition . we analyzed data to compare areas of the country that comprise predominantly minority and elderly populations with the rest of the u.s. population and found some differences in the coupon request , redemption , and expiration rates for hispanic , black , and senior households compared with the rest of the u.s. population . for example , zip codes with a high concentration of latino or hispanic households had noticeably higher request rates ( 20 percent ) compared with non - latino or non - hispanic zip codes ( 8 percent ) . however , households in predominantly black and latino or hispanic zip codes were less likely , compared with households outside these areas , to redeem their coupons once they received them . as shown in table 2 , the overall rate of redemption for the converter box subsidy program is 28 percent , but only 19 percent of coupons have been redeemed in predominantly latino or hispanic areas . in predominantly black areas , 22 percent of coupons have been redeemed . furthermore , we found that in areas of the country with a high concentration of seniors , fewer coupons were requested ( 7 percent ) compared with areas of the country that did not have a high concentration of seniors ( 9 percent ) . redemption rates for the senior population were similar to the redemption rates in the rest of the country . regarding coupon expirations , we found a wide variance between minority and senior populations compared with the population as a whole . for example , the areas comprising latino or hispanic households only allowed 4 percent of their coupons to expire , while areas with predominantly senior populations allowed 21 percent of their coupons to expire . the higher coupon request rates for latino or hispanic households compared with the non - latino or non - hispanic areas might be due to the consumer education efforts of the spanish speaking broadcasters . an advocacy group representing hispanics told us that the outreach efforts of spanish speaking broadcasters , such as univision , telemundo , and azteca america , have been effective in educating their viewers on the dtv transition . while the advocacy group had high praise for these broadcasters , it and another advocacy group representing minority populations that we contacted expressed concerns about certain aspects of the consumer education and outreach efforts by federal and private sector stakeholders . specifically , these groups expressed concerns about the lack of funding for outreach to targeted vulnerable populations , the possibility of misinformation being provided by retailers to consumers , a lack of technical assistance to the targeted populations ( such as assisting the elderly with connecting the converter boxes to their televisions ) , and the absence of rapid response planning to assist the targeted populations if funds for the converter box subsidy run out .