pub . 111-216 , 124 stat . management systems ( sms ) . this risk - based oversight approach is becoming the standard throughout the global aviation industry and is recognized by aviation leaders , such as the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , as the next step in the evolution of safety . in addition to sms , faa's certification process attempts to ensure that safety is built into the aircraft and equipment used in the nas.agency has taken steps to improve its oversight approach , challenges remain in key areas . my statement today highlights two areas that are important to faa's safety efforts: the certification process and the collection and analysis of risk - based data as part of sms . this statement is drawn from a body of work that we have completed from june 2009 to october 2012 regarding faa's safety oversight efforts . we have updated this information through a review of faa documents and interviews with faa officials . a list of related gao products is included at the end of this statement , along with footnoted references to these products throughout the statement . the reports and testimonies cited in this statement contain more detailed explanations of the methods used to conduct our work . this body of work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . among its responsibilities for aviation safety , faa issues certificates that approve the design and production of new aircraft and equipment before they are introduced into service ; these certificates demonstrate that the aircraft and equipment meet faa's airworthiness requirements . faa also grants approvals for such things as changes to air operations and equipment . certificates indicate that the aircraft , equipment , and new air operators are safe for use or flight in the nas . while industry stakeholders have expressed concerns about variation in faa's interpretation of standards for certification and approval decisions , stakeholders and experts that we interviewed for our 2010 report indicated that serious problems occur infrequently . in addition , in september 2011 we reported that faa did a good job following its certification processes in assessing the composite fuselage and wings of boeing's 787 against its airworthiness standards . the certification process also provides an example of how faa is attempting to use a more proactive approach in finding solutions to a potential problem . in the case of flammability regulations that govern transport type aircraft , faa has primarily developed its regulations on a reactive basis . that is , as accidents and incidents have occurred , their causes have been investigated , and the findings used to develop regulations designed to prevent the future occurrence of similar incidents or accidents .