we disagree . our questionnaire explicitly asked city emergency managers to consider response assistance from surrounding jurisdictions in their assessment of response abilities , and only exclude federal assistance . in this way , we were able to isolate the perceived need for federal support , which we found for technical and resource assistance , improved procedures and information , and funding . further , emergency managers did not provide trend information through their questionnaire responses on assessing rdd and ind risks , and cities more often separated the assessment of rdd and ind risks than combined them as dhs indicated in its comment letter . in addition , we took a number of steps to develop the questionnaire and to identify the best source for a response . for example , we conducted extensive pretesting and obtained comments on a draft questionnaire from officials at fema's national preparedness assessment division . we also determined that city emergency managers were in the best position to provide a city - wide perspective on this issue , but we allowed them to seek advice from other city officials as necessary . in its comment letter , dhs stated that neither the department nor fema believes that our recommendation that fema develop additional guidance in a single document to clarify the capabilities needed by cities for these attacks , including the planning assumptions for an rdd attack and addressing the type and timing of federal assistance for early response takes into sufficient account advances made to the preparedness system . in addition , the comment letter states that fema program officials and subject matter experts believe the recommendation does not align with our survey results or all - hazard risk management for worst case catastrophic scenarios . it also states that fema has concerns with the report's characterization of the nation's ability to respond to a nuclear and / or radiological attack . furthermore , the letter states that additional rdd response guidance in a single document would be counterproductive to the existing planning and guidance structure for ind and all hazards incidents . as we note in the report , fema is already considering development of a nuclear and radiological incident annex to the fiops for the response and recovery mission areas based on the recognition that the all hazards approach may be insufficient to cover the unique response needs for nuclear and radiological incidents . while our recommendation did not specify how fema should provide this additional guidance , we have added language to the recommendation to clarify that that we are not recommending a single guidance document to cover only rdd response . in addition , to address the dhs / fema concern that city emergency managers may not be fully informed about available guidance , we added language to the recommendation for fema to promote greater awareness of existing federal guidance . more generally , dhs' comment letter states that fema officials do not believe we provided adequate context for the national preparedness system as defined by presidential policy directive 8 , which may cause confusion for cold readers not familiar with how the directive has been implemented .