( see fig . the total number of facilities scheduled to receive stars has fluctuated between 70 and 190 because some of the facilities have received interim systems and may not get full stars . faa is designing stars to provide a platform that allows easy and rapid incorporation of new hardware - and software - based tools to help improve controllers' productivity and make the nation's airspace safer and managed more efficiently . what has been the impact of changes in the schedule for deploying stars ? you also asked how our analysis of the cost and schedule for stars compares with faa's and the dot ig's analyses . we did not perform an independent analysis of the cost and schedule of stars , in part because of time constraints and in part because faa is reassessing its plans for modernizing the equipment in terminal facilities . specifically , faa is exploring how it can reduce its future stars costs by using portions of equipment developed for stars with other automated equipment that it recently deployed to around 140 facilities . faa officials indicated that they hope to have information in early spring 2003 for making a decision about the future direction of the stars project . our work covers faa's efforts to develop and deploy stars ; we did not review similar efforts by dod . to conduct this work , we reviewed faa biweekly status reports , deployment schedules , and test results ; and we interviewed officials from faa's program and independent testing offices , the mitre corporation , the dot ig , and union officials representing the air traffic controller and maintenance technician workforces . we did not independently verify cost and performance data that we received from faa and did not adjust the costs that faa and others have reported to reflect the effects of inflation . we performed our work in august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . stars will replace controller workstations with new color displays , processors , and computer software at faa and dod terminal air traffic control facilities . for each acquisition project that the agency undertakes , faa officially estimates , or develops baselines for , the project's life - cycle costs , schedule , benefits , and performance in a formal document called the acquisition program baseline . this baseline , which is approved by the joint resources council , faa's acquisition decision - making body , is used to monitor a project's progress in these four areas . the initial acquisition plan for stars was approved in march 1996 ; and in september 1996 , faa signed a contract with raytheon corporation to acquire stars . the initial strategy for stars included two phases: ( 1 ) initial system capability , which was to provide the same functions as the equipment in use at the time and ( 2 ) final system capability , which was to implement new functions to help controllers move traffic more safely and efficiently . faa's acquisition policy requires that projects follow a structured and disciplined test and evaluation process appropriate to the product or facility being tested . typically , this process includes system testing and field familiarization testing .