see pub . we have issued several reports in the past few years on defense headquarters and on the department's ability to determine the right number of personnel needed to perform headquarters functions . for example , in may 2013 we found that authorized military and civilian positions at the geographic combatant commands — excluding u.s. central command — had increased by about 50 percent from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2012 . we also found that dod's process for sizing its combatant commands had several weaknesses , including the absence of a comprehensive , periodic review of the existing size and structure of these commands and inconsistent use of personnel - management systems to identify and track assigned personnel . dod concurred with our recommendation that it improve its visibility over its headquarters personnel , but did not concur with our recommendation that it conduct comprehensive and periodic reviews of the combatant commands' existing size , as we discuss later in this report . we are following up with dod about its actions in response to our recommendations . in addition , in march 2012 , we found that dod did not have complete and reliable headquarters information available for use in making efficiency assessments and decisions . the functional combatant commands and their service component commands for fiscal years 2001 through 2013 , and ( 2 ) evaluates the extent to which dod's directed reductions to headquarters , like the functional combatant commands and supporting service component commands , could result in cost savings for the department . see h. rep. no . 113-102 ( june 7 , 2013 ) accompanying h.r . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . further details on our scope and methodology may be found in appendix i . dod's unified command plan sets forth basic guidance to all combatant commanders and establishes the missions , responsibilities , and areas of geographic responsibility among all the combatant commands . there are currently nine combatant commands — six geographic and three functional . the six geographic combatant commands have responsibilities for accomplishing military operations in defined areas of operation and have a distinct regional military focus . the three functional combatant commands operate worldwide across geographic boundaries and provide unique capabilities to the geographic combatant commands and the military services . in addition , each combatant command is supported by multiple service component commands that help provide and coordinate service - specific forces , such as units , detachments , organizations , and installations , to help fulfill the combatant commands' current and future operational requirements . figure 1 is a map of the headquarters locations of the functional combatant commands , to include their subordinate unified commands and their respective service component commands . unless otherwise directed by the president or the secretary of defense , the combatant commanders organize the structure of their commands as they deem necessary to carry out assigned missions .