participant data . data on individual participants that the ata program collects and maintains in its electronic participant data system are also incomplete . as noted above , data in ata's participant data system account for only about 25,000 , or less than half of the 56,000 participants ata reported to have trained in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 . in addition , some individual electronic participant records do not contain complete information for all elements that the system is designed to capture . for instance , while ata policy instructs officials to collect participant unit affiliations , we found that 15 percent of the approximately 25,000 participant records that ata provided to us did not include information on each participant's current assigned unit . in addition to our concerns of completeness , we found that elements of the participant records included in the electronic data were not always accurate . for example , some participant records included course dates that did not align either with course dates identified in ata's course data or provided to us directly by the contractors who delivered the training . facility visits . state officials visit the training facilities used by ata to review security and other aspects of training delivery . for example , following the award of the gata contract , ata subject matter experts conducted a survey of o'gara's training facility , which included an examination of whether the facility had secure storage and firing ranges . officials said that they did not conduct a similar survey of the academi training facility at the time the gata contract was awarded because it had been previously certified under a prior ata training contract . state and contractor officials said that ata program managers who visit training facilities during course delivery also review the sites to ensure that they are in compliance with contract requirements . frequent interactions . state and prime contractor officials told us that they meet weekly to discuss operational and planning issues . officials noted that there is no set agenda for these meetings because the topics are driven by events , and all issues are open for discussion . contractors that manage ata's domestic training have taken a variety of required and voluntary steps to ensure security at the tactical training facilities . state officials said that it is the responsibility of the prime contractors to ensure that the training facility subcontractors have the necessary federal , state , and local permits for the storage of weapons , ammunition , and explosives . both facilities we visited — o'gara and academi — had relevant , unexpired licenses . for example , they had atf licenses for transporting , storing , and possessing explosives . in addition to taking steps to meet the gata contract requirements , both training facilities we visited have taken voluntary actions related to facility security . atf suggests security measures including installing fences , security cameras , and locked gates to increase security ; however , the measures are not atf licensing requirements .