this community of federal stakeholders is known as the nbis . the nbis community predated the enactment of the 9 / 11 commission act . beginning in 2004 , dhs managed the nbis and developed an it system to manage other agencies' biosurveillance information , an effort that was moved among several dhs directorates , including dhs's science and technology directorate and the preparedness directorate . in 2007 , dhs created the office of health affairs , headed by the dhs chief medical officer , to lead dhs's biodefense activities and provide timely incident - specific management guidance for the medical consequences of disasters . at that time , dhs placed nbis in the office of health affairs . shortly after that , the 9 / 11 commission act created nbic and gave it responsibility for managing the nbis , which has remained in the office of health affairs . since fiscal year 2008 , nbic has operated with an annual budget of $8 million dollars . biosurveillance activities at nbic are carried out by its operations division , which is headed by the deputy director and chief scientist and supported by 10 contract employees that serve as the analytic core for nbic's daily operations . these staff members have various backgrounds related to biodefense , including public health , veterinary , environmental , and intelligence training . as shown in table 1 , the 9 / 11 commission act outlines certain requirements for nbic and nbis member agencies , and most of these relate to how nbic is to coordinate nbis member agency data and information management resources . generally , there are four elements that are critical for nbic to achieve its early detection and situational awareness missions established in the 9 / 11 commission act: ( 1 ) acquire data from nbis partners that can be analyzed for indications of new or ongoing biological events , ( 2 ) leverage scientific and event - specific expertise from across the nbis , ( 3 ) obtain strategic and operational guidance from nbis partners , and ( 4 ) develop and maintain information technologies to support data collection , analysis , and communication . although the act does not specify any member agency that must participate in the nbis , it defines a member agency as any agency that signifies agreement to participate by signing a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) and establishes for them specific requirements — generally related to sharing information and human assets . for example , as shown in table 1 , the act provides that each member agency shall use its best efforts to integrate biosurveillance information into the nbic , with the goal of promoting information sharing between federal , state , local , and tribal governments to detect biological events of national concern . among the recommendations in the after - action memo was for nbic to work internally with the appropriate dhs parties , including the noc , to write protocols defining the nbic role inside dhs . according to nbic officials , they have followed up on this recommendation , by among other things , exploring it through the niwg . additionally , nbic , the noc , and other stakeholders have initiated discussions about how to develop appropriate protocols .