this role , however , is not new . for example , the agency has well - established relationships with 85 percent of the nation's medical schools . according to va , more than half of the nation's medical students and a third of all medical residents receive some of their training at va facilities . in addition , more than 40 other types of health care professionals , including specialists in medical toxicology and occupational and environmental medicine , receive training at va facilities every year . in recent years , va expanded physician training slots in disciplines associated with wmd preparedness . va maintains the agency's relocation site and necessary communication facilities to continue functioning during a major national emergency . in addition to these functions , va plays a key support role in the nation's stockpiling of pharmaceuticals and medical supplies in the event of large - scale disasters caused by weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) . these stockpiles are critical to the federal assistance provided to state and local governments should they be overwhelmed by terrorist attack . under a memorandum of agreement between va and hhs' office of emergency preparedness ( oep ) , va maintains at designated locations medical stockpiles containing antidotes , antibiotics , and medical supplies and smaller stockpiles containing antidotes , which can be loaned to local governments or predeployed for special events , such as the olympic games . in fiscal year 2001 , oep reimbursed va $1.2 million for the purchase , storage , and maintenance of the pharmaceutical stockpiles . va also maintains stockpiles of pharmaceuticals for another hhs agency , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . under contract with cdc , va purchases drugs and other medical items and manages a spectrum of contracts for the storage , rotation , security , and transportation of stockpiled items . va maintains the inventory of pharmaceutical and medical supplies called “12-hour push packages,” which can be delivered to any location in the nation within 12 hours of a federal decision to deploy them . in 1984 , va , dod , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) created a federal partnership to administer and oversee ndms , which is a joint effort between the federal and private sectors to provide backup to civilian health care in the event of disasters producing mass casualties . the system divides the country into 72 areas selected for their concentration of hospitals and proximity to airports . va has significant capabilities related to its four health care missions that have potential applicability for the purpose of homeland security . at the same time , it is clear that some of these capabilities would need to be strengthened . how best to employ and enhance this potential will be determined as part of a larger effort currently underway to develop a national homeland security strategy . as the comptroller general recently noted , this broad strategy will require partnership with the congress , the executive branch , state and local governments , and the private sector to minimize confusion , duplication of effort , and ineffective alignment of resources with strategic goals .