these and other problems are now resolved . however , the delays increased the system's cost from an original estimate of less than $30 million to over $85 million , as of september 2000 . in january 2001 , kaiser - hill estimated that the system would start operating in march 2001 , but the system had not yet completed operational readiness testing , and ongoing problems may further delay startup . one ongoing problem is that in august 2000 , doe directed kaiser - hill to ensure that it could meet the plutonium stabilization and packaging requirements issued at that time by the savannah river site , where rocky flats' packaged plutonium will be sent for storage , pending its ultimate disposition . these requirements , for plutonium to be stored at savannah river , include developing and implementing a plan for testing the container welds and meeting criteria for monitoring and blending the plutonium . kaiser - hill concluded that the additional tasks required would increase the cost and delay the start of the plutonium stabilization and packaging system . however , there is some debate between doe and the contractor about whether these requirements are in addition to those that were included under the closure contract . if it is determined that kaiser - hill was directed to meet requirements in addition to those in the contract , kaiser - hill could request an equitable adjustment to the contract . once the system begins operations , it is not clear if it can sustain the necessary production rate to allow the site's closure by the target date . according to doe officials , to complete the plutonium packaging on time before delays compressed the schedule , the system needed to operate only about 10 percent of the time . under its compressed schedule , though , the system must operate over 70 percent of the time . in effect , under the compressed schedule , the packaging portion of the system will have to produce eight containers a day — one container for every 2 hours of operation . although kaiser - hill officials believe that this production rate is within the system's capability , no empirical evidence supports this view.if the system cannot meet its expected production rate , many other cleanup activities will be delayed because they cannot begin until the completion of the system's activities . because of continuing concerns about the viability of the system , kaiser - hill is studying alternatives for packaging the site's plutonium ; the study had not been completed at the time of our review . thus , it is unclear whether a viable alternative exists and could be installed in time to complete plutonium - packaging operations as scheduled by may 2002 . removing the transuranic wastes is one of the most difficult obstacles to the site's closure because of the large quantity of wastes and the complex challenges they present . kaiser - hill must ship a total volume of transuranic waste comparable to over 80,000 drums ( 55 gallons each ) , or more than 2,000 truckloads .