interoperable communications is not an end in itself . rather , it is a necessary means for achieving an important goal — the ability to respond effectively to and mitigate incidents that require the coordinated actions of first responders , such as multi - vehicle accidents , natural disasters , or terrorist attacks . public safety officials have pointed out that needed interoperable communications capabilities are based on whether communications are needed for ( 1 ) “mutual - aid responses” or routine day - to - day coordination between two local agencies ; ( 2 ) extended task force operations involving members of different agencies coming together to work on a common problem , such as the 2002 sniper attacks in the washington , d.c. metropolitan area ; or ( 3 ) a major event that requires response from a variety of local , state , and federal agencies , such as major wildfires , hurricanes , or the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . a california state official with long experience in public safety communications breaks the major event category into three separate types of events: ( 1 ) planned events , such as the olympics , for which plans can be made in advance ; ( 2 ) recurring events , such as major wildfires and other weather events , that can be expected every year and for which contingency plans can be prepared based on past experience ; and ( 3 ) unplanned events , such as the september 11th attacks , that can rapidly overwhelm the ability of local forces to handle the problem . interoperable communications are but one component , although a key one , of an effective incident command planning and operations structure . as shown in figure 1 , determining the most appropriate means of achieving interoperable communications must flow from an comprehensive incident command and operations plan that includes developing an operational definition of who is in charge for different types of events and what types of information would need to be communicated ( voice , data , or both ) to whom under what circumstances . another technical factor inhibiting interoperability is the different technologies or different applications of the same technology by manufacturers of public safety radio equipment . without planning , coordination , and applicable standards — in other words , without a commonly understood and accepted blueprint or national architecture — the communications systems developed between and among locations and levels of government may not be interoperable . safecom officials also said that they have no enforcement authority to require other agencies to use the safecom grant guidance in their funding decisions or to require agencies to provide grant program information to them for use in their database . states , with broad input from local governments , can serve as focal points for statewide planning to improve interoperable communications . the fcc has recognized the important role of states .