we disagree . in fact , we explicitly acknowledged that future productivity numbers may not be comparable to those achieved under the old process because of the nprc's plan to handle cases completely and correctly the first time they are received . this approach may take longer than the previous system , but , to the extent that it reduces duplicate requests and other rework , it would ultimately improve timeliness . nara also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . nara stated that the nprc backlog is not a factor in the timeliness of the veterans benefits administration's ( vba's ) servicing of disability compensation claims . however , our previous work on vba's process shows that nprc is an external source from which vba often needs documentation . to expedite obtaining this information , vba established its own unit at the nprc in 1999 . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the honorable john carlin , archivist of the united states ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512- 7101 or irene chu , assistant director , on ( 202 ) 512-7102 . other key contributors were martin scire , bob sampson , and patrick di battista . request processing was manual and labor intensive . only recently has the nprc begun to make computers and other technology available to its staff that processes requests . even telephones were not installed on employees' desks until february 2000 . the pre - reengineering philosophy was that having telephones on the desks of all technicians might reduce productivity . as a result of not having telephones on their desks , technicians generally did not contact requesters to obtain additional information to assist them in locating the requested military service record or to clarify an unclear request . in the past , requests that were unclear and could not be clarified were returned to the requester . for requests that were clear , staff located the appropriate cardboard box , pulled the record , processed the request , and later returned the record . for each request , staff created a reply using forms with preprinted responses that could be checked off . the forms were handwritten and sent out with the relevant record copies . nprc was organized by branches of service — the army , navy and air force — and each branch processed its own records . technicians were assigned work based on the level of difficulty of the tasks required to fulfill the requests . these tasks could range from simply photocopying a form to formulating complex correspondence . more complex cases were assigned to higher pay grade employees . however , the division of workload among branches and pay grades made it difficult to respond to fluctuations in workload and affected timeliness and customer service , according to nprc officials .