vii. ) however , recent reviews of these internal controls done by nrcs's oversight and evaluation ( o&e ) staff and the usda inspector general raise concerns regarding the adequacy of some of these controls to preclude improper payments being made under csp . in general , these other programs ( 1 ) help farmers and ranchers address existing environmental problems by paying for a portion of the cost of needed conservation practices or structures ; ( 2 ) keep land in farming or grazing by purchasing rights to part of the land , such as development rights through easements ; or ( 3 ) idle or retire environmentally sensitive land , such as highly erodible land or wetlands , from production . in contrast , csp is focused on operations that already have addressed environmental problems and have achieved a high level of environmental stewardship , while keeping the land in production . i prodcer willing to complete elf - assssment ? tier iii minimm requirement re met . are ll pplicable rerce concern ddressed to the minimm level of tretment on the entire gricltre opertion ? tier ii minimm requirement re met . are ll oil quality nd wter quality concern ddressed to the minimm level of tretment on the entire gricltre opertion ? are ll oil quality nd wter quality concern ddressed to the minimm level of tretment on the prt of the gricltre opertion ? i prodcer willing to ddress oil quality nd wter quality on the prt of the gricltre opertion ? plce in enrollment ctegory based on enchmrk inventory . tier i minimm requirement re met . refer prodcer to other pproprite conervtion progr . develop conervtion ecrity plnd contrct , determine progrm pyment . wit for fre ign - when rerce concern re ddressed . implement contrct . in addition to to the conservation security program ( csp ) , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) manages a number of other conservation programs . producers cannot receive csp payments and payments under another usda conservation program for the same conservation practices or activities on the same land . however , producers can use assistance received under other usda programs , as well as assistance received under state or private conservation programs , to arrive at a high level of stewardship necessary to participate in csp . table 20 describes other key usda conservation programs . budget scoring or scorekeeping is the process of estimating the budgetary effects of pending and enacted legislation and comparing them with a baseline , such as a budget resolution , or to any limits that may be set in law . scorekeeping tracks data such as budget authority , receipts , outlays , the surplus or deficit , and the public debt limit . the process allows congress to compare the cost of proposed budget policy changes with existing law in order to enforce spending and revenue levels agreed upon in the budget resolution . the congressional budget committees and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) score legislation in relation to levels set by congress in concurrent budget resolutions .