nmfs does not report this measure . to identify species with relatively high federal and state expenditures , we used the fiscal year 2003 annual report to congress of federal and state expenditures . this was the most recent report available at the time we selected our species . it provides expenditure data on all listed species , regardless of which service has primary responsibility . we excluded salmon , steelhead , and the desert tortoise from this sample , even though they had relatively high expenditures , because we have issued comprehensive reports on these species.we relied on fws officials to identify species that had at least one full - time staff member devoted to recovery efforts . nmfs officials told us that their staff work in recovery teams , and that having a full - time staff member dedicated to recovery efforts would not be a good measure of the resources the agency was devoting to recovery of the species . we identified 40 species that met these three criteria . next , because of time and resource constraints , we took several steps to reduce the 40 species to a more manageable number . we prioritized species for review by generally selecting all of the species that satisfied at least two of the three criteria , and species that were nearing recovery and had relatively low federal and state expenditures ( in order to understand how species can achieve recovery with relatively low expenditures ) . the bald eagle is one example . the primary threat to the eagle's survival was the widespread use of ddt , an insecticide that caused thin egg shells and reproductive failure . thus , although there were other steps that needed to be taken ( primarily addressing loss of important habitat ) , the banning of ddt in 1972 was critical to achieving the bald eagle's recovery . fws reports that the eagle is recovered and has recently proposed delisting the species . another example is the magazine mountain shagreen — a land snail found only on the north side of magazine mountain in arkansas . the primary threat to this species was human use of its habitat or areas close to its habitat . specifically , the department of defense considered using magazine mountain for military exercises , and the state of arkansas proposed building a visitor's center and related facilities on the summit of the mountain — the highest peak in the state . after the snail was listed , however , the department of defense withdrew its plans for military exercises in the area , and the visitor's center and associated facilities were designed and built so that potential impacts from construction and operation have been mitigated . fws biologists told us that the snail's population is stable , but that a proposed 3-year study to gather additional biological information about the species needs to be completed before the species can be proposed for delisting . table 1 summarizes some key details about the eight species .