international adoptions . as required under federal law and state department regulations , international adoptions are generally conducted through accredited adoption agencies or approved persons . uscis is involved in adjudicating immigration petitions for these children as well as setting federal home study requirements for international adoptions and determining the suitability and eligibility of prospective adoptive parents . the state department also sets requirements for pre - adoption training that international adoption agencies and approved persons must provide for prospective parents . there are no federal requirements for post - adoption monitoring for international adoptions , according to state department officials . however , officials said some countries of origin require adoptive families to provide periodic reports ( eg , according to the state department's website , one country requires families to provide reports every 6 months for 2 years following an international adoption ) . individual states may also have separate licensing requirements for international adoption agencies operating in their state . foster care adoptions . foster care adoptions are typically conducted by state , county , and local child welfare agencies or private adoption agencies with which they contract . for these adoptions , states set requirements for home studies , pre - adoption training , and post - adoption services . private domestic adoptions . states also set requirements for home studies , pre - adoption training , and post - adoption services for private domestic adoptions , generally through state licensing standards and other requirements for private adoption agencies , attorneys , and others . some federal funding is available for adoption services , in addition to any funding from state , local , or other sources . funding appropriated for title iv - e of the social security act makes up the large majority of federal funding dedicated to child welfare , comprising about 89 percent of federal child welfare appropriations ( approximately $7.4 billion of nearly $8.3 billion ) in fiscal year 2015 , according to the congressional research service . while the majority of these title iv - e funds support children in the foster care system , the title iv - e adoption assistance program provides grants to states for a portion of their costs to support families who adopted children with special needs , generally from foster care . for example , these organizations specialized in certain aspects of adoption , including adoption law , home studies , pre - adoption training , and post - adoption services . we interviewed the following child welfare and adoption organizations and experts: american academy of adoption attorneys ; american bar association's center on children and the law ; association of administrators of the interstate compact on the placement of children ; center for adoption policy ; center for adoption support and education ; child welfare league of america ; coalition for children , youth , and families ; congressional coalition on adoption institute ; council on accreditation ; the donaldson adoption institute ; joint council on international children's services ; madeline freundlich ; maureen flatley ; national center for missing and exploited children ; national center on adoption and permanency ; national conference of state legislatures ; north american council on adoptable children ; spaulding for children ; and voice for adoption .