jpme colleges and universities . based on this evidence , we determined that 20 institutions were conducting research as their primary mission and had dedicated personnel assigned to them and therefore were included in the scope of our review . for our first objective of determining the extent to which jpme research institutions have changed in number , funding , and size , and the factors contributing to any changes , we obtained questionnaire responses and other documentation on the number of research institutions that existed at jpme colleges and universities from fiscal years 2000 through 2013 and collected and analyzed available funding and staffing data for these years for the jpme research institutions . we assessed the reliability of the funding and staffing data collected by analyzing questionnaire responses from jpme colleges and universities , which included information on their data - system management , data quality - assurance processes , and potential sources of errors and mitigations of those errors . based on our review of the data provided and our review of the questionnaire responses , we concluded that the systems used to provide the data , and thus the data they provide , are sufficiently reliable for our audit purposes . however , based on this evidence , we determined that we were unable to report consistent data on jpme research institution funding and staffing levels prior to fiscal year 2007 , and therefore we are providing trend data on jpme research institutions from fiscal years 2007 through 2013 . subcommittee on oversight and investigations , committee on armed services , house of representatives , another crossroads ? professional military education two decades after the goldwater - nichols act and the skelton panel , h.r . jpme certification — that is , ndu , the army war college , army command and general staff college , air university , naval war college , and marine corps university . research conducted at these jpme colleges and universities can be accomplished by research institutions associated with the colleges and universities as well as by students and professors as part of academic coursework . for the purposes of this report , we focused on research institutions that conduct research as their primary mission and have dedicated personnel to do so . we excluded certain centers and institutes associated with jpme colleges and universities because we determined they did not have a mission to primarily conduct research or we also excluded from our analysis did not have dedicated personnel.research conducted by students as part of their academic coursework and by professors not affiliated with the research institutions . to identify the jpme research institutions included within the scope of our review , we examined documentation and gathered testimonial evidence related to the missions , activities , and organization of the institutions that conduct research at the jpme colleges and universities . staffing data provided by jpme colleges and universities include military and civilian personnel , noncontractor researchers , contractor researchers , as well as noncontractor administrative staff positions . provided and our review of the questionnaire responses , we concluded that the systems used to provide the data , and thus the data they provide , are sufficiently reliable for our audit purposes .