( recommendation 7 ) . further details on each agency's process are provided below . usda: according to usda's fiscal year 2018 afr , fns used snap's quality control system to identify improper payments and determine improper payment rates for fiscal year 2018 . according to agency officials , snap improper payment root causes occur at the state level . according to agency officials , as required by the food and nutrition act of 2008 and subsequent program regulations , fns requires states to conduct root cause analyses and develop corrective action plans because of the unique circumstances in each state owing to flexibilities under statute and regulations . snap's quality control system uses a two - tier approach to report improper payments . in the first tier , each month , state agencies follow federal sampling requirements to select samples of households that participated in snap in their states and conduct quality control reviews to determine whether each selected household was eligible and received the right amount of benefits . in the second tier of the process , federal snap staff select a subsample of the state data for review to confirm the validity of the states' findings . federal snap staff use that subsample data to aggregate the root cause information at a nationwide level in order to categorize the data into the omb root cause categories for fiscal year 2018 reporting . education: according to education's fiscal year 2018 afr , education conducted a risk - based , nonstatistical sample and estimation methodology , which omb approved , to estimate pell grant and direct loan improper payment rates for fiscal year 2018 reporting . as part of this estimation process , education analyzed identified improper payments to determine improper payment root causes . hhs: according to hhs's fiscal year 2018 afr , hhs estimated the chip improper payment rate for fiscal year 2018 reporting through the payment error rate measurement ( perm ) program . we also reviewed agencies' documented policies and procedures for these processes . we obtained documentation and supporting analyses on the corrective action plans developed for root causes that agencies reported in their fiscal year 2018 agency financial reports ( afr ) . we analyzed the supporting documentation against relevant ipia requirements , omb guidance , and federal internal control standards to determine how the agencies identified root causes of improper payments and the extent to which they ( 1 ) developed corrective actions that corresponded to the identified root causes , ( 2 ) monitored the progress and effectiveness of their corrective actions , and ( 3 ) communicated relevant information to the appropriate stakeholders within the agency in accordance with such requirements and guidance . federal internal control standards state that management should establish and operate activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results and remediate identified internal control deficiencies on a timely basis . va: according to va's fiscal year 2018 afr , va conducted a statistical sample and estimation methodology to estimate the psas improper payment rate for fiscal year 2018 reporting . va then analyzed the improper payments identified during testing to determine improper payment root causes .