dod award fee practices do not promote accountability . dod programs gave contractors on about half of the award - fee contracts in our study population at least a second opportunity to earn an estimated $669 million in initially unearned or deferred fees . taken together , dod's acquisition , business , and contract management practices are contrary to the purpose of performance - based contracting concepts and have resulted and , if not corrected in both form and practice , will continue to result in wasting billions of dollars in taxpayer funds . my statement today will focus on what steps dod must take to strengthen the link between monetary incentives and acquisition outcomes and by extension increase the transparency and accountability of dod programs for fees paid and of contractors for results achieved . this testimony draws upon our recently issued report on dod's use of award and incentive fees as well as the gao high - risk series and our body of work on weapon system acquisitions . gao's many acquisition - related reports over the years raise serious questions about the reasonableness , appropriateness , and affordability of dod's current investment plans ; the soundness of the acquisition process which implements those plans ; and the effectiveness of the practices dod uses to manage its contractors , including the use of award and incentive fees . these reports collectively present a compelling case for change . how they have been used and how we believe they should be used is the focus of my statement today . to put the issues related to dod's use of award and incentive fees in context , i want to step back and look at some of the broader management challenges that confront dod . the department is facing a significant number of recurring problems in managing its major weapon acquisitions . although u.s. weapons are the best in the world , dod's acquisition process for weapons programs consistently yields undesirable consequences — dramatic cost increases , late deliveries to the warfighter , and performance shortfalls . from fiscal year 1999 through fiscal year 2003 , award - and incentive - fee contract actions accounted for 4.6 percent of all dod contract actions over $25,000 . however , when taking into account the dollars obligated — award - and incentive - fee contract actions accounted for 20.6 percent of the dollars obligated on actions over $25,000 , or over $157 billion , as shown in figure 1 . our sample of 93 contracts includes $51.6 billion , or almost one - third , of those obligated award - and incentive - fee contract dollars . these obligations include award - and incentive - fee payments as well as other contract costs . dod utilized the contracts in our sample for a number of purposes . for example , programs lack clearly defined and stable requirements , move forward with unrealistic program cost and schedule estimates , use immature technologies in launching product development , and fail to solidify design and manufacturing processes at appropriate junctures in development .