one cannot be done without the other . expanding the use of performance - based contracting approaches and emphasizing strategic human capital planning are welcomed and positive steps , but sustained leadership and commitment will be required to ensure that these efforts mitigate the risks the government currently faces when contracting for services . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information , please contact david e. cooper at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included don bumgardner , ralph dawn , tim dinapoli , julia kennon , gordon lusby , monty peters , ron schwenn , and john van schaik . the amount being spent on services is growing substantially . last year alone , the federal government acquired more than $87 billion in services — a 24- percent increase in real terms from fiscal year 1990 . rather , dod relied primarily on voluntary turnover and retirements , freezes on hiring authority , and its authority to offer early retirements and "buy - outs" to achieve reductions . consequently , purchases for services now account for about 43 percent of federal contracting expenses — the largest single spending category . the growth in services has largely been driven by the government's increased purchases of two types of services: information technology services , which increased from $3.7 billion in fiscal year 1990 to about $13.4 billion in fiscal year 2000 ; and professional , administrative , and management support services , which rose from $12.3 billion in fiscal year 1990 to $21.1 billion in fiscal year 2000 . the increase in the use of service contracts coincided with a 21-percent decrease in the federal workforce , which fell from about 2.25 million employees as of september 1990 to 1.78 million employees as of september 2000 . as federal spending and employment patterns were changing , changes were also occurring in the way that federal agencies buy services . specifically , there has been a trend toward agencies purchasing professional services using contracts awarded and managed by other agencies . for example , in 1996 , the general services administration ( gsa ) began offering information technology services under its federal supply schedule program , and it now offers services ranging from professional engineering to laboratory testing and analysis to temporary clerical and professional support services . the use of the schedule program to acquire services has increased significantly over the past several years . other governmentwide contracts have also come into use in recent years . the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 authorized federal agencies to enter into multiple award , task - and delivery - order contracts for goods and services . these contracts provide agencies with a great deal of flexibility in buying goods or services while minimizing the burden on government contracting personnel to negotiate and administer contracts . the clinger - cohen act of 1996 authorized the use of multiagency contracts and what have become known as governmentwide agency contracts to facilitate purchases of information technology - related products and services such as network maintenance and technical support , systems engineering , and integration services .