gao - 14-138t . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2014 . the contractor can appeal this decision to an appeal board . thus , contractors have their personal appearance before the revocation decision is made . in contrast , military and civilian personnel within dhs and dod who receive a notice that their clearance may be revoked can only submit written documentation prior to a revocation decision . adjudicators issue a written decision to revoke or sustain the clearance before any personal appearance by , and without any in - person discussion with , the employee . the employee can appeal this written decision and request a personal appearance during the appeal process . furthermore , dhs military and civilian employees , and contractor employees government - wide , have a better opportunity than dod military and civilian employees to understand the rationale for the revocation decision and the effect their personal appearance may have had on the revocation decision . dhs military and civilian employees receive a written decision letter to revoke or sustain the clearance from the individual who presided over the personal appearance . similarly , contractors government - wide are also provided a copy of the administrative judge's written decision . however , for dod military and civilian employees , the administrative judge who presided over the personal appearance during the appeal makes a written recommendation rather than a decision . this recommendation is sent directly to one of dod's personnel security appeals boards ( psab ) , based on the agency to which the employee is assigned , and the recommendation generally is not shared with the dod military or civilian employee . the dod psabs consider the administrative judge's recommendation and other evidence when they reach and issue a final written decision regarding the security clearance to the employee , but they are not required to follow the judge's recommendation . the employee is provided a final written decision from one of the three military department psabs , which cannot be appealed , but the employee generally is not privy to the administrative judge's recommendation . an exception is the washington headquarters services appeal board which , in its written decision , typically provides the employee with a copy of the administrative judge's recommendation and the hearing transcript . army psab officials explained that providing the judge's recommendation to the employee could be misleading because the individual might assume that was the final decision , and would be disappointed if the psab reached a different decision . the level of detail contained in the written decisions received by employees after the personal appearance also varied , with contractors having more information about the rationale for the decision than military and federal civilian personnel in the military departments . when we reviewed defense office of hearings and appeals administrative judge decisions that are provided to contractors , we found that they contained detailed findings of fact , discussions of applicable law and policy , and analysis , which provides an employee an in - depth understanding of the rationale for the judge's decision .