gao - 16-108 . washington , d.c.: february 5 , 2016 . ( see fig . based on our review of reports issued by gao and other entities , we determined that available medicaid expenditure and utilization data do not provide cms with sufficient information to consistently ensure that payments are proper or that beneficiaries have access to covered services , which is inconsistent with federal internal control standards that state that management should use quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . cms should rely on quality information to oversee the medicaid program . the cms - 64 , which serves as the basis of calculating the amount of federal matching funds for states , and msis , which is designed to report individual beneficiary claims data , have the potential to offer a robust view of payments and overall spending in the medicaid program . however , as the following examples from our work on supplemental payments , states' sources of financing , and beneficiary eligibility under ppaca demonstrate , the usefulness of the cms - 64 and msis data is limited , because of issues with completeness , accuracy , and timeliness . for example , neither the cms - 64 nor the msis is designed to capture detailed information on payments made to individual providers or the non - state sources of the state share of medicaid payments . without more transparent information on program payments and state funding sources , cms is unable to determine the appropriateness of program expenditures and ensure the fiscal integrity of the program . states report aggregate data regarding supplemental payments on the cms - 64 , but neither the cms - 64 nor msis identifies supplemental payments made to individual providers . as a result , we had to rely on alternative sources to determine upper payment limit ( upl ) supplemental payment amounts in conducting two reviews . in particular , we examined states' mandatory dsh reports , which include some information on upl supplemental payments made to dsh hospitals , and interviewed providers from selected states to identify their uses of these payments . based on these efforts , we made the following observations , among others . thirty - nine states made upl supplemental payments to 505 hospitals that , along with their regular medicaid payments , exceeded those hospitals' total costs of providing medicaid - funded care by $2.7 billion . certain hospitals use these payments for a wide range of purposes , from covering the costs of uninsured patients to funding general hospital operations , maintenance , and capital purchases , such as a helicopter . these findings suggest that further examination of upl supplemental payments is warranted ; however , data on these payments are incomplete as states are not required to report such payments to non - dsh hospitals or to other providers at the provider level . by not collecting complete or consistent data about these payments to all providers — either through the cms - 64 or another vehicle — cms is missing an opportunity to ensure that such payments were made for medicaid purposes and were consistent with medicaid payment principles .