i turn now to these challenges . a successful transition to nextgen will depend , to a great extent , on faa's ability to manage the acquisition and integration of multiple nextgen systems . since 1995 , we have designated faa's air traffic control modernization program as high risk because of systemic management and acquisition problems . in recent years , faa has taken a number of actions to improve its management of acquisitions . realization of nextgen goals could be severely compromised if faa's improved processes are not institutionalized and carried over into the implementation of nextgen , which is an even more complex and ambitious undertaking than past modernization efforts . to its credit , faa has taken a number of actions to improve its acquisition management . by creating the air traffic organization ( ato ) in 2003 , and appointing a chief operating officer ( coo ) to head ato , faa established a new management structure and adopted more leading practices of private sector businesses to address the cost , schedule , and performance shortfalls that have plagued air traffic control acquisitions . ato has worked to create a flatter organization , with fewer management layers , and has reported reducing executive staffing by 20 percent and total management by 16 percent . in addition , faa uses a performance management system to hold managers responsible for the success of ato . more specifically , to better manage its acquisitions and address problems we have identified , faa has established strategic goals to improve its acquisition workforce culture and build towards a results - oriented , high - performing organization ; developed and applied a process improvement model to assess the maturity of its software and systems acquisitions capabilities resulting in , among other things , enhanced productivity and greater ability to predict schedules and resources ; and reported that it has established a policy and guidance on using earned value management ( evm ) in its acquisition management system and that 19 of its major programs are currently using evm . institutionalizing these improvements throughout the agency ( i.e. , providing for their duration beyond the current leadership by ensuring that reforms are fully integrated into the agency's structure and processes and have become part of its organizational culture ) will continue to be a challenge for faa . for example , the agency has yet to implement its cost estimating methodology , although , according to the agency , it has provided training on the methodology to employees . furthermore , faa has not established a policy to require use of its process improvement model on all major acquisitions for the national airspace system . until the agency fully addresses these legacy issues , it will continue to risk program management problems affecting cost , schedule , and performance . with a multi - billion dollar acquisition budget , addressing these issues is as important as ever . while faa has implemented many positive changes to its management processes , it currently faces the loss of key leaders .