gao - 05-859 . september 13 , 2005 . border security: actions needed to strengthen management of department of homeland security's visa security program . gao - 05-801 . july 29 , 2005 . visa delays are a longstanding problem . however , since september 2001 , several factors have exacerbated wait times for visas . first , changes to visa policies and procedures have resulted in additional workload for consular officers . second , while not reaching pre - 2001 levels , visa application volume has increased in recent years . third , many posts face facility constraints , which limit the extent to which posts can increase visa processing . finally , staffing shortfalls also affect the length of time that applicants must wait for a visa . since the september 11 attacks , congress , state , and dhs have initiated a series of changes to policies and procedures designed to enhance border security . these changes have added to the complexity of consular officers' workload and , in turn , exacerbated state's resource constraints . these changes include the following: consular officers must interview virtually all visa applicants ; prior to august 2003 , they could routinely waive interviews . since october 2004 , consular officers are required to scan foreign nationals' right and left index fingers and clear the fingerprints through the dhs automated biometric identification system before an applicant can receive a visa . these changes have added to the complexity of consular officers' workload . they have also , in turn , contributed to the delays facing foreign citizens at some posts who are seeking visas for travel to the united states . for example , in february 2004 , we reported that applicants had faced delays when scheduling appointments for visa interviews at consular posts in china and india . although wait times in china have improved in recent months , applicants in india continue to face long delays . moreover , worldwide , nine posts reported maximum wait times of 90 or more days in february 2006 . in light of the increased workload per visa applicant due to additional border security requirements , we recommended in october 2002 and again in september 2005 that state reassess its staffing requirements . today i will discuss ( 1 ) wait times facing visa applicants , ( 2 ) factors that affect wait times , and ( 3 ) our recent work on consular staffing concerns . my statement covers a series of reports that we have issued regarding the visa process and related areas . over the course of our work for these reports , we have reviewed relevant legislation and agency documents , interviewed state's consular and human resource officials in washington , and observed visa operations and interviewed consular officials at more than 20 consular posts . in addition , in 2005 , we interviewed consular staff at 25 overseas posts regarding issues such as visa policies and procedures , staffing , and training . our work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards ( see appendix i for a list of gao reports ) . the 1952 immigration and nationality act , as amended , is the primary body of law governing immigration and visa operations .