conf . tsa interprets the term explosive detection system to include both explosive detection systems ( eds ) and explosive trace detection ( etd ) machines . maintenance of explosive detection systems ( eds ) and explosive trace detection ( etd ) machines ? what factors played a role in eds and etd maintenance costs and what factors could affect future costs ? what has tsa done to control eds and etd maintenance costs ? for purposes of our review , we focused on the amounts obligated under contracts to maintain the machines . we did not review tsa's negotiations for maintenance services or the process for awarding contracts , nor did we assess other direct or indirect costs related to tsa or dhs employees engaged in contract administration or other related items . to determine what factors played a role in maintenance costs and what tsa has done to control costs , we: reviewed tsa contract files , acquisition and strategic plans , budget documents , tsa processes for reviewing contract cost and performance data , and a dhs oig report ; and interviewed tsa headquarters officials , dhs oig officials , and eds and etd contractor representatives . to determine the extent of tsa contract oversight , we: reviewed tsa contract files and processes for reviewing contract performance data , interviewed tsa headquarters officials and eds and etd contractor representatives , and reviewed gao standards for internal controls we performed our work from january 2006 through june 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . gao , standards for internal control in the federal government , gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 ( washington , d.c.: november 1999 ) . according to tsa budget documents , tsa has obligated almost $470 million from fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2005 for eds and etd maintenance . in fiscal year 2006 , tsa estimates it will spend $199 million and has projected it will spend $234 million in fiscal year 2007 . tsa was unable to provide us data on maintenance cost per machine prior to fiscal year 2005 because , according to tsa officials , its previous contract with boeing service company ( boeing ) to maintain eds and etd machines was not structured to capture these data . tsa did not provide us with projections of eds and etd maintenance costs beyond fiscal year 2007 , although tsa has negotiated maintenance prices per machine through fiscal year 2009 . tsa was mandated to screen all checked baggage using explosive detection systems at airports by december 31 , 2003.1 explosive detection systems ( eds ) use computer - aided tomography x - rays to recognize the characteristics of explosives . in general , eds are used for checked baggage screening . explosive trace detection ( etd ) machines use chemical analysis to detect traces of explosive material vapors or residues . etd machines are used for both passenger carry - on baggage and checked baggage screening . according to tsa budget documents , tsa will have deployed over 1,400 eds and 6,600 etd machines at baggage screening locations in over 400 airports nationwide by the end of fiscal year 2006 . the aviation and transportation security act , pub . 107-71 ยง 110 ( b ) , 115 stat .