( see fig . ( see table 1. ) these sources of information cover medicare more broadly and provide information about medicare benefits in general , rather than those dealing specifically with behavioral health . like cms , ma plans use different approaches to provide information to the beneficiaries enrolled in ma plans , including publications , phone calls , and websites . according to officials from the five ma plans in our review , ma plans use multiple modes of communication to meet the preferences of their enrolled populations . ma plans are required to provide information to each enrollee at the time of enrollment and annually thereafter ; for example , ma plans must share information about providers reasonably available to enrollees . ma plans are also required to provide marketing materials to cms for review to ensure the adequacy and accuracy of the information in the materials . two of the ma plans in our review offer digital health tools to their enrollees . one plan offers a tool that allows enrollees to communicate with case managers , and another plan provides enrollees access to test results , the ability to refill prescriptions and schedule appointments , as well as resources for patient education . according to cms officials , the agency also uses other strategies for providing information to beneficiaries about coverage of behavioral health benefits . cms officials stated that it partners with stakeholders to assist beneficiaries and caregivers seeking help with behavioral health conditions . for example , cms officials described webinars and workshops it conducts to educate partners and stakeholders who educate and counsel medicare beneficiaries . according to agency officials , the webinars cover a range of topics related to medicare benefits and coverage , including behavioral health . the officials also told us that cms partners with state health insurance programs to provide information about medicare , including information to help medicare beneficiaries understand their coverage . cms officials also stated that the agency conducts public awareness and outreach campaigns to provide information to beneficiaries . medicare & you — the most widely disseminated source of information on medicare benefits and coverage — does not provide explicit information about coverage of services for beneficiaries with suds , although hhs and cms have identified addressing suds as a top priority . we reviewed the fall 2019 edition of the medicare & you publication and found that , while it does provide information on medicare coverage for behavioral health services , it does not contain an explicit description of the services that may be covered for treatment of suds . cms officials noted that printing the almost 43 million hard copies of the fall 2019 edition of medicare & you started in july 2019 , several months before the rule implementing expanded oud coverage under medicare was finalized . in december 2019 , cms officials updated the 2020 edition of medicare & you to include information on the expanded oud treatment authorized by the support act , which were finalized in november 2019 , and became effective in january 2020 .