fns has begun to take steps to implement our recommendations . in addition , along with usda's office of inspector general , we recognize the importance of improving state use of ebt data and we are working with usda to determine best practices for using these data to identify food stamp recipients and storeowners who may be defrauding or abusing the program . participation in the food stamp program has dropped by about 33 percent during the past 4-1 / 2 years . the monthly average number of participants declined from 25.5 million in fiscal year 1996 to about 17.1 million in the first half of fiscal year 2001 . although factors such as the strong u.s. economy and tighter eligibility requirements have been cited as primary reasons for the dramatic decline in food stamp participation in recent years , there remains a large gap between the number of people eligible to receive benefits and the number participating in the program . some of this gap may be explained by other factors , such as past initiatives designed to reduce tanf caseloads , confusion about eligibility requirements after the passage of prwora , and administrative burdens placed on food stamp participants that might discourage participation . thirty - nine of these systems are operating statewide . all states are to implement ebt systems by october 1 , 2002 , unless usda waives the requirement . by providing benefits electronically , the federal government saves time and money because the process of providing the coupons is eliminated . furthermore , an ebt system creates an electronic record of each food stamp transaction , making it easier to identify and document instances of fraud and abuse in the program . recent legislative initiatives to reform welfare have also affected food stamp program operations . specifically , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , which was passed in 1996 to reform the nation's welfare system , also modified aspects of the food stamp program . to reform welfare , prwora replaced the aid to families with dependent children entitlement program with the tanf program and gave the states responsibility for administering tanf through block grant funding . in implementing welfare reform , the states have , for example , used prwora's flexibility to ( 1 ) require that applicants look for jobs before their tanf applications are processed ; ( 2 ) offer one - time , lump - sum payments ( known as diversion payments ) to potential applicants rather than enroll them in the tanf program ; and ( 3 ) disqualify individuals from participation in the food stamp program if they have committed tanf violations , thereby reducing the household's total food stamp benefit . almost all of the states use a single application for the food stamp and welfare programs to reduce administrative costs , even though the eligibility rules for these two programs are different . though welfare reform retained the food stamp program as an entitlement for qualifying participants , it tightened eligibility requirements and eased administrative requirements . it disqualified able - bodied adults without dependents who , during the preceding 36-month period , received food stamp benefits for at least 3 months but worked less than 20 hours per week .