as a result , such comparisons are not performed on all properties . comparisons are made , if at all , 3 years or more after the initial entry date by the mms compliance group for those properties selected for a compliance review or audit . in addition , mms lacks a process to routinely and systematically reconcile all production data included by payors on their royalty reports or by operators on their production reports with production data available from third - party sources . omm does compare a large part of the offshore operator - reported production data with third - party data from pipeline operators through both its oil and gas verification programs , but blm compares only a relatively small percentage of reported onshore oil and gas production data with third - party pipeline data . however , as discussed below , we have found that there are significant questions and uncertainties about the other financial benefits as well . revenues from the sale of royalty - in - kind oil are due 10 days earlier than cash payments , and revenues from the sale of in - kind gas are due 5 days earlier . mms calculates that the government earned about $5 million in interest from fiscal years 2004 through 2006 from these early payments that it would not have received had it taken royalties in cash . we found two weaknesses in the way mms calculates this interest . first , the payment dates used to calculate the interest revenue have the potential to over - or underestimate its value . mms calculates the interest on the basis of the time between the actual date that treasury received a royalty - in - kind payment and the theoretical latest date that treasury would have received a cash payment under the royalty - in - value program . however , mms officials told us that cash payments can , and sometimes do , arrive before their due date . blm staff ordered the company to remove the bypass . staff from another field office told us of a case in which individuals illegally tapped into a gas line and routed gas to private residences . finally , in one of the field offices we visited , blm officials told us of an instance in which a company maintained two sets of conflicting production data — one used by the company and another reported to mms . moreover , omm , which is responsible for inspecting offshore production facilities that include oil and gas meters , did not inspect all oil and gas royalty meters , as required by its policy , in 2007 . for example , omm officials responsible for meter inspections in the gulf of mexico told us that they completed about half of the required 2,700 inspections , but that they met omm's goal for witnessing oil and gas meter calibrations . omm officials told us that one reason they were unable to complete all the meter inspections was their focus on the remaining cleanup work from hurricanes katrina and rita .