, capabilities and costs ) . ( see fig . 3 for the five itim stages of maturity. ) this framework is grounded in our research of it investment management practices of leading private and public sector organizations . dod is a massive and complex organization . to illustrate , it reported that its fiscal year 2006 operations involved approximately $1.4 trillion in assets and $2.0 trillion in liabilities , more than 2.9 million military and civilian personnel , and $581 billion in net cost of operations . organizationally , dod includes the office of the secretary of defense , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the military departments , numerous defense agencies and field activities , and various unified combatant commands that are responsible for either specific geographic regions or specific functions . figure 1 provides a simplified depiction of dod's organizational structure . in support of its military operations , dod performs an assortment of interrelated and interdependent business functions , including logistics management , procurement , health care management , and financial management . as we have previously reported , the systems environment that supports these business functions is overly complex and error prone , and is characterized by ( 1 ) little standardization across dod , ( 2 ) multiple systems performing the same tasks , ( 3 ) the same data stored in multiple systems , and ( 4 ) the need for data to be entered manually into multiple systems . the department of the navy is a major component of dod , consisting of two uniformed services: the navy and the marine corps . the department's mission is to maintain , train , and equip combat - ready naval forces capable of winning wars , deterring aggression , and maintaining freedom of the seas . to support this mission , the department performs a variety of interrelated and interdependent business functions , such as logistics and financial management , relying extensively on it to carry out its operations . in fiscal year 2006 , the department's budget for it was $4.3 billion , of which $3.9 billion ( 90.3 percent ) was allocated to operations and maintenance of existing systems and $424 million ( 9.7 percent ) was allocated to systems in development and modernization . the department was appropriated about $4.2 billion in fiscal year 2007 and requested about $4 billion in fiscal year 2008 to operate , maintain , and modernize business systems and associated infrastructures . the chief information officer ( cio ) for the department is accountable for all it business system investments for both the navy and marine corps . the cio's office is organized to align and integrate information management and it programs across the two services and focus departmentwide efforts in support of warfighter priorities . the cio is supported by deputy cios for the navy and marine corps and a deputy cio for policy and integration , who directs the operations of the cio functional teams .