gao - 14-684 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2014 . are the challenges related to lack of transportation ? are the challenges related to inconsistent or inadequate hours of operation ? for any challenges you have had , have you voiced your concerns to your immediate supervisor or other leadership ? if yes , what changes , if any , have you seen as a result of voicing these concerns ? what other ways do you have for voicing your concerns ( other than voicing your concerns to your immediate supervisor or other leadership ) ? if participants are silent , ask if they have participated in [optional probe:] quality of life or other big surveys ? customer service surveys or feedback at facilities what other suggestions do you have for improving access to on - base services and programs ? what things are working well in accessing the on - base services and programs provided at this installation ? we also used a similar set of in all the senior enlisted discussion groups: to what extent have you heard or been made aware of junior enlisted personnel having any challenges accessing on - base services and programs ? please describe their challenges accessing on - base services and health care ( medical / dental / mental health ) recreation facilities ( gyms / fitness centers / mwr programs ) dining facilities base exchanges / commissaries / clothing and sales ) are the challenges related to lack of transportation ? does your installation have a shuttle system or other on - base transportation ? are the challenges related to inconsistent or inadequate hours of operation ? are some groups such as e1s or e2s experiencing these issues more than other junior enlisted personnel ? how devoted is senior leadership ( such as the command master chief or installation commander ) at this installation to addressing the challenges junior enlisted personnel have accessing on - base services and programs ? what changes , if any , have resulted from junior enlisted personnel voicing their concerns about accessing on - base services and programs ? other than voicing their concerns to their immediate supervisor , what other means do junior enlisted personnel have for voicing their concerns ? are you aware of any service - wide or installation - specific data - collection methods ( surveys , pulse checks , town halls , etc. ) that have been used to assess whether junior enlisted have ready access to services on this base ? what other suggestions do you have for improving access for junior enlisted personnel to on - base services and programs ? do you have any other comments for gao regarding access to on - base services and programs at this installation ? we developed these questions with one of our methodologists to help ensure they would elicit unbiased responses from discussion group participants .