, capability gaps ) . the identification of capability gaps is necessary to effectively prioritize preparedness grant funding . however , we have previously found that dhs and fema have faced challenges in developing and implementing such an assessment . most recently , in march 2011 , we reported that fema's efforts to develop and implement a comprehensive , measurable , national preparedness assessment were not yet complete . capability level ) to identify gaps ( i.e. accordingly , we recommended that fema complete a national preparedness assessment and that such an assessment should assess capability gaps at each level of government based on capability requirements to enable prioritization of grant funding . we also suggested that congress consider limiting preparedness grant funding until fema completes a national preparedness assessment . in april 2011 , congress passed the fiscal year 2011 appropriations act for dhs , which reduced funding for fema preparedness grants by $875 million from the amount requested in the president's fiscal year 2011 budget . the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2012 appropriated $1.7 billion for fema preparedness grants , $1.28 billion less than requested . the house committee report accompanying the dhs appropriations bill for fiscal year 2012 stated that fema could not demonstrate how the use of the grants had enhanced disaster preparedness . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . more information about the scope and methodology of our prior work can be found in those reports . to update our work , we analyzed documentation such as dhs's national preparedness report , issued in march 2012 ; interviewed relevant fema officials to obtain updates on recent progress in managing preparedness grants and measuring national preparedness ; and reviewed our prior reports . four of the largest preparedness grant programs are the port security grant program , the state homeland security program , the transit security grant program , and the urban areas security initiative . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the state homeland security program provides funding to support states' implementation of homeland security strategies to address the identified planning , organization , equipment , training , and exercise needs at the state and local levels to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism and other catastrophic events . the transit security grant program provides funds to owners and operators of transit systems ( which include intracity bus , commuter bus , ferries , and all forms of passenger rail ) to protect critical surface transportation infrastructure and the traveling public from acts of terrorism and to increase the resilience of transit infrastructure . however , members of congress have expressed concern about the consolidation of the 16 grant programs and congress has not yet approved the proposal . in october 2012 , fema officials told us that members of congress had asked fema to refine the npgp proposal to address concerns raised by stakeholders , such as how local officials will be involved in a state - administered grant program .