, guardianship ) itself . some states have established programs to do just this . for example , new jersey's adoption certificate program , in coordination with rutgers university school of social work and continuing education department , developed a 45-hour postgraduate training program leading to an adoption certificate for mental health clinicians . the certificate program is intended to increase the knowledge of mental health practitioners regarding the core issues facing adoptive families , and to expand their clinical skills in attachment - based , family - focused therapeutic interventions . oregon's efforts present another example . portland state university , in collaboration with oregon's department of human services and oregon's post adoption resource center , has also developed a postgraduate training certificate program for mental health providers working with adoptive families . the training program includes hands - on strategies for coaching and working with adoptive parents to address their children's challenging behaviors . according to program officials , the program has trained 27 therapists , and 15 more are expected to complete the program by june of 2005 . the names of these therapists have been or will be forwarded to oregon's adoptions resource center to be included in referral information sent to adoptive families in need of mental health therapists . most states have not conducted evaluations of their post adoption services . in responding to our survey , 9 states indicated that they have completed evaluations of post adoption services ; 8 states said that they had evaluations under way , and 30 informed us that they had not conducted any evaluations prior to their completion of our survey . evaluations play an important role in improving program operations . they can identify which services are most important to families , as well as help managers determine whether the services are achieving desired goals and if they can be provided more efficiently . evaluation results can help individual states improve their programs and , if shared , can provide other states with valuable information to help avoid costly mistakes . various hhs activities have helped states' adoption efforts . over the years , hhs has administered programs , sponsored campaigns , funded a resource center , and taken steps to disseminate information about adoptions . according to hhs officials , special needs children constitute the majority of children waiting for adoptive homes , and as such , they are the beneficiaries of the agency's efforts to support adoption . hhs has promoted innovation for many years through the adoption opportunities program and the title iv - e child welfare demonstration program . the adoption opportunities program , authorized by the child abuse prevention and treatment and adoption reform act of 1978 , as amended , generally provides 3-to 5-year grants and contracts to public and private adoption agencies . these grants and contracts have been used to support states' efforts , such as increasing placement of minority children , recruiting minority adoptive families , and providing post adoption services for families with special needs children . since the program's inception , congress has obligated more than $300 million for the adoption opportunities program .