we agree . our recommendation is that irs develops a strategy . we leave irs with the discretion on how to articulate the strategy and point out that it may need to be developed incrementally . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release the contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or whitej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) describe what the internal revenue service ( irs ) knows about network tax evasion and how well irs's traditional enforcement efforts address network tax evasion and ( 2 ) assess irs's progress in addressing network tax evasion and opportunities , if any , in making further progress . corporation income tax return . other entities may operate as pass - throughs . a pass - through entity generally has the legal right to impute or pass net income or losses through to its partners , shareholders , and beneficiaries untaxed . pass - through entities are required to provide each partner , shareholder , or beneficiary with a schedule k - 1 stating the individual share of net income or loss to be reported . the entities also provide this information to irs . the partners , shareholders , or beneficiaries are responsible for reporting this income or loss on their individual income tax returns and paying any tax . entities that may serve as pass - throughs include subchapter s corporations ( s corporations ) and partnerships . the various types of entities that make up networks can be linked in multiple ways . table 2 summarizes how a select set of individuals , various forms of businesses , and trusts may own or control other entities . ( see app . i for details on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 through september 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . networks of related entities are a feature of modern business organizations . many legitimate reasons explain why a business owner ( or owners ) may choose to use a network of related entities to conduct operations .