eucom's september 2015 review . eucom developed an analysis comparing raf croughton with lajes field as potential locations for the jiac . the consolidation of the jiac is proceeding in three phases . in phase i , according to the air force budget documentation , the air force plans to build eucom's intelligence analytic center , a data processing center , a warehouse , and various supporting facilities . in phase ii it plans to build the u.s. africa command's intelligence analytic center , the intelligence fusion center of the north atlantic treaty organization , a battlefield information system , and additional supporting facilities . phase iii will include a regional joint intelligence training facility and a physical fitness facility . in december 2014 and november and december 2015 , congress authorized and appropriated $92.2 million for phase i and $94.2 million for phase ii . in september 2016 , congress appropriated $53.1 million for phase iii . comprehensiveness ( partially met ) . according to best practices , agencies should develop accurate life - cycle cost estimates . further , a life - cycle cost estimate should encompass all past ( or sunk ) , present , and future costs for every aspect of the program , regardless of funding source — including all government and contractor costs . however , the jiac cost estimate included only milcon costs and did not include costs associated with the life cycle of the project . air force and office of the secretary of defense officials said they do not consider the jiac cost estimate a life - cycle cost estimate and that the estimate's scope is in line with dod guidance on the development of budget requests for milcon projects . according to dod officials , the department does not have a full life - cycle cost estimate for the entire jiac consolidation effort . dod and air force officials further stated that the estimate covers the costs of infrastructure for the jiac's facilities , other supporting infrastructure ( eg , utilities serving the jiac facilities ) , and certain other facilities for functions related to jiac , such as family support ( eg , expanded capacity of the child development center ) . the associated operation and maintenance costs ( eg , family support costs like living allowances ) were not included in the estimate , because they were considered out of scope , according to dod and air force officials . however , without fully accounting for life - cycle costs , management may have difficulty successfully planning and programming resource requirements for the jiac consolidation and making sound decisions . documentation ( partially met ) . according to best practices , documentation is essential for validating and defending a cost estimate . the united kingdom is serving as executive agent for jiac construction , and in august 2015 , dod obligated phase i funding to the united kingdom . also , dod documented both the data sources and the methodology used for the jiac cost estimate in an excel spreadsheet model and a parametric cost engineering estimate summary . however , the documentation for the jiac cost estimate is not complete .