we are not making any recommendations in this report . sba's mission is to maintain and strengthen the nation's economy by aiding , counseling , assisting , and protecting the interests of the nation's small businesses and by helping businesses and families recover from natural disasters . while some sba officials felt that the regions had a positive effect on communication between headquarters and the districts , others felt that the regions were an unnecessary layer of management and were more likely to be a bottleneck , hampering the effective flow of information through the agency . sba's former headquarters - to - field communication model is depicted in figure 3 . senior sba officials in headquarters and the field said that the realignment — in which the regions were downsized , but not eliminated , and the office of field operations was created , but never fully staffed — created communication problems . the primary function of the office of field operations was to facilitate the flow of information between headquarters and district offices . however , the office of field operations has fewer than 10 staff , and senior sba officials told us that it would be impossible for such a small office to have the same information conduit responsibility once held by multiple staff in each of 10 regional offices . as a result , headquarters program offices sometimes communicate with the district offices through the office of field operations , but they more often communicate directly with district office staff working on the sba programs they manage . for example , district officials said that the office of capital access may make a request for loan information through the office of field operations or may make the request directly to loan program managers in every district office . officials described how these multiple lines of communication with the district offices have led to district staff being on the receiving end of conflicting or redundant requests . finally , regional offices were downsized but not closed , and they still play a role in monitoring goals and coordinating administrative priorities with the districts . for example , officials told us that district office goals are disseminated through the regions . in addition , district managers said that districts are on the receiving end of a flood of information but that the information received may not clearly indicate priority or may lack practical application . district managers described how the possibility that important information might be buried among the large number of messages that are of little concern to them meant having to spend hours sorting through incoming messages . furthermore , they described how important information may not be disseminated at all . for example , district staff were notified of headquarters blood drives or job opportunities open only to headquarters staff but said that they were not formally notified when the former administrator left the agency . also , a district counsel told us that she was not notified when a new sba general counsel was named . figure 3 depicts current headquarters - to - field communication in sba . the sba inspector general found similar problems with communication within sba .