gao - 09-977sp . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2009. international food assistance: usaid is taking actions to improve monitoring and evaluation of nonemergency food aid , but weaknesses in planning could impede efforts . gao - 07-616t . washington , d.c.: march 21 , 2007 . gao - 09-980 . i will focus on two topics . first , i will discuss host government and donor efforts to halve hunger , especially in sub - saharan africa , by 2015 . second , i will discuss the status of u.s . agencies' implementation of gao's 2008 recommendations to enhance efforts to address global food insecurity and accelerate progress toward halving world hunger by 2015 , particularly in sub - saharan africa . to address these objectives in our reports , we reviewed economic literature on the factors that influence food security , and we convened an expert roundtable to further delineate factors that have contributed to persistent food insecurity in sub - saharan africa and efforts to address these factors . for our prior reports and our ongoing review of u.s. efforts to address food insecurity , we reviewed relevant reports by gao and other agencies and organizations and met with numerous u.s. agency officials in washington , d.c. and overseas . we also conducted fieldwork in a number of food - insecure countries and convened structured panels of nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) and donors in four countries in sub - saharan africa . we conducted these performance audits in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in brief , mr. chairman , we found that , although world leaders have committed to halving global hunger by 2015 , host governments and donors — including the united states — have made little progress , especially in sub - saharan africa . first , host governments have not prioritized food security as a development goal and , as of 2007 , only 8 of 38 countries had fulfilled a 2003 pledge to direct 10 percent of government spending to agriculture . second , donor aid directed toward agriculture was generally declining until 2005 . third , u.s. efforts to reduce hunger in africa have been constrained in funding and limited in scope , focusing primarily on emergency food aid , and have not addressed the underlying factors that contributed to the recurrence and severity of food crises . to reverse the declining trend in oda funding for agriculture , in july 2009 , the group of 8 ( g8 ) agreed to a $20 billion , 3-year commitment . the u.s. share of this commitment , or $3.35 billion , includes $1.36 billion for agriculture and related programming in fiscal year 2010 to establish food security , representing more than double the fiscal year 2009 budget request .