dod has not , as of yet , issued this new directive . we also found dod personnel were not consistently complying with regulations relating to ensuring that allotments were appropriately authorized . according to dod's financial management regulation , establishment of , discontinuance of , or changes to existing allotments for supplemental life insurance are to be based on a written request by a service member or someone with a special power of attorney on behalf of the service member . however , dod personnel and insurance agents indicated that some offices accepted allotment forms personally submitted by insurance agents or through the mail with only the signature on the form serving as proof that the service member initiated the allotment . we also found evidence that large numbers of these products were being sold . for example , base personnel at one naval training facility we visited said they regularly received several hundred allotment forms each month to initiate automatic premium payment deductions from military members' paychecks for these insurance products . these products provide additional death benefits but are significantly more expensive than other life insurance coverage available to service members . for example , service members purchasing these products make payments of about $100 per month for additional death benefits generally ranging from $25,000 to $50,000 . in contrast , all service members are currently able to purchase $400,000 of life insurance through servicemembers' group life insurance ( sgli ) for $26 per month . although the insurance products these six companies were selling also included a savings component that recently promised to earn interest between 6.5 and 8.1 percent , these products also included features that reduced the likelihood that service members purchasing them would accumulate large amounts of savings . as we reported , military members move frequently and many leave the service after a few years , which which may reduce their ability or willingness to continue making payments to fulfill a long - term financial commitment . this firm agreed to pay a total of about $12 million and has voluntarily discontinued sales of contractual plan products . about $8 million of the total money paid by this firm is to be used to fund financial education efforts for military members that are being developed and administered by nasd . regulatory examinations of the other four smaller broker - dealers that continue to sell contractual plans are continuing . given the longstanding history of sales - practice abuses associated with the contractual plans and the availability of viable alternative investments , we believe that congress should act to ban the further sale of contractual plans . the bills currently under consideration in the congress include language that would amend the investment company act of 1940 to render sales of such plans illegal , thereby removing from the market a product that appears to have little need to continue to exist . additional actions by congress , dod , and regulators also appear warranted to improve the effectiveness of insurance and securities regulators in overseeing sales of financial products to military members .