risk assessments . recently , fdic developed a framework for assessing and managing risk on a continuing basis . this framework specifies ( 1 ) how the assessments should be initiated and conducted , ( 2 ) who should participate in the assessment , ( 3 ) how disagreements should be resolved , ( 4 ) what approvals are needed , and ( 5 ) how these assessments should be documented and maintained . at the completion of our audit , the corporation had performed risk assessments on all of its major systems . although fdic has made substantial progress in each of the elements discussed above , it only recently established a program to test and evaluate its computer control environment , but this program was incomplete . test and evaluation is a key element of an information security program that includes ongoing reviews , tests , and evaluations of information security to ensure that systems are in compliance with policies and procedures and to identify and correct weaknesses that may occur . fdic began implementing this program during 2003 . in october 2003 , the corporation used a contractor to ( 1 ) develop a self - assessment process that includes annual general and application control reviews and ( 2 ) begin to perform ongoing quarterly tests of its systems . still , fdic's test and evaluation program does not address all key areas . specifically , the program does not include the following provisions . all key computer resources supporting fdic's financial systems are routinely reviewed and tested , as appropriate . fisma requires agencies to develop , document , and implement an agencywide information security program that includes routine security reviews of key computer resources supporting critical information systems , such as those supporting the corporation's financial systems . these reviews should include those managed by other agencies or contractors . although it initiated a program of tests and evaluations , this program did not yet address all key computer resources . for example , fdic relies extensively on contractors to support its financial systems , and accordingly , provides them with connections and access to its internal network . yet , during the past 2 years , the corporation has performed only limited security reviews of these contractor connections — a key computer resource . further , fdic did not schedule a review of these contractor connections in conjunction with its newly established self - assessment process . without routine tests and evaluations of all key computer resources , including contractor connections , the corporation's financial or sensitive bank information is at risk of unauthorized disclosure , disruption of operations , or loss of assets . information security weaknesses detected are analyzed for systemic solutions . to ensure that actions taken to correct identified security weaknesses are effective , security management best practices prescribe that procedures should include an assessment of systemic causes of related security weaknesses . although fdic has been very proactive in addressing the individual information security weaknesses identified , it currently lacks an ongoing process to collectively analyze related weaknesses for systemic problems that could adversely affect critical financial and bank information systems .