gao - 13-104 . washington , d.c.: october 15 , 2012 . ( see fig . generally , ddss are required to develop a complete medical history for each claimant for at least a 12-month period prior to the application . ssa guidance directs ddss to request medical evidence records from all providers who treated or evaluated the individual for the alleged or documented impairment during this time period . for example , a dds may request laboratory reports ; x - rays ; doctor's notes ; and other information used in assessing the claimant's health and functioning from many types of providers , including physicians or psychologists , hospitals , or community health centers . according to ssa , ddss generally pay providers for these records in accordance with required state fee schedules . in claims where the evidence gathered is insufficient to make a determination or where no evidence is present , the dds may order its own tests or evaluations — called consultative examinations — from medical providers . ssa regulations specify the types of providers who can perform consultative exams and require ddss to recruit , train , and oversee these providers in their states . state ddss pay providers to conduct exams and set the rates of payments for these exams . ssa's regulations prohibit ddss from purchasing consultative exams from medical providers who are excluded , suspended , or otherwise barred from participation in the medicare or medicaid programs , or any other federal or federally - assisted program , which includes providers on the list of excluded individuals and entities maintained by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) office of inspector general ( oig ) . ssa regulations also prohibit the agency from purchasing exams from certain providers whose license to practice has been revoked by any state licensing authority . hhs is legally required to exclude from participating in federal health care programs individuals and entities convicted of certain criminal offenses , such as defrauding medicare , medicaid , or other federal or state health programs ; patient abuse or neglect ; and felony convictions related to controlled substances . this function is performed by the hhs oig . the oig also has discretion to exclude individuals and entities based on a number of other grounds — ssa instructs ddss both related and unrelated to programmatic fraud.to review the hhs list and verify medical licenses and credentials before using the services of any consultative exam provider . ddss are also required to review the list for each existing exam provider at least annually . ddss are not required to check the status of the claimant's treating physician or other medical providers that submit evidence since they are obtaining existing medical records and not paying for medical services . ssa has guidance on how examiners should document and report suspected fraud . according to ssa's policy , fraud generally occurs when an individual makes or causes to be made false statements of material facts or conceals such facts for use in determining rights to benefits , with the intent to defraud . ssa employees should gather enough information to either remove suspicion or determine that there is potential fraud .