i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . in several instances patients cancelled multiple times . in 4 of the cases vamc staff closed the consults without the patients being seen ; in the other 6 cases vamc staff rescheduled the appointments for times that exceeded the 90-day timeframe . as we also reported , our preliminary work identified variation in how the five vamcs we reviewed have implemented key aspects of vha's business rules , which limits the usefulness of the data in monitoring and overseeing consults systemwide . as previously noted , vha's business rules were designed to standardize aspects of the consult process , thus creating consistency in vamcs' management of consults . however , vamcs have reported variation in how they are implementing certain tasks required by the business rules . for example , vamcs have developed different strategies for managing future care consults — requests for specialty care appointments that are not clinically needed for more than 90 days . at one vamc , officials reported that specialty care providers have been instructed to discontinue consults for appointments that are not needed within 90 days and requesting providers are to track these consults outside of the electronic consult system and resubmit them closer to the date the appointment is needed . these consults would not appear in vha's systemwide data once they have been discontinued . at another vamc , officials stated that appointments for specialty care consults are scheduled regardless of whether the appointments are needed beyond 90 days . the results of our review of outpatient consults are not generalizable across all vamcs . for our december 2012 report examining the reliability of vha's reported outpatient medical appointment wait times and scheduling oversight , we reviewed vha's scheduling policy and methods for measuring medical appointment wait times and interviewed vha central office officials responsible for developing them . we also visited 23 high - volume outpatient clinics at four vamcs selected for variation in size , complexity , and location ; these four vamcs were located in dayton , ohio ; fort harrison , montana ; los angeles , california ; and washington , d.c. at each vamc we interviewed leadership and other officials about how they manage and improve medical appointment timeliness , their oversight to ensure accuracy of scheduling data and compliance with scheduling policy , and problems staff experience in scheduling timely medical appointments . we examined each vamc's and clinic's implementation of elements of vha's scheduling policy and obtained documentation of scheduler training completion . in addition , oversight of the implementation of vha's business rules has been limited and has not included independent verification of vamc actions . vamcs were required to self - certify completion of each of the four tasks outlined in the business rules . visns were not required to independently verify that vamcs appropriately completed the tasks . without independent verification , vha cannot be assured that vamcs implemented the tasks correctly . furthermore , vha did not require that vamcs document how they addressed unresolved consults that were open greater than 90 days , and none of the five vamcs in our review were able to provide us with specific documentation in this regard .