they also had control over their budget resources . the exception was the ombudsman at the agency for toxic substances and disease registry , who did not have a separate office with staff or a separate budget . this ombudsman reported to the assistant administrator of the agency instead of the agency head . in our july 2001 report , we recommended , among other things , that epa modify its organizational structure so that the function would be located outside of the office of solid waste and emergency response , whose activities the national ombudsman was charged with reviewing . epa addresses this recommendation through its placement of the national ombudsman within the oig , where the national ombudsman will report to a newly - created position of assistant inspector general for congressional and public liaison . oig officials also told us that locating the national ombudsman function within the oig offers the prospect of additional resources and enhanced investigative capability . according to the officials , the national ombudsman will likely have a small permanent staff but will also be able to access oig staff members with expertise in specific subject matters , such as hazardous waste or water pollution , on an as - needed basis . further , oig officials anticipate that the ombudsman will adopt many of the office's existing recordkeeping and reporting practices , which could help address the concerns we noted in our report about accountability and fairness to the parties subject to an ombudsman investigation . despite these aspects of epa's reorganization , several issues merit further consideration . first and foremost is the question of intent in establishing an ombudsman function . the term “ombudsman,” as defined within the ombudsman community , carries with it certain expectations . the role of an ombudsman typically includes program operating responsibilities , such as helping to informally resolve program - related issues and mediating disagreements between the agency and the public . assigning these responsibilities to an office within the oig would conflict with statutory restrictions on the inspector general's activities . specifically , the inspector general act , as amended , prohibits an agency from transferring any function , power , or duty involving program responsibilities to its oig . however , if epa omits these responsibilities from the position within the oig , then it will not have established an “ombudsman” as the function is defined within the ombudsman community . in our april 2001 report , we noted that some federal experts in dispute resolution were concerned that among the growing number of federal ombudsman offices there are some individuals or activities described as “ombuds” or “ombuds offices” that do not generally conform to the standards of practice for ombudsmen . a related issue is that ombudsmen generally serve as a key focal point for interaction between the government , or a particular government agency , and the general public . by placing the national ombudsman function within its oig , epa appears to be altering the relationship between the function and the individuals that make inquiries or complaints . ombudsmen typically see their role as being responsive to the public , without being an advocate .