gao - 06-865t . washington , d.c.: june 13 , 2006 . logcap is an example of an external support contract . finally , systems support contracts provide logistics support to maintain and operate weapons and other systems . these types of contracts are most often awarded by the commands responsible for building and buying the weapons or other systems . the individual services and a wide array of dod and non - dod agencies can award contracts to support deployed forces . within a service or agency , numerous contracting officers , with varying degrees of knowledge about how contractors and the military operate in deployed locations , can award contracts that support deployed forces . according to dod estimates , in 2005 several hundred contractor firms provided u.s. forces with a wide range of services at deployed locations . figure 1 illustrates the broad array of contractor services being provided in iraq and the dod agency that awarded each contract . the customer ( eg , a military unit ) for these contractor - provided services is responsible for identifying and validating requirements to be addressed by the contractor as well as evaluating the contractor's performance and ensuring that contractor - provided services are used in an economical and efficient manner . in addition , dod has established specific policies on how contracts , including those that support deployed forces , should be administered and managed . oversight of contracts ultimately rests with the contracting officer who has the responsibility for ensuring that contractors meet the requirements set forth in the contract . we focused our efforts in iraq and elsewhere in southwest asia . to address our objective , we met with and obtained documentation from the office of the secretary of defense , joint staff , and service headquarters officials to review changes to key dod and service guidance and obtain a comprehensive understanding of their efforts in addressing the issues raised in our 2003 report . we visited select dod components based on their responsibilities for contract management , such as the defense contract management agency , and various service commands in the united states , including the army materiel command , to discuss their roles in managing and overseeing contractors in deployed locations . we also interviewed staff officers from six combat units that had been deployed to iraq between 2003 and 2006 to discuss their experiences with contractors at deployed locations . we traveled to iraq and kuwait to meet with deployed combat units , installation commanders , headquarters personnel , and other military personnel responsible for contracting and contract management at deployed locations . in addition , we met with 26 u.s. and foreign contractors providing a variety of services to dod at deployed locations to discuss their perspectives on contracting and contract management issues . we conducted our review from august 2005 through october 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details on our scope and methodology are contained in appendix i .