forms 1042 are filed on paper . forms 1042-s may be filed electronically or on paper . the law requires withholding agents filing more than 250 returns to file electronically ; consequently , most u.s. financial institutions file the information returns electronically , while most qis file on paper . when returns are paper filed , irs personnel must transcribe information from the paper returns into an electronic database in order to efficiently and effectively make use of the data . data on both paper and electronically filed returns must also be reviewed for errors . data from forms 1042 have been routinely transcribed and checked for errors . however , since the inception of the qi program , irs has not consistently entered information from the paper forms 1042-s into an electronic database . in years when data were not transcribed , the unprocessed paper 1042-s forms were stored at the philadelphia service center in philadelphia and then destroyed a year after receipt in accordance with record retention procedures . additionally , for certain tax years , the electronically filed forms 1042-s did not go through computerized error resolution routines . for tax year 2005 irs's large and midsize business division transferred $800,000 in funding to the service center to fund transcribing paper forms 1042-s and performing error resolution for all forms 1042-s. irs officials anticipate funding 2006 transcription and error resolution although as of march 2007 , this had not yet occurred . figure 3 shows the dual processing procedures irs uses for receiving , checking and validating the form 1042-s data it receives . the nqi opened an account for our investigator . we did not then make an investment to earn u.s. source income in part because of the relatively large minimum investments required by qi and nqi firms we contacted . thus , we were able to open a solely owned foreign corporation that was not actually an active business but do not know whether a qi or nqi intermediary would then have questioned a withholding certificate had we made an investment and claimed treaty benefits . because qis agree to have external auditors perform oversight of their compliance with required procedures , irs has greater assurance that taxes are properly withheld and treaty benefits are properly dispensed by qis than by u.s. withholding agents . however , within their limited scope , qis' auditors are not responsible for following up on possible indications of fraud or illegal acts that could have an impact on the matters being tested as they would under u.s. government auditing standards . in addition , irs obtains considerable data from withholding agents but does not make effective use of the data to ensure that withholding agents perform their duties properly . in designing the qi program , irs , treasury , and intermediaries and their representatives had the objective of achieving an appropriate balance to obtain appropriate assurance that qis meet their obligations without imposing such a burden that intermediaries would not participate in the program .