examples follow . we found little evidence in the contract file that the contractor's proposed prices had been analyzed for price reasonableness at various points during the life of the order . for example , the fbi program official's analysis of the contractor's proposed price for the order under the initial contract was a statement in an email that she had reviewed the price and found it reasonable , with no further documentation supporting the statement . further , during preparations to award an option year on this order , an fbi program official again approved the contractor's revised price proposal with a simple “yes” response when asked by the interior contracting officer , and also explained to the contracting officer that the independent estimate — presumably for this option year — was different from the contractor's proposed prices in part because the contractor included additional labor categories that the fbi did not require , but that they “agreed with.” communications between the fbi and interior were problematic . specifically , the program office was communicating directly with the contractor about the growth in the requirements but not involving the contracting officers . for example , the contractor informed the interior contracting officer that it had been directed by the program office , due to a change in requirements , to establish an increased level of continuity and retention within the terrorist screening center — particularly for the second and third shifts . the contractor proposed additional compensation for these shifts and told the contracting officer that approval to apply these shift differentials would be approved by the program office . the contracting officer told us the program office should have informed her first of the need for shift differential compensation and that the direction to the contractor should have come from her rather than from the program office . interior contracting officials expressed dismay at the program office's lack of communication with them and told us that sometimes they did not know what was going on with their own contract . further , when interior was preparing to award the second contract to the anc firm , an fbi program official told the contracting officer that she understood delays in the award may be due to interior's legal review process ; the fbi official , in an effort to expedite the process , then asked for the legal representative's contact information to “move this along smoothly.” interior officials told us that after several years of dealing with this contract , their office had undergone a culture change whereby they were starting to push back on customer demands instead of simply doing what the program offices wanted . eventually , after a dispute about the interagency contracting fees the fbi was paying to interior and interior's desire to not award another sole - source contract to the same vendor , the fbi officials told us that they pulled the requirement in - house and , under their own contract , awarded the requirement noncompetitively to another anc 8 ( a ) firm . fbi officials added that by this time , they had increased their own contracting staff so were able to handle this requirement themselves .