we disagree . commerce's june 2000 guidance on how to conduct psvs states that psvs are the first line of defense in preventing illegal technology transfer after dual - use items have been exported . we also found that psvs play a less important role in future licensing decisions than other sources of information . as noted in the report , commerce officials stated that industry leads , information from other agencies , self - disclosures , and visa referrals are more highly valued in licensing decisions than information gathered during a psv . commerce stated that the effectiveness of psvs cannot be assessed in isolation from other enforcement and compliance efforts of commerce . we agree . our report includes discussions of several of these mechanisms , including prelicense checks ( p. 4 ) , screening against its watch list ( p. 15 ) , and using information on export transactions from industry and other agencies ( p. 16 ) . we also discuss the deterrent effect of prosecuting criminal and administrative enforcement cases ( pp . 21-23 , app . ii ) . commerce notes that its new safeguards protocol requires training for all safeguards trip team members prior to their departure . however , as of december 2003 , two agents had received this training . commerce noted that it had undertaken to revise the priority of license checks in countries of concern , by focusing on hong kong , russia , india , israel , and the united arab emirates . we have added information in the report to reflect the new efforts . in addition , julie hirshen , eugene beye , joseph brown , lynn cothern , jeanine lavender , steve lord , and minette richardson made significant contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading .