this testimony . the nslds data we obtained allows us to count federal student loans and loan balances , but not the number of borrowers . although education maintains borrower - level data , we were only able to obtain aggregated data by loan type during the course of our analyses . these summary tables reported that about 1,000 of the more than 6 million parent plus loans outstanding in fiscal year 2013 were to borrowers under the age of 25 . according to education , these cases resulted from a reporting issue where the date of birth of the parent plus borrower was the reported as being the same as that of the student . we excluded these parent plus loans from our analysis . to understand the extent to which older americans defaulted on federal student loans and the possible consequences of such a default , we relied on a number of data sources and agency documents related to federal student loans . to determine the extent to which older americans have defaulted on federal student loans , we used data from the nslds summary tables we received from education . to evaluate the consequences of default , we reviewed federal law , regulations , and agency documents describing the collection process for defaulted federal student loans , including offset of federal benefit payments through the treasury offset program ( top ) . we interviewed officials at education involved in managing defaulted federal student loans , and we interviewed officials at treasury , education , and the social security administration about the process for offsetting social security retirement , survivor , and disability benefits through the top . they generally agreed with our findings . we received technical comments from each agency except the social security administration , which had no comments , and as appropriate , we incorporated these technical comments into this testimony . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to september 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since passage of the higher education act of 1965 , a broad array of federal student aid programs , including loan programs , have been available to help students finance the cost of postsecondary education . currently , several types of federal student loans administered by education make up the largest portion of student loans in the united states . four types of federal student loans are available to borrowers and have features that make them attractive for financing higher education . for example , borrowers are not required to begin repaying most federal student loans until after graduation or when their enrollment status significantly changes . further , interest rates on federal student loans are generally lower than other financing alternatives , and the programs offer repayment flexibilities if borrowers are unable to meet scheduled payments .