hhs did not have comments . we also provided relevant excerpts to states we visited and incorporated their technical comments as appropriate . in its written comments , education agreed with our recommendation to develop an online clearinghouse and noted actions it plans to take to implement it . specifically , education said in fall 2019 , its office of elementary and secondary education will restructure its entire website to better organize its information , and create a new web page to house all foster care - related information and resources . additionally , education said this office will launch a virtual portal through which sea foster care points of contact may collaborate and share resources . in addition , in a draft report sent to education in august 2019 , we included a recommendation to education to update its foster care point of contact email list , and develop a process to update it at regular intervals . education noted in its comment letter that it had updated its email list and that it will solicit updates to the email list on a quarterly basis , so we subsequently removed this recommendation . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of education and health and human services , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at 617-788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of our report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this report examines ( 1 ) the challenges states and selected local educational agencies face implementing the requirements of the every student succeeds act ( essa ) related to educational stability for youth in foster care , and ( 2 ) how the department of education ( education ) provided technical assistance and monitored states and localities to ensure compliance with these requirements , including collaborating with the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . to address both objectives and obtain national information , we held three discussion groups with officials from state educational agencies and child welfare agencies and conducted a web - based survey of state educational agencies in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico . to obtain more in - depth information , we visited three states — arizona , georgia , and ohio — where we interviewed officials from state and local educational agencies and child welfare agencies . we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , education and hhs guidance to states , and other research publications .