teach and deliver it ? are we achieving the educational outcomes , that is , can we measure it ? according to its report , the mecc relied on the professional opinion of the academic deans of the jpme schools and directors of other joint education programs to make determinations about the effectiveness of their officer and senior enlisted programs based on the 35 subattributes identified by the mecc . to conduct the gap analysis , the mecc analyzed the 945 responses it received from the 27 programs and used a stoplight color coding scheme to summarize by cohort group each program's assessment of its current capabilities to achieve the joint force 2020 outcomes . the gap analysis results were then coded , scored and ranked by officer cohort group ( precommissioning , intermediate , senior , capstone ) using four categories to describe the program's current capabilities . in turn , this gap analysis helped inform the mecc's 21 recommendations . while the mecc conducted a similar gap analysis for its senior enlisted jpme programs , the results of that analysis led the mecc to conclude that the department needed to further reconsider and redefine the desired leader attributes for enlisted personnel . the mecc has not yet fully developed timeframes and coordinated with all stakeholders , nor has it assessed the costs associated with implementing any of the study's recommendations . as a result , it is not clear how the department will obtain concurrence among its stakeholders regarding an approach for moving forward , or how the department will hold its stakeholders accountable for implementing change . furthermore , the department will not know whether the implementation of its recommendations will be cost effective . we have previously found that project planning is the basis for controlling and managing project performance , including managing the relationship between cost and time . our 2004 training guide highlights the need for agencies to develop a formal process to help ensure that strategic and tactical changes are promptly incorporated in training and development efforts . specifically , that report advises that agencies develop plans that describe or outline the way in which the agency intends to incorporate strategic and tactical changes into its training and developmental efforts . our guide also highlights that including important agency stakeholders in the process can contribute to an open and continuous exchange of ideas and information , particularly when it comes to ensuring that strategic and tactical changes are promptly incorporated into training and developmental efforts . according to the july 16 , 2012 memorandum that directed the mecc study , the march 1 , 2013 deadline for the results of the study was intended to help shape the fall 2013 academic year . the mecc completed its report on june 24 , 2013 , and provided us with a copy of the final report on july 1 , 2013 . subsequently , officials provided us with an informational paper that identifies an office of primary responsibility and outlines details on the status of the recommendations . however , this paper does not fully lay out dod's planned actions in a transparent manner .