gao - 01-288 . be overly optimistic and to minimize the difficulty and resources needed to deliver the capability . many of our prior recommendations have been aimed at this problem and , while one could argue whether more formal authority should be granted to the service chiefs , the current acquisition process allows for the service chiefs to be more involved in the management and oversight of acquisition programs . regardless , the solution must involve investing in systems engineering expertise sooner — while developing requirements — to enable technological knowledge to better shape and define operational requirements . recommendations such as holding preliminary design reviews before the start of system development have been made as a means to improve program outcomes . after initial support , the enthusiasm for these practices wanes and the old pressures to continue with insufficient knowledge prevail , because the old practices allow programs to proceed and funding to flow . importantly , the negative consequences of proceeding with limited knowledge are not sufficient to counteract these pressures , as accountability for the initial poor decisions is lost by the time problems emerge . information and expertise will not result in good outcomes unless the need for a solid business case is reinforced . in order to improve program outcomes , dod must focus its efforts on better integrating the requirements and acquisition processes , which can be achieved through better collaboration between these communities from the generation of requirements through system development , coupled with a greater emphasis on systems engineering and knowledge attainment early in a program's life cycle . former military service chiefs and vice chiefs . we met with all current military service chiefs and vice chiefs as of september 2014 , including the chief and vice chief of staff of the air force , the chief and vice chief of staff of the army , the chief and vice chief of naval operations , and the commandant and assistant commandant of the marine corps . we also sought the perspectives of other dod leadership , including the service acquisition executives . we analyzed evidence and examples collected from our interviews with current and former dod leadership , and assessed them in relation to findings from acquisition reform studies and prior gao work on dod weapon systems and commercial best practices . to assess key problems or factors the service chiefs identified with the acquisition process and our assessment of these issues , we drew upon our extensive body of work in defense acquisitions and best practices , and reviewed program execution information from all 78 ongoing major defense acquisition programs identified in annual selected acquisition reports . we assessed the reliability of the data by reviewing existing information about the system and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . in december 2014 , after completing our interviews and analysis , we sent a summary of the problems with the acquisition process identified during our interviews to the seven current and former military service chiefs whom we interviewed for their review and comment . we received responses from five of the seven service chiefs . instead , incentives exist that encourage deviation from sound policies and practices .