we analyzed information from other years to provide context . we also matched the names of company officers and directors in the s&p data to the names of the tax shelter investors in the irs database . whenever we found a match , we tried to verify if the same person was actually involved , as opposed to two people with the same first and last names . if the person appeared to be the same ( for example , had the same middle initial ) , we matched the promoter name for that individual and , similar to what was just described , the tax benefit dates in the irs database to the auditing firm of the individual's company for 1998 through 2003 in the s&p data . our matching methodology did not allow us to detect instances in which a spouse or other relative of the officer or director was the tax shelter investor or instances in which the investing entity was a partnership or other unit formed by the officer or director . additional transactions might later be found to be nonabusive . according to an irs official , the database included some tax shelter transactions more than once — at the level of a flow - through entity , such as a partnership , and again at the level of the taxpayers , for example , the individual partners — with the relevant dollar amounts thus appearing twice . this limitation would not apply to information dealing only with fortune 500 companies' use of tax shelters . the numbers could be underestimates for the following reasons: the irs database did not include promoters for about a quarter of the transactions of the 207 fortune 500 companies that used tax shelters . in these cases , the tax shelter might have been obtained using a promoter that the taxpayer did not identify to irs , or , according to an irs official , a very few taxpayers not working for firms designing tax shelters might have developed their own tax shelter . in total , the database did not include promoters for 2,095 , or about 14 percent , of its transactions as of may 28 , 2004 . the database did not reflect estimated potential tax losses for about a third of the transactions of the fortune 500 companies using an accounting firm to obtain tax shelters , or for about a quarter of the transactions of the total number of fortune 500 companies obtaining tax shelters . according to an irs official , this was because taxpayers did not include estimated losses on documents submitted to irs . as part of our work , we tested the reliability of irs's database and the data we received from s&p . according to an irs official , taxpayer - provided information may represent estimates or incomplete information . despite these data limitations , the numbers we present in this report provide a general indication of the extent to which fortune 500 companies did use their external auditor for tax shelter services .