visitor services . our survey found that the quality of all six wildlife - dependent visitor services was stable or improving between fiscal years 2002 and 2007 , according to the vast majority of refuge managers responding to our survey . most notably , environmental education and interpretation programs showed the largest percentage of refuges reporting improvement , although these programs also showed the largest percentage reporting declines as well , as compared to other visitor services ( see table 4 ) . our survey found that four of the six key visitor services provided to the public were of moderate or better quality at most refuges in 2007 , but environmental education and interpretation were reported to be low quality at about one - third of refuges ( see table 5 ) . managers told us that education and interpretation are among the most resource intensive visitor service programs and , for these reasons , the programs are often among the first areas to be cut when a refuge faces competing demands . a major factor influencing the quality of visitor services — beyond the abundance of fish and wildlife populations — is the amount and quality of refuge infrastructure and the availability of supplies . for example , the availability of trails and tour routes is essential to providing the public with access to what refuges have to offer and is generally important for supporting any type of visitor service activity . hunting and fishing infrastructure depend largely on physical structures such as duck blinds , boat launches , and fishing platforms . providing wildlife observation and photography opportunities simply require adequate access to the refuge , but can be enhanced through observation platforms and photography blinds . environmental education depends on physical infrastructure , such as classrooms , and supplies , such as workbooks , handouts , and microscopes . environmental interpretation also depends on physical infrastructure such as informational kiosks and interpretive signs along trails . habitat management . fluctuations in staffing levels . staffing levels for core refuge activities ( core staffing ) , as measured by full - time equivalents ( fte ) the refuge system actually used , peaked one year later than core inflation - adjusted funding and then declined more slowly . specifically , core staffing , which includes operations , maintenance , and fire management , peaked in fiscal year 2004 at a level 10.0 percent higher than in fiscal year 2002 , but declined after that to 4.0 percent below peak staffing levels in fiscal year 2007 . this level , however , was still 5.5 percent higher than the staffing level in fiscal year 2002 . while operations and maintenance ftes increased 3.6 percent overall during our study period , they ended the period down 6.9 percent from their 2004 peak . fire management ftes , on the other hand , increased 14.3 percent over fiscal year 2002 levels . similar to ftes , the number of employees on board in refuge system positions also declined after peaking in fiscal year 2004 . through fiscal year 2007 , nearly 375 employees were lost from the refuge system's peak staffing levels , a reduction of 8.4 percent over this period .