( see fig . the disposal process differs depending on the disposal method selected . as part of the disposal process , va is required to take certain actions , including conducting environmental reviews and considering the effects of its actions on historic properties . accordingly , va conducts “due diligence” reviews on vacant properties , and these reviews include complying with selected federal requirements described in table 1 below . from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , va disposed of 577 properties ( including 471 buildings with about 5-million gross square feet ) , primarily through demolition of medical facilities and enhanced - use lease agreements ( see fig . these two methods accounted for the disposal of 3.6-million gross square feet of building space . va used other disposal methods , such as transferring property to states for nursing home care or negotiating a sale , for the remaining 50 properties , as shown in figure 4 below . as of july 2018 , va reported initiating the disposal or re - use of 167 of the 430 vacant buildings the secretary identified for disposal in june 2017 . of the 471 building disposals from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , va disposed of 203 buildings in fiscal year 2012 alone in contrast to 61 building disposals in fiscal year 2017 , as shown in figure 5 . a va official attributed the decline in disposals from fiscal year 2012 to fiscal year 2013 to limitations placed on va's enhanced - use lease authority in 2012 . additional information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted our work from november 2017 to december 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va administers its services and programs through three distinct administrations — veterans health administration ( vha ) , veterans benefits administration , and the national cemetery administration . vha is the largest property holder within va and is responsible for overseeing health care delivery to enrolled veterans and managing all va medical facilities . vha's visns are responsible for overseeing medical facilities , and va works with the visns and local medical facilities to manage its real property assets through va's capital - planning process . various va offices share responsibilities for managing and disposing of real properties . specifically: visns and local facilities are responsible for identifying , planning , and managing underutilized and vacant properties , including executing demolitions of buildings . office of capital asset management , engineering , and support , within vha , is responsible for supporting the property disposal efforts of visns and local facilities , including providing funding for demolitions ( if properties are part of a minor construction project or non - recurring maintenance project ) .