 fea . when originally developed in 1999 , the fea was intended to provide federal agencies with a common construct for their architectures and thereby facilitate the coordination of common business processes , technology insertion , information flows , and system investments among federal agencies . as part of the fiscal year 2004 budget cycle , omb required agencies to align proposed it investments to the fea reference models ; this information was then used to develop the initial lob initiatives . since that time , agencies have established individual enterprise architectures and used them to characterize their it investments and to guide plans for the future . in 2004 , we reported that the fea was a work in progress and was still evolving . to this point , the federal chief enterprise architect recently began planning changes to the fea framework — such as updating existing reference models and adding reference models for software applications , infrastructure , and security — to further assist agencies in reducing duplication and improving mission performance . omb's chief architect reported that comprehensive changes to the fea are planned for fiscal year 2012 .  targeted it initiatives . omb officials reported that ongoing it initiatives , including efforts to consolidate federal data centers and to develop trusted internet connections , could help reduce duplication across government . specifically , in february 2010 , omb began an initiative meant to consolidate federal data centers and hardware and software assets through virtualization , cloud computing , and consolidation . in july 2011 , omb reported that the federal government had already closed 81 centers and was on track to close 137 centers by december 2011 and 800 by 2015 . however , in july 2011 , we reported that federal agencies' data center inventories and consolidation plans were incomplete and recommended that agencies complete their data center consolidation inventories and plans , and that omb's data center task force oversee these efforts . separately , in november 2007 , omb announced its trusted internet connection initiative to improve security by reducing and consolidating external network connections . however , we reported in march 2010 that none of the 23 participating agencies had yet met all of the initiative's requirements and recommended steps to improve communication and performance measures . in addition , we recently reported on other governmentwide initiatives and found that the fedramp project , which is to provide , among other functions , continuous security monitoring of cloud computing systems for multiagency use , is currently behind schedule , and has not yet defined all performance metrics . similarly , the fedspace project , which is to provide federal employees and contractors collaboration tools for cross - agency knowledge sharing , is also behind schedule and has not defined all of its performance metrics . we recommended establishing metrics so that the benefits of these initiatives can be effectively measured .  techstat reviews . omb works with federal agencies to identify it projects that need increased visibility in the agency ; high - risk projects are then selected for a techstat session . this program enables the government to improve or terminate it investments that are experiencing performance problems .