gao - 08-255t . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2007 . these rules are the subject of h.r . gao - 07-214 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . 5613 — which would place a moratorium on the rules — and of today's hearing . one of those rules , issued as a final rule in may 2007 , relates to a body of work gao has conducted since the early 1990s on state medicaid financing arrangements . in my testimony today , i will summarize and describe our findings on ( 1 ) past inappropriate state medicaid financing arrangements , including their implications for the fiscal integrity of the medicaid program , and ( 2 ) the outcomes and transparency of cms's 2003 initiative , which provides context for considering the effect of the may rule on various stakeholders . my testimony is based on our previous work assessing various medicaid financing arrangements and federal oversight of these arrangements . we conducted this body of work from june 1993 through march 2007 . we have not reported on the proposed and final rules that are addressed in h.r . 5613 , with respect to the operation of the medicaid program . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we have reported for more than a decade on varied financing arrangements that inappropriately increase federal medicaid matching payments . in reports issued from 1994 through 2005 , we reported on various arrangements whereby states received federal matching funds by paying certain government providers , such as county - owned or county - operated nursing homes , amounts that greatly exceeded standard medicaid rates . the large payments were often temporary , since some states could require the government providers to return all or most of the money to the states . states used the federal matching funds received for these payments — which essentially made a round - trip from the states to providers and back to the states — at their own discretion . such financing arrangements had significant fiscal implications for the federal government and states . the exact amount of additional federal medicaid funds generated through these arrangements is not known , but was in the billions of dollars . despite congressional and cms action taken during those years to limit such arrangements , we found even in recent years that improved federal oversight of such arrangements was still needed . because such financing arrangements effectively increase the federal medicaid share above what is established by law , they threaten the fiscal integrity of medicaid's federal and state partnership . they shift costs inappropriately from the states to the federal government , and take funding intended for medicaid beneficiaries and covered medicaid costs from providers , who do not under these arrangements retain the full payments . cms's oversight initiative , started in 2003 to end inappropriate state financing arrangements , by august 2006 had resulted in 29 states ending one or more financing arrangements in which providers did not retain the supplemental payments they received .