iii ) . the three - step process flier and the resource guide for businesses provide estimates of expected time frames for the processing and closing steps of the loan process . however , the electronic loan application and some other resources do not provide an applicant with any estimated time frame of when the disaster business loan application will be processed . the electronic loan application does provide the applicant with application status messages , such as “processing application.” see appendix v for application status messages and descriptions . according to sba officials , sba has updated its disaster forecasting model and planning documents that enable sba to better estimate loan processing time frames based on the severity of a disaster , the volume of expected loan applications , and other factors . according to the acsi survey results for 2012 through 2015 , loan applicants and recipients surveyed consistently rated the loan decision process with the second - lowest satisfaction scores . in response to questions about the decision process , survey respondents were least satisfied with the “timeliness of the decision.” based on the survey results , acsi recommended from 2012-2015 that sba focus on improving the loan decision process as a means of increasing applicants' and recipients' satisfaction with the process . the paperwork reduction act and omb state that agencies should explain the collection and use of personal information and promote transparency with the public . one of the three sbdcs told us of instances where applicants thought they had provided all the required documentation , but received subsequent requests from sba for additional documentation . in a 2014 report on disaster assistance , we found in interviews with sbdcs and local business organizations that sba's follow - up requests for additional documentation prolonged the application process and loan decision . furthermore , we observed that although the paper application form includes a list of additional information that may be requested , the electronic loan application does not include a list of other information an applicant may have to provide sba in addition to the required forms . also , as of august 2016 , the electronic loan application did not contain two disaster business loan forms: ( 1 ) sba form 159d – fee disclosure and compensation , and ( 2 ) sba form 1368 – additional filing requirements economic injury disaster loan , and military reservist economic injury disaster loan . according to sba officials , sba includes links to these two forms in follow - up letters sent to disaster business loan applicants after they submit their loan applications . lack of information about the reasons for required documents . according to responses from sba's survey of loan applicants provided by sba , one survey respondent said that the loan process required too much information from applicants when sba could access the same information elsewhere . the applicant cited that she should not have to locate copies of her tax return when sba can use her signed tax transcript form to obtain tax information from the irs . further , according to one sbdc we interviewed , applicants it assisted did not understand why sba requires applicants to submit both a current tax return and complete an irs tax transcript authorization form .