disadvantaged . in 1989 when the program began , sba funded 13 wbcs . the women's business ownership act of 1988 , pub . 100-533 , § 201 , 102 stat . 2689 , 2690 ( 1988 ) created the wbc program with demonstration projects that would expire in 1991 . although the act was passed in 1988 , wbcs were initially funded in 1989. business ownership ( owbo ) in sba's office of entrepreneurial development ( oed ) . however , congress and wbcs participating in the program have expressed concerns about the centers' ability to continue operating without sba funding and about the uncertain funding structure of the program . congress has made changes to the wbc program in several reauthorizations to extend the program since it was first established in 1988 . in its 1999 reauthorization , congress made a significant change by establishing the sustainability pilot program to make funding available to wbcs after the initial 5-year funding limit , which many believed did not offer wbcs enough time to become self - sustaining . because the pilot also had a 5-year limit , wbcs could no longer receive funding from sba after 10 years , and the pilot raised additional concerns because of uncertainty about its reauthorization and funding . in may 2007 , to address the uncertainties about the pilot program , congress replaced it by allowing wbcs — including those that had “graduated” from the program — to receive 3-year renewable awards . while there have been changes in the wbc program's funding structure , the budget available for wbc awards has remained relatively constant for the past 5 years . during that same time , sba has downsized and has fewer agency resources . concerns have also been raised about whether sba's business assistance programs are duplicating each other's efforts . in a previous report , we noted the need for the federal government , during this time of constrained resources , to reexamine federal programs that may have overlapping missions and responsibilities . the two other primary business assistance programs that sba administers are the small business development center ( sbdc ) and score ( formerly called the service corps of retired executives ) programs . these programs also provide training and counseling services to aspiring and existing small business owners but are not expected to target a particular group . under the terms of the sba award , wbcs are required to coordinate with local sbdcs and score chapters when appropriate . to assist you in oversight of sba programs and because of your interest in the wbc program , you requested that we evaluate key issues related to the program , including funding for wbcs and the potential for duplication among the wbc , sbdc , and score programs . accordingly , this report addresses ( 1 ) the uncertainties associated with the funding process for wbcs ; ( 2 ) sba's oversight of the wbc program , including policies and procedures for monitoring compliance with program requirements and assessing program effectiveness ; and ( 3 ) the services that wbcs provide to small businesses and actions that sba and wbcs have taken to avoid duplicating the services offered by the sbdc and score programs .