additional comments . n=28 q5: state communication and guidance state department communication and guidance factors: how sufficient or insufficient 5. were the following communication and guidance factors for achieving public diplomacy objectives ? ( check only one answer for each item listed below. ) the quality of 5b . ( check only one answer for each factor listed below. ) inr polling data ( please specify ) 20d if you checked an additional source please list and describe it here . additional comments n=21 21 . in your opinion , how accurately does inr polling data measure the effectiveness of public diplomacy programs and activities in your host country ? n=114 ( check only one answer. ) in your opinion , how accurately does bbg audience research measure the effectiveness of public diplomacy programs and activities in your host country ? n=115 ( check only one answer. ) how could polling or audience research be a more effective tool for your public diplomacy efforts ? are u.s. government - sponsored international broadcasting programs received in your host country ? such programs include voice of america radio / tv , worldnet television , radio / tv marti , radio free europe / radio liberty , radio free asia , radio free afghanistan , and radio sawa . n=116 ( check only one answer. ) 80.2% yes 2 . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . inr polling data 20 . in your opinion , how useful to public diplomacy is the information received from the following sources ? ( check only one answer for each factor listed below. ) 12.9% no ( click here to skip to question 26. ) 6.9% not applicable ( click here to skip to question 26. ) in your opinion , how effective or ineffective are the following broadcasting elements in terms of helping to achieve public diplomacy goals ? ( please check only one answer for each item listed below. ) in your opinion , how effective is u.s. government - sponsored international broadcasting in achieving u.s. public diplomacy objectives in your host country ( promoting u.s. national interests through understanding , informing , and influencing foreign audiences ) ? n=109 ( check only one answer. ) additional comments about broadcasting .