use of encryption . federal agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , use encryption to secure their radio communications . encryption can be vitally important in preserving the safety and security of their officers . new york has established a statewide interoperability executive committee that is currently working to establish a state interoperability plan . in addition , there are several different groups throughout new york that are involved with interoperability at the state and local level . according to state officials , the governance structure limits the state's ability to mandate requirements to local governments ; therefore , individual counties and cities determine their own interoperability requirements and have their own governance structure in place for interoperable communications . the state , however , determines priority investments and the localities must spend grant money on these priority investments . interoperable communications was a priority investment for both grants for fiscal year 2006 . the state is currently in the process of deploying a statewide wireless network intended to provide an integrated mobile radio communications network that links all state agencies and would be available to connect participating local agencies ( see figure 7 ) . it will be a digital , trunked radio system with both voice and data capabilities and will be used in day - to - day operations , as well as large scale emergency situations . the network is to interconnect radio sites across the state through a “backbone network” based on internet protocol ( ip ) . frequency incompatibilities . the national telecommunications and information administration , which manages frequencies used by federal agencies , and the federal communications commission , which manages frequencies used by state and local governments , have established conflicting time frames for when federal agencies and state and local agencies need to implement narrowband systems . our review showed that while the program has had broad goals that include federal , as well as state and local agencies , its specific program goals and activities have not focused on improving interoperable communications between federal and other agencies . for example , one of the program's goals is to increase interoperable communications capacity of local , tribal , and state public safety agencies , not federal agencies . thus , it will be important for dhs to develop and implement a program plan that includes goals focusing on improving interoperability among all levels of government . dhs agreed with our recommendation to include quantifiable performance measures in the program plan for safecom and other oec interoperability programs . dhs indicated that it intends to establish such measures by the third quarter of 2007 . dhs stated that it is deferring comments on two recommendations: ( 1 ) assess how states' grant requests support their statewide communications plans and ( 2 ) plan for a new full - scale exercise for uasi areas to validate their interoperable communications plans . dhs disagreed with our recommendation that it modify grant guidance to provide more flexibility in purchasing communications equipment until standards for completed interfaces have been fully defined and products have been certified compliant with all aspects of the standards .