resources . we previously found that collaborating agencies should identify the various resources , including financial and staff resources , needed to initiate and sustain their collaborative effort . collaboration can take time and resources in order to accomplish activities such as building trust among the participants , setting up the ground rules for the process , attending meetings , conducting project work , and monitoring and evaluating the results of work performed . moreover , relying on agencies to participate can present challenges for collaborative mechanisms . our past work has also found that , in cases where staff participation was insufficient , collaboration often failed to meet key objectives and achieve intended outcomes . consequently , it is important for groups to ensure that they identify and leverage sufficient funding and staffing to accomplish the objectives . agencies do not have a full understanding of their future resource needs — in terms of individual agency funds and staffing contributions — to maintain the pilot initiative through september 2020 , when the third round is currently scheduled to end . federal and non - federal partners in the disconnected youth pilots told us that these resources are important for its success . agency officials told us that , because much of their early focus was on designing and implementing the initiative in short time frames , decisions related to resource contributions generally were made as needed to ensure near - term progress . now that agencies have designated finalists for the second and third rounds , they can better identify and plan for the resources they will need to contribute to support the overall initiative through its lifetime ( september 2020 ) . however , the agencies — including omb which has responsibility for coordinating agencies' overall efforts to implement the disconnected youth pilots — have not yet fully identified how those resources will be provided . key aspects of the pilot initiative rely on funding and staff contributed by individual agencies . as such , it is important for each agency to understand what resources it is expected to provide so that it can plan accordingly . by fully identifying and planning for the specific financial and staff resource contributions described below , the agencies will have greater assurance that those contributions will sustain success in their collaborative efforts and the overall pilot initiative . financial resources . as was previously mentioned , the funding for federal grants included in individual pilots is provided through appropriations . according to agency officials involved in the pilots , they identified additional activities that they considered key to the success of the initiative . as highlighted in table 1 , these include the start - up grants , general technical assistance , and the national and site - specific evaluations . education and dol leveraged various mechanisms , including contracts and interagency transfers , and other agencies contributed funds , to the extent possible , to support these activities . according to agency officials , their agencies consider potential contributions on a year - to - year basis , depending on the available resources in eligible programs . they told us that their agencies have needed to make trade - off decisions among competing priorities to contribute funds to these activities each year .