choice program . vapihcs may also refer veterans to a non - va provider in the community when veterans need care that is not offered by vapihcs , or cannot obtain the needed care in a timely manner . in fiscal year 2017 , 61 percent of vapihcs referrals sent to community providers were through the choice program . ( see fig . 1 for the breakdown of the number and percent of referrals sent to care outside of vapihcs in fiscal year 2017. ) veterans may opt to obtain health care services from a network of community providers through the choice program if they meet certain criteria , including: 1. the next available medical appointment with a vha clinician is more than 30 days from the veteran's preferred appointment date or the date the veteran's physician determines he or she should be seen ; 2. the veteran lives more than 40 miles driving distance from the nearest vha facility with a full - time primary care physician ; 3. the veteran needs to travel by air , boat , or ferry to the vha facility that is closest to his or her home ; 4. the veteran faces an unusual or excessive burden in travelling to a vha facility based on geographic challenges , environmental factors , or a medical condition ; 5. the veteran's specific health care needs , including the nature and frequency of care needed , warrants participation in the program ; or 6. the veteran lives in a state or territory without a full - service vha medical facility . as the third - party administrator of the choice program for vapihcs , triwest is responsible for establishing networks of community providers , scheduling appointments with community providers for eligible veterans , and paying providers for their services . triwest has contractual time frames in which to accept and schedule the appointment , or return the referral to vapihcs for further action . our review of 30 medical records of newly enrolled veterans accessing initial primary care services at the american samoa , guam , or maui clinic found some delays in processing of health care benefits enrollment applications and contacting of veterans to schedule appointments . once contacted , however , most veterans in our sample received initial primary care within vha's timeliness goal . these enrollment delays may have contributed to the time taken for veterans to see primary care providers , consistent with findings from our prior work . enrollment for va health care benefits to receive va health care benefits , a veteran may submit an enrollment application by mail , telephone , through va's website , or by applying in person at a va health care facility . once a veteran submits an application , there are three key steps for processing the application: ( 1 ) intake of application , ( 2 ) verification of eligibility , and ( 3 ) enrollment determination . in fiscal year 2016 , most enrollment applications were processed by va medical center staff . according to veterans health administration policy , staff are required to process applications within 5 business days of receipt . applications within the timeliness goal set in vha policy .