by other contractors were resolved . cms had not resolved or taken significant action to resolve 38 of 44 vulnerabilities ( 86 percent ) reported in 2009 by zpics . only 1 vulnerability had been fully resolved by january 2011 . the oig made several recommendations , including that cms have written procedures and time frames to assure that vulnerabilities were resolved . cms has indicated that it is now tracking vulnerabilities identified from several types of contractors through a single vulnerability tracking process . we are currently examining aspects of cms's vulnerability tracking process and will be reporting on it soon . although cms has taken some important steps to identify and prevent fraud , including implementing provisions in ppaca and the small business jobs act , more remains to be done to prevent making erroneous medicare payments due to fraud . in particular , we have found cms could do more to strengthen provider enrollment screening to avoid enrolling those intent on committing fraud , improve pre - and post - payment claims review to identify and respond to patterns of suspicious billing activity more effectively , and identify and address vulnerabilities to reduce the ease with which fraudulent entities can obtain improper payments . it is critical that cms implement and make full use of new authorities granted by recent legislation , as well as incorporate recommendations made by us , as well as the oig in these areas . moving from responding once fraud has already occurred to preventing it from occurring in the first place is key to ensuring that federal funds are used efficiently and for their intended purposes . as all of these new authorities and requirements become part of medicare's operations , additional evaluation and oversight will be necessary to determine whether they are implemented as required and have the desired effect . we have several studies underway that assess efforts to fight fraud in medicare and that should continue to help cms refine and improve its fraud detection and prevention efforts . notably , we are assessing the effectiveness of different types of pre - payment edits in medicare and of cms's oversight of its contractors in implementing those edits to help ensure that medicare pays claims correctly the first time . we are also examining the use of predictive analytics by cms and the zpics to improve fraud prevention and detection . zpics play an important role in detecting and investigating fraud and identifying vulnerabilities , and fps will likely play an increasing role in how zpics conduct their work . additionally , we have work under way to identify the types of providers and suppliers currently under investigation and those that have been found to have engaged in fraudulent activities . these studies may enable us to point out additional actions for cms that could help the agency more systematically reduce fraud in the medicare program . due to the amount of program funding at risk , fraud will remain a continuing threat to medicare , so continuing vigilance to reduce vulnerabilities will be necessary . individuals who want to defraud medicare will continue to develop new approaches to try to circumvent cms's safeguards and investigative and enforcement efforts .