security . this organization is a decision - making body responsible for providing recommendations to the secretary of health and human services on coordination of medical countermeasures development against chemical and biological threats , among other responsibilities . similarly , in may 2014 , we found coordination of effort among federal agencies located on the national interagency biodefense campus . the following textbox provides our observations on the program's efforts at the national interagency biodefense campus to collaborate with other federal agencies to reduce potential infrastructure fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . gao observations on the national interagency biodefense campus the national interagency biodefense campus at fort detrick , maryland , was established in 2004 . an official with the u.s. army medical research and materiel command testified before the house select committee on homeland security in 2004 that the campus would share common infrastructure and supporting requirements , such as roadways , libraries , and regulatory and quality assurance responsibility . in addition , the official stated that the campus would minimize duplication of effort , technology , and infrastructure . during the course of our review , we found some examples of actions taken by the cbdp enterprise's primary research and development facility at the national interagency biodefense campus to reduce the potential for duplication of physical and intellectual infrastructure . a set of studies on medical countermeasure test and evaluation facility requirements , conducted for the u.s. army assistant chief of staff for facilities , planning and programming division , determined , among other things , that there was sufficient capacity for holding animals in existing facilities that conduct research with animals . during planning for a new medical countermeasure test and evaluation facility , a decision was made that the u.s. army medical research institute of infectious diseases ( usamriid ) on the national interagency biodefense campus would cancel its own plans to construct this building , including an animal holding facility ( vivarium ) . according to usamriid officials , the cancellation had an overall estimated cost savings of about $600 million . usamriid and the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases integrated research facility plan to share biosafety level - 3 ( bsl - 3 ) and bsl - 4 imaging laboratories capabilities . usamriid officials said that this reduces the need for each facility to have a bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 imaging laboratory . the national interagency confederation for biological research , a governance structure for the national interagency biodefense campus , encourages intellectual collaboration in efforts related to research of biological pathogens across agency boundaries , such as collaborative award programs and annual scientific forums . we conducted a number of reviews since 1999 on the efforts of federal agencies to reduce potential fragmentation , overlap , and duplication through coordination of their efforts to manage chemical and biological programs . we found improved coordination that may reduce potential fragmentation , overlap , and duplication of research and development of medical countermeasures .