we do not know if these results will be typical for all schools . one bia official indicated , however , that some schools were likely to experience greater changes than others in the square footage that would qualify for o&m funding . bia officials said that the improved data , along with improvements to the funding formula , will help ensure the various schools that their share of o&m funding was objectively and accurately determined . however , whether this corrected inventory data will be transferred to fmis in time for making fiscal year 2004 funding decisions is uncertain . bia may yet face some implementation problems as it moves into the final months of putting this information in place . for example , during 2002 , bia attempted to run the o&m funding formula using the existing fmis inventory data for the first time and experienced problems with the data and software . while the agency has had a year to work out these problems , introduction of the updated inventory data may hold its own unforeseen problems . if such problems are encountered and remain unresolved , a bia official told us that the agency would continue to use the data currently in the system to allocate the o&m funding for fiscal year 2004 . the backlog data in fmis reflects actions and funding needed to improve the condition of facilities and infrastructure at the various schools now and in the future . most of the items listed in the backlog provide detail for repairs needed over the next 5 years to correct what is wrong with a facility such as a leaky roof , the presence of asbestos , or a violation of handicapped codes and standards . however , fmis also includes entries for capital improvements that will need to be addressed beyond 5 years to upgrade specific building components such as replacing lighting and power systems , siding , and carpeting as well as future construction to replace , renovate , and add buildings to accommodate program needs . accurate and up - to - date backlog data are important because fmis contains formulas that use these data to allow bia to make informed decisions not only about which projects are in greatest need of attention , but also how much money is needed to fund them each year . as of october 2002 , for example , bia schools had a backlog of unfunded repairs and improvements with an estimated cost over $640 million ( see table 3 ) ; fmis shows that almost two - thirds of this amount may be needed within the next 5 years . ame currently validates the backlog for each school in a 3-year cycle . see appendix i for a more complete description of our scope and methodology . in that review , ame updated the backlog data by confirming entries already in the system , updating the costs estimated to conduct the work , deleting entries for duplicate items or completed work , and identifying new entries . we conducted our work between june 2002 and july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .