attorneys offices . of these cases , 37 involving 54 defendants were resolved or terminated . fbi cyber division . the cyber division coordinates , supervises , and facilitates the fbi's investigation of federal violations in which the internet , computer systems , and networks are exploited as the principal instruments or targets of criminal , foreign intelligence , or terrorism activity and for which the use of such systems is essential to that activity . for fiscal year 2003 , the cyber division investigated 596 cases involving intellectual property rights . of these cases , 160 were related specifically to software copyright infringement and 111 were related to other types of copyright infringement . the results of these investigations include 92 indictments and 95 convictions / pretrial diversions . computer crime and intellectual property section . the computer crime and intellectual property section consists of 38 attorneys who focus exclusively on computer and intellectual property crime , including ( 1 ) prosecuting cybercrime and intellectual property cases ; ( 2 ) advising and training local , state , and federal prosecutors and investigators in network attacks , computer search and seizure , and intellectual property law ; and ( 3 ) coordinating international enforcement and outreach efforts to combat intellectual property and computer crime worldwide . computer hacking and intellectual property units . computer hacking and intellectual property units are comprised of highly trained prosecutors and staff who are dedicated primarily to prosecuting high - tech crimes , including intellectual property offenses . there are 13 computer hacking and intellectual property units located in u.s . attorneys offices across the nation . each unit is comprised of between four and six prosecutors and dedicated support staff . computer and telecommunication coordinator network . the computer and telecommunication coordinator program consists of prosecutors specifically trained to address the range of novel and complex legal issues related to high tech and intellectual property crime , with general responsibility for prosecuting computer crime , acting as a technical advisor and liaison , and providing training and outreach . the computer and telecommunication coordinator program is made up of more than 200 assistant u.s . attorneys , with at least one prosecutor who is part of the program in each of the 94 u.s . attorneys offices . attorneys offices . attorneys serve as the nation's principal federal litigators under the direction of the u.s. attorney general . attorneys conduct most of the trial work in which the united states is a party and have responsibility for the prosecution of criminal cases brought by the federal government , the prosecution and defense of civil cases in which the united states is a party , and the collection of debts owed the federal government which are administratively uncollectible . attorneys stationed throughout the united states , puerto rico , the virgin islands , guam , and the northern mariana islands . for fiscal year 2002 , the u.s . attorneys offices received 75 referrals involving investigative matters for title 18 , u.s.c. , section 2319 — criminal infringement of a copyright — and 28 cases involving 56 defendants were resolved or terminated . u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , intellectual property rights coordination center .