country . type of industry / commodity . finance amount . final board decision . staff members conducting analyses . methodological issues . given the small universe ( 17 ) of detailed economic impact analyses conducted by ex - im from fiscal years 2002 through 2006 , we determined that selecting a random sample would not be necessary or appropriate . while we used these 5 case studies to guide some of our work , we reviewed all 17 detailed analyses because findings that are based solely on a judgmental sample would not necessarily be generalizable to all detailed economic impact analyses conducted . to describe ex - im's legal interpretation of its statutory economic impact analysis mandate , we reviewed the statutory provision as it was written in the bank's 2002 reauthorizing legislation ; reviewed other relevant legal documents ; and interviewed ex - im legal staff , including the general counsel , regarding their interpretation . to describe ex - im's economic impact analysis process , we reviewed ex - im's economic impact analyses procedures published in march 2003 and compared them with the 2002 reauthorization legislation for consistency . to describe how ex - im's 2006 reauthorization will impact the economic impact procedures , we reviewed the relevant legislation and the revised economic impact procedures , and spoke with cognizant ex - im officials . to describe how ex - im implements the economic impact procedures , we spoke with the analysts who analyzed our 5 case studies , the engineers who assisted with the analysis , and the supervising officials . to determine how many applications ex - im coded for economic impact , we reviewed data on all projects processed between fiscal years 2003 and 2005 . ex - im did not use the same set of economic impact procedures when reviewing applications in fiscal year 2002 ; therefore , we did not use data from that fiscal year . in addition , ex - im did not have complete data for fiscal year 2006 projects at the time of our review . these data have some limitations that could result in small deviations from the values and quantities that we reported . despite limitations , we determined that the transaction data provided by ex - im were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to determine whether the exportable goods in each of our five case studies were subject to antidumping orders and countervailing duty orders , we reviewed the united states international trade commission's ( itc ) list of current antidumping and countervailing duty orders in place as of october 23 , 2006 , and february 15 , 2007 ; the federal register from 1997 to the present for notices posted by itc or the department of commerce's international trade administration ( ita ) ; and ita's ad / cvd investigations federal register history . to determine whether the exportable goods in our five case studies were subject to “safeguards,” we searched the federal register from 1997 up to the date of the case for notices posted by itc or ita that mentioned the name of the product involved in our cases .