cost . private sector and federal agency representatives identified potential for cost savings as a benefit of using contract staff over in - house security staff . such potential cost savings were based on several factors identified by representatives: ( 1 ) an in - house staffing model requires organizations to have more employees on board to staff posts than may be required under a contract model in which security is procured hourly ; ( 2 ) a contract workforce may offer savings in employee compensation costs , including health and retirement benefits ; and ( 3 ) contract security costs are fixed within the contract , which may reduce the risk of budget fluctuations . first , contract security staff are typically procured based on the hours of service provided and not by the number of staff who are used by the contractor to provide such services . several federal officials reported that agencies that use in - house security workforces must have more security staff available than the equivalent hours required to fill the same security posts through a contract workforce to cover time when staff are away from their posts , such as for training or leave . for example , and as discussed later , smithsonian officials reported it uses contract security guards at lower - risk areas of its facilities which has enabled it to staff five posts with contract security guards for the same cost as three posts staffed with federal security guards . in addition , the use of an in - house security workforce increases the number of ftes an agency must recruit , train , schedule , and manage , and adds to the in - house administrative responsibilities and associated costs that could otherwise be handled by a contractor . however , army officials reported that an army analysis for fiscal year 2009 showed that while contract security guards would have offered savings over in - house security guards in the first 2 years of an in - sourcing decision , in - house security guards would be more cost effective over time as start - up costs for training , equipment , and uniforms are reduced . they noted it had sufficient administrative capacity to absorb the increased workload without additional administrative staff . second , federal agency and private sector representatives told us that a contract security workforce offers savings in employee compensation costs , including health and retirement benefits . with a contract security workforce , the contractor is responsible for providing health or retirement benefits to its workforce , rather than the organization procuring the service . several federal and private sector representatives reported that the benefits offered by contractors may be of lesser value than those offered in the federal sector , where employee benefits represent a significant portion of an employee's compensation . opm reported that for fiscal year 2010 , the cost factor for federal employee health benefits was about $5,900 per enrolled employee . retirement benefits for employees covered under the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) are about 14 percent of a regular civilian employee's salary and as much as 30 percent of a federal law enforcement officer's salary . marshals .