inspections . fws's office of law enforcement inspects certain wildlife shipments to help ensure that prohibited species , including certain aquatic invasive species , do not enter the country . fws's has about 120 inspectors at 49 ports of entry nationwide that review import documentation and conduct visual inspections of some shipments to help prevent species listed as injurious wildlife under the lacey act from being illegally brought into the country or across state lines . physical barriers . the corps operates a series of electric barriers in the chicago area waterway system located approximately 25 miles from lake michigan to prevent the entry of asian carp and other aquatic invasive species from the mississippi river basin into the great lakes . these barriers send out pulses to form an electric field in the water that discourages fish from crossing . ten of the 13 task force member agencies reported conducting early detection and rapid response activities — activities to detect the presence of aquatic invasive species in an area and remove any newly detected species while they are localized and before they become established and spread to new areas . aside from preventing introductions , the most cost - effective way to address an invasive species is to detect and respond to invasions early , according to documents from the u.s. forest service and noaa . however , coordinated rapid response efforts have been challenging to implement due , in part , to constraints in existing funding , according to officials from some agencies . consequently , 11 task force member agencies are part of a federal work group , co - led by the department of the interior and the national invasive species council , that in january 2015 started developing a framework for a national early detection and rapid response program and a plan for an emergency rapid response fund . the work group reported in july 2015 that it plans to issue a report of recommendations to implement an early detection and rapid response framework , including mechanisms for funding , to the white house and the council on climate preparedness and resilience in the fall of 2015 . early detection technique using environmental dna detection methods such as the use of environmental dna have become widespread among task force member agencies , such as the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the national park service , the bureau of reclamation , and the u.s fish and wildlife service ( fws ) . environmental dna — genetic material shed into the environment by organisms that can be detected in samples of air , water , or soil — is a relatively new tool being used to detect invasive species , particularly in areas where the species is not abundant or is difficult to detect . for example , because they are well camouflaged in the environment , visual detection of burmese pythons in south florida is difficult , with detection rates of less than 1% . use of environmental dna methods , however , can increase python detection rates to more than 90% , according to usgs officials .