the team was disestablished as of january 2019 . as discussed later in this report , dod has since identified two additional cross - functional teams related to close - combat lethality and protecting critical technology . section 911 included a provision for us — every 6 months after the date of enactment on december 23 , 2016 , through december 31 , 2019 — to submit to the defense committees a report setting forth a comprehensive assessment of the actions that dod has taken pursuant to section 911 during each 6-month period and cumulatively since the enactment of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 . since june 2017 , we have issued five reports and made 11 recommendations to dod . in our most recent report , issued in august 2019 , we reported that dod was up to 21 months late in fully addressing several requirements of section 911 , largely because the chief management officer ( cmo ) had not approved the documents drafted to meet the requirements or coordinated department - wide review of the documents and provided them for secretary of defense issuance . we also reported that dod had established its cross - functional team on emso , but that funding for the team was delayed in part because of disagreements over responsibility for funding the team . we recommended , and dod concurred , that the secretary of defense ensure that the cmo meets specific internal deadlines for review and approval of outstanding requirements of section 911 , and that dod clarify roles and responsibilities for providing funding for the emso cross - functional team . see table 1 below for an overview of dod actions and gao reports in response to section 911 . additionally , see appendix i for more information on the status of dod's implementation of the recommendations made in these reports . in this sixth and final report required by section 911 , we assess the extent to which dod has made progress in implementing ( 1 ) the requirements of section 911 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 related to dod's organizational strategy and associated guidance and training , and ( 2 ) cross - functional teams under section 911 . to address our first objective , we reviewed documentation and interviewed office of the cmo ( ocmo ) officials on dod's efforts to finalize its draft organizational strategy ; dod's guidance on cross - functional teams ; and its training for cross - functional team members , their supervisors , and presidential appointees . we interviewed ocmo officials regarding dod's report on the successes and failures of cross - functional teams . we compared dod's efforts to the requirements in section 911 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 . to address our second objective , we reviewed documentation and interviewed ocmo and other officials involved in the establishment of cross - functional teams to discuss their efforts to implement these teams . we also interviewed and surveyed the members of the emso cross - functional team about their experiences on the team . while designing the survey , we pretested the instrument with two members of the emso team and took their feedback into account when finalizing the survey instrument .