creditworthiness . for a company to be eligible for a loan guarantee , a reasonable prospect of repayment must exist and the applicant cannot have delinquent federal debt , which is critical to determine at the beginning of the review process to assess whether an applicant is even eligible . therefore , a sound assessment of creditworthiness is essential . however , the criteria doe has established to evaluate creditworthiness — which it used during the preapplication process and plans to use for future applications — did not take into account the more meaningful and thorough information required for the full application process . in addition , while doe's guidance requests applicants to submit more complete information , such as a credit assessment , it does not provide details regarding how doe will evaluate the information to determine creditworthiness . project cost information . doe's guidance for the application process instructs applicants to indicate if their cost estimates are firm or subject to change , but it does not request applicants to report a level - of - confidence in their total project estimates . gao has reported that for management to make good decisions and determine if a program is realistically budgeted , the estimate must quantify the uncertainty so that a level of confidence can be given about the estimate . for example , an uncertainty analysis could inform doe management that there is a 60 percent chance that a project's cost will be greater than estimated . without requiring information on the uncertainty in project cost estimates and specifying how it will assess that information , doe may not be able to appropriately determine a project's feasibility and identify projects that could eventually require substantially more investment or loans for completion . without sufficient internal policies and procedures that correspond to application components , doe's application review process will lack transparency and it will be difficult for doe to consistently , thoroughly , and efficiently evaluate project applications . omb circular a - 129 calls for agencies to establish policies and procedures to identify eligible lenders and to monitor loans and lenders . doe has hired a director of monitoring and , according to doe officials , is currently developing policies and procedures that will include ( 1 ) processes for identifying eligible lenders through a competitive process , as well as an associated checklist and guide for evaluating potential lenders , and ( 2 ) loan servicing and monitoring guidelines . these policies and procedures may build upon the monitoring policies of the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) . implementing rigorous monitoring policies and procedures will help doe ensure the success of the loan guarantee program . according to doe officials , these policies and procedures will be completed before doe issues the first loan guarantees . as required by the lgp's fiscal years 2007 and 2008 appropriation , doe plans to charge borrowers fees to cover subsidy costs , as permitted by title xvii . however , estimating the subsidy cost for the lgp will be difficult because of inherent risks due to the nature and characteristics of the program .