typically , the plan sponsor is a fiduciary . , selecting and managing the securities included in a mutual fund ) ; consulting and providing financial advice ( i.e. , selecting vendors for investment options or other services ) ; record keeping ( i.e. , tracking individual account contributions ) ; custodial or trustee services for plan assets ( i.e. , holding the plan assets in a bank ) ; and telephone or web - based customer services for participants . generally there are two ways to provide services: “bundled” ( the sponsor hires one company that provides the full range of services directly or through subcontracts ) and “unbundled” ( the sponsor uses a combination of service providers ) . fees are one of many factors — such as the historical performance and investment risk for each plan option — participants should consider when investing in a 401 ( k ) plan because fees can significantly decrease retirement savings over the course of a career . as participants accrue earnings on their investments , they pay a number of fees , including expenses , commissions , or other charges associated with operating a 401 ( k ) plan . fees are charged by the various outside companies that the plan sponsor — often the employer offering the 401 ( k ) plan — hires to provide a number of services necessary to operate the plan . services can include investment management ( i.e. we conducted our review from february 2007 through march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , there are more active participants now in 401 ( k ) plans than other types of employer - sponsored pension plans , a trend that has accelerated since the 1980s . now , 401 ( k ) plans represent the majority of all private pension plans ; they also service the most participants and hold the most assets . these plans offer a range of investment options , but equity funds — those that invest primarily in stocks — accounted for nearly half of 401 ( k ) assets at the close of 2005 . most 401 ( k ) plans are participant - directed , meaning that a participant is responsible for making the investment decisions about his or her own retirement plan contributions . inadequate disclosure and reporting requirements may leave participants without a simple way to compare fees among plan investment options , and labor without the information it needs to oversee fees and identify questionable 401 ( k ) business practices . the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) requires 401 ( k ) plan sponsors to disclose only limited information on fees . participants must collect various documents over time and may be required to seek out some documents in order to get a clear picture of the total fees that they pay . furthermore , the documents that participants receive do not provide a simple way to compare fees — along with risk and historical performance — among the investment options in their 401 ( k ) plan .