( fig . ambassador sent demarches ( diplomatic messages ) to the highest level of the burundi government in mid - 2000 challenging government troops who were intimidating patients in rural health clinics near the capital bujumbura . this helped end the troops' harassment and occupation of the rural health clinics , which were used heavily by displaced populations . in southern sudan , the government and factional commanders increased the risk to internally displaced persons by requiring that food drops and the provision of aid be provided in strategic locations at specific times to coincide with their strategies . an insurgency by hutu rebels and a counterinsurgency campaign by the government have claimed tens of thousands of lives and caused mass internal displacement in an ongoing civil war that continues today . the military has pursued a regroupment policy starting in 1996 , requiring an estimated 350,000 persons ( mostly hutus ) to live in forced regroupment camps , to prevent those living in the countryside from supporting the rebels . the camps had inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to water , food , shelter , and medicine , according to the u.s. committee for refugees . international organizations could not reach many of the government's forced regroupment camps due to inadequate infrastructure or because they were prevented from doing so by security forces . the government's and the rebels' human rights record are poor , according to the department of state's human rights report . combatants on both sides deliberately uprooted civilian populations and targeted displacement camps for attack . government forces and rebels committed large - scale atrocities against civilians . according to amnesty international , the armed forces and rebel groups have continued to show complete disregard for human life , acting with little or no accountability . scores of civilians were killed in ambushes . humanitarian workers were also killed and attacked . on numerous occasions , rebel groups killed unarmed civilians in reprisal for alleged collaboration with the government or for failing to support them . the u.s. government has made humanitarian relief its priority response in burundi . inadequate harvests during the last three seasons due to conflict and drought have caused severe malnutrition in several provinces . usaid - funded programs implemented by nongovernmental organizations and u.n. agencies primarily focused on life - sustaining activities such as food security assistance ( provision of livestock , seeds , and tools ) , health care , and supplementary nutrition programs . in fiscal year 2001 , the u.s. government provided an estimated $5.8 million in food aid and another $3 million to combat hiv / aids and promote human rights and democracy . in addition , the u.s. government is a significant contributor to the programs of the world food program and the u.n.'s children fund in burundi . figure 10 shows a usaid - assisted family . the roots of the conflict in colombia go back to a power struggle between liberals and conservatives in the late 1940s . between 1947 and 1957 , the fighting claimed more than 300,000 lives and forced more than 1 million colombians to abandon their homes , according to the international committee of the red cross .