revenue . multiple local government agencies that receive fees as a result of providing services to compact migrants did not consider fees in their compact impact reports . any exclusion of revenue may cause an overstatement of the total impact reported . compact migrants also participate in local economies through their participation in the labor force , payment of taxes , consumption of local goods and services , and receipt of remittances . previous compact migrant surveys estimated compact migrants' participation in the labor force , but existing data on other compact migrant contributions such as tax revenues , local consumption , or remittances are not available or sufficiently reliable to quantify their effects . capital costs . many local government agencies did not include capital costs in their impact reporting . capital costs entail , for example , providing additional classrooms to accommodate an increase in students or constructing additional health care facilities . in cases where compact migration has resulted in the expansion of facilities , agencies understated compact migrant impact by omitting these costs . per person costs . a number of local government agencies used an average per - person service cost for the jurisdiction rather than specific costs associated with providing services to compact migrants . for example , one jurisdiction based the cost of providing health care services to compact migrants on the number of migrants served out of the total patient load instead of totaling each patient's specific costs . using the average cost may either overstate or understate the true cost of service provision . a number of local government agencies did not disclose their methodology for developing impact costs , including any assumptions , definitions , and other key elements , which makes it difficult to evaluate reported costs . furthermore , some agency methodologies vary among affected jurisdictions . for those years when the affected jurisdictions submitted impact reports to interior , not all local government agencies in the affected jurisdictions included compact impact costs for those years . for example , hawaii did not provide estimated costs to interior in 2005 and 2006 , although it included partial costs incurred in those years in its 2007 and 2008 reports . federal funding . in addition , compact impact reporting has not been consistent across affected jurisdictions . for example , guam and the cnmi included the cost of providing police services , while hawaii did not . guidelines that interior developed in 1994 for compact impact reporting do not adequately address certain concepts key to reliable estimates of impact costs . developed in response to a 1993 recommendation by the the guidelines suggest that impact costs in interior inspector general,guam and the cnmi should , among other concepts , ( 1 ) exclude fas citizens who were present prior to the compacts , ( 2 ) specify omitted federal program costs , and ( 3 ) be developed using appropriate methodologies . however , the 1994 guidelines do not address certain concepts , such as calculating revenue received from providing services to compact migrants , including capital costs , and ensuring that data are reliable and reporting is consistent .