deployments . the occurrence of deployments and their effects on family life were also highlighted in four of the six studies as factors influencing female servicemembers' decisions to separate from the military . for example , one study of female air force pilots identified deployments as a factor that caused them to consider leaving active duty . in another study , which included 295 active - duty and reserve female officers in grades o - 1 to o - 5 , participants in 94 percent of the 54 focus group mentioned deployments as an important negative influence on retention , given their effect on spouses and children . organizational culture . organizational culture also had an effect on female servicemembers' decisions to separate from the military in four of the six studies we reviewed . women veterans project: operation iraqi freedom . ann arbor , michigan: university of michigan ( 2008 ) . https: / / ntrl.ntis.gov / ntrl / dashboard / searchresults / titledetail / pb2013101 316.xhtml . stoker , carol and alice crawford . surface warfare officer retention: analysis of individual ready reserve survey data . monterey , california: naval postgraduate school , graduate school of business and public policy ( january 22 , 2008 ) . https: / / ntrl.ntis.gov / ntrl / dashboard / searchresults / titledetail / ada476863 .xhtml . williams , nanette marie , the influence of contemporary army culture on senior enlisted women's decision to commit to a lifelong career . flint , michigan: baker college , 2013. https: / / search.proquest.com / docview / 1427847908 ? this report examines ( 1 ) trends in the percentage of female active - duty servicemembers in the military and their attrition rates from fiscal year 2004 through 2018 , including the reported factors leading to that attrition ; ( 2 ) how female active - duty servicemember promotion rates compare with those of their male counterparts and among female servicemembers with differing characteristics from fiscal years 2004 through 2018 , and what factors influence these rates ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which dod and the military services have plans to guide and monitor female active - duty servicemember recruitment and retention . to address these objectives , we focused our review on active - duty enlisted , officers , and warrant officers in all ranks and pay grades , serving within the four military services ( the army , the navy , the marine corps , and the air force ) . for our first and second objectives , we obtained and analyzed servicemember personnel data for fiscal year 2004 through 2018 from the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) , including , for example , service start date , branch of service , status , grade , gender , race , marital status , and whether the servicemember has dependents . we selected fiscal year 2004 through 2018 because , at the time we submitted our request for data , this was the most recent 15-year time period for which dmdc had complete data available .