ports of entry . gao - 03-1153tni . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2003 . homeland security: limited progress in deploying radiation detection equipment at u.s . ports of entry . gao - 03-963 . washington , d.c.: september 4 , 2003 ) . container security: current efforts to detect nuclear materials , new initiatives , and challenges . gao - 03-297t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2002 . customs service: acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment . gao - 03-235t . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to combat nuclear smuggling . gao - 02-989t . washington , d.c.: july 30 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to help other countries combat nuclear smuggling need strengthened coordination and planning . gao - 02-426 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2002 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dndo conducted its formal tests in two phases . the first , called phase 1 , was designed to support resolution of critical operational issue 1 with high statistical confidence . dndo told us on multiple occasions and in a written response that only data collected during phase 1 would be included in the final report presented to the secretary to request asp certification . according to dndo , the second , called phase 3 , provided data for algorithm development which targeted specific and known areas in need of work and data to aid in the development of secondary screening operations and procedures . according to dndo documentation , phase 3 testing was not in support of the full - scale production decision . further , dndo stated that phase 3 testing consisted of relatively small sample sizes since the data would not support estimating the probability of detection with a high confidence level . on may 30 , 2007 , following the formal tests and the scoring of their results , dndo told gao that it had conducted additional tests that dndo termed “special testing.” the details of these tests were not outlined in the nevada test site test plan . on june 20 , 2007 , dndo provided gao with a test plan document entitled “asp special testing” which described the test sources used to conduct the tests but did not say when the tests took place . according to dndo , special testing was conducted throughout the formal phase 1 testing process and included 12 combinations of threat , masking , and shielding materials that differed from “dry run,” “dress rehearsal,” and formal tests . dndo also stated that the tests were “blind,” meaning that neither dndo testing officials nor the asp vendors knew what sources would be included in the tests .