alien apprehension history over multiple fiscal years . border patrol's methodology for calculating recidivism — the percent of aliens apprehended multiple times along the southwest border within a fiscal year — limits its ability to assess cds effectiveness because this calculation does not account for an alien's apprehension history over multiple years . dhs noted that cds uses annual recidivism rate calculations to measure annual change , which is not intended to be , or used , as a performance measure for cds , and that border patrol annually reevaluates the cds to ensure that the methodology for calculating recidivism provides the most effective and efficient post apprehension outcomes . dhs stated that external factors can affect the consequences available to each sector , which may change over time , and thus using the recidivism rate for multiple years would not benefit border patrol . additionally , dhs noted that the support border patrol provides to its partners is not impacted by the aliens for whom there is no record of removal and who may remain in the united states . ( 3 ) to what extent has border patrol established guidance and controls to monitor field implementation of cds ? to answer these questions , we reviewed border patrol's implementation of cds from fiscal years 2013 through 2015 across all nine border patrol sectors along the southwest border . we continue to believe that border patrol should strengthen its methodology for calculating recidivism , as dhs noted in its comments that the recidivism rate is used as a performance measure by border patrol and dhs . we reviewed policies and procedures related to cds , such as border patrol procedures for developing a cds guide . we obtained and analyzed data from border patrol on apprehensions and the use of cds along the southwest border from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 . we also examined the outcomes of border patrol apprehensions of aliens in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 , including obtaining and analyzing u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) data on enforcement actions and case status for these aliens . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing system documentation , interviewing knowledgeable officials about system controls and conducting electronic testing , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . further , we interviewed border patrol managers and agents from all nine southwest border sectors to obtain their views on cds . additionally , we visited three of border patrol's southwest border sectors — the san diego , tucson , and rio grande valley sectors — to observe how agents in these sectors applied cds in their operations . we selected these sectors to visit because they had the highest number of apprehensions in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 as well as the most consequences listed in their cds guides for those fiscal years . we also interviewed officials at border patrol headquarters , including staff from cds pmo , about cds guidance and implementation throughout the southwest border and reviewed program documentation . we reviewed our prior reports on border patrol , and reports by the congressional research service and the dhs inspector general .