v ) . education , ssa , and justice all provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the draft as appropriate . in its formal comments , education agreed with our recommendation and plans to develop and implement a coordinated approach to providing technical assistance to postsecondary schools through a work group , to include the office of vocational and adult education , the office of postsecondary education , the office for civil rights , and the office of special education and rehabilitative services . in addition , education noted that the same knowledge , resources , and information useful to postsecondary schools might be equally of interest and utility to students and potential students with disabilities , family members , secondary schools personnel , and counselors , among others . education plans to explore making information on higher education and individuals with disabilities available in a more centralized and user - friendly manner on its web site , www.ed.gov . among postsecondary schools . ( see fig . 1 for example. ) postsecondary schools are required to have an individual who coordinates the school's compliance with the rehabilitation act and ada . the school must also have grievance procedures that include steps to ensure a student can raise concerns fully and fairly and provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints . in addition , some schools also offer more comprehensive accommodations to promote the full participation of students with disabilities in campus life . for example , two schools we visited provided on campus dorms staffed with personal attendants for students with severe physical disabilities . in addition , one of these schools also had an underground tunnel system that provided easy access for students with physical disabilities to get across campus , especially in inclement weather ( see sidebar ) . some schools also offer specialized programs to supplement academic instruction . for example , one school we visited had established a learning services program to help students transition from secondary to postsecondary school ( see sidebar ) . in addition , a few schools are designed exclusively for students with a specific type of disability , such as gallaudet university in washington , d.c. , for deaf and hard of hearing students and landmark college in vermont for students with learning disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) . this student earned income exclusion is intended to help defray the cost of educational training . in addition , ssa beneficiaries may obtain a plan to achieve self support ( pass ) , which allows them to set aside income and / or assets to support efforts like higher education in the pursuit of work goals . further , the department of health and human services administers the medicaid program , which can provide medical benefits to individuals with disabilities . finally , the department of veterans affairs provides services and benefits to veterans with disabilities , including vr services and student financial aid under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill . the npsas pertains to school years 1999-2000 , 2003-2004 , and 2007-2008 . note that data from the 2008 npsas are preliminary and may be subject to change .