part 304 . obtaining personal services from individuals or organizations by contract , rather than by appointment , is generally prohibited unless specifically authorized by statute , such as 5 u.s.c . agencies that have such statutory authorization may use 5 u.s.c . § 3109 as a contracting authority and apply far procedures , rather than opm regulations , when awarding contracts to procure personal services from organizations . additionally , agencies that have such statutory authorization may use 5 u.s.c . § 3109 to appoint individual experts or consultants as temporary federal employees in accordance with opm regulations . the law is unsettled , however , on the extent to which 5 u.s.c . § 3109 permits agencies to award procurement contracts in accordance with the far when they obtain the personal services of individual experts . furthermore , nist provided training to both contracting and laboratory officials on how to use this authority and included in each contract a requirement that the contractor fully disclose any actual or potential conflicts of interest . nist officials also periodically discuss issues related to the agency's competes act authority through an acquisition advisory panel , which can recommend changes to existing acquisition practices on the basis of feedback from program and contracting officials . although nist applied a number of contracting safeguards , we found that nist did not compete any of the 39 contracts we reviewed . although the far permits the use of a contract to obtain the personal services of individual experts , the text of 5 u.s.c . § 3109 may imply that these services should be obtained through appointment . as we have previously noted and as described in more detail in table 1 , a personal services contract is characterized by the close working relationship that is established between the agency and the contractor . to date , nist has used its authority under 5 u.s.c . § 3109 to award personal services contracts to individuals . we found that 37 of the 39 contract files did contain a one - sentence statement attesting that the expert selected was the only person reasonably available to perform the needed services . however , the files did not indicate how that determination was made . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted our work from october 2008 to august 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . advances in science and technology are widely seen as responsible for much of the economic growth and increased standard of living in modern societies . nist , a nonregulatory agency within commerce , plays a lead role in promoting innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science , standards , and technology .