progress has been made . however , the area remains high - risk because of a continuing need for a governmentwide framework to advance human capital reform . this framework is vital to avoid further fragmentation within the civil service , ensure management flexibility as appropriate , allow a reasonable degree of consistency , provide adequate safeguards , and maintain a level playing field among agencies competing for talent . today and in the near term , the federal workforce is facing a variety of a capacity challenges that could affect the ability of agencies to cost - effectively carry out their missions . for example , the federal government is facing a retirement wave and with it the loss of leadership and institutional knowledge at all levels . governmentwide , about one - third of federal employees on board at the end of fiscal year 2007 will become eligible to retire by 2012 . proportions of workers eligible to retire are projected to be especially high in certain occupations — some are mission critical , such as customs and border protection agents — as well as in key leadership positions . about 64 percent of career executives may be eligible to retire by 2012 . in the current economic situation , projections of how many federal workers will actually retire upon becoming eligible remain unclear ; however , these workers will eventually retire and the federal government needs to have the right people in the right jobs at the right time to meet the challenges it faces . congress and the executive branch have taken steps to address the federal government's human capital shortfalls . for example , congress provided agencies across the executive branch with additional human capital flexibilities , such as specific hiring authorities . while much progress has been made in the last few years to address human capital challenges , ample opportunities continue to exist for agencies to improve their strategic human capital management and for the office of personnel management's ( opm ) continued leadership in fostering and guiding improvements in these areas . my remarks today will focus on executive branch agencies' and opm's progress in addressing strategic human capital management challenges in four key areas: ( 1 ) leadership ; ( 2 ) strategic human capital planning ; ( 3 ) acquiring , developing , and retaining talent ; and ( 4 ) results - oriented organizational culture . this testimony is based on a large body of our completed work issued from january 2001 through march 2009 . we conducted our work in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that were relevant to the objectives of each engagement . top leadership in agencies across the federal government must provide committed and inspired attention needed to address human capital and related organizational transformation issues . leaders must not only embrace reform , they must integrate the human capital function into their agencies' core planning and business activities . senior executive leadership is especially key today as the federal government faces significant efforts to transform to address key challenges . opm's 2008 federal human capital survey results showed that the government needs to establish a more effective leadership corps .