b . revise the design guide to establish criteria for the number of appeals courtrooms and chambers and the space allocated for senior district judges and make additional improvements to space allocation standards related to technological advancements ( eg , libraries , court reporter space , and staff efficiency due to technology ) and decrease requirements where appropriate . we provided a draft of the report that is being released today to gsa and aousc for official review and comment and received written comments from both . gsa agreed with the thrust of the report and concurred with our recommendations , but expressed one concern . gsa felt it was more aware of the reasons for rent increases than our draft portrayed . in commenting on the report associated with this testimony , aousc said that it does not believe tracking the data recommended by gao would be useful — we disagree with this assessment . aousc also said it is already implementing incentives and updating its criteria , however the actions it identified do not fully address our recommendations . for a more thorough discussion of the agency comments , see the report associated with this testimony . we conducted our work from may 2005 to may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during our work , we analyzed nationwide judiciary rent data generated from gsa's billing data , reviewed laws and the regulation related to fbf and gsa's rent pricing process and policies , and reviewed the u.s. courts design guide and other judiciary rent planning documents . additionally , we conducted site visits at federal courthouses in the following districts: arizona , eastern virginia , maryland , nebraska , rhode island , and western washington . we selected arizona , nebraska , rhode island , and western washington because they were in districts that experienced large overall rent increases from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 and were geographically dispersed . we also visited maryland and eastern virginia court facilities while we were designing this audit and included them in the review because they contained a new courthouse , a renovated courthouse , and a courthouse that was targeted for replacement . the findings from these courthouse visits can not be generalized to the population of federal courthouses nationwide . we interviewed district , magistrate , and bankruptcy judges ; officials from the aousc , which is the judiciary's administrative agency ; clerks , circuit executives , and other representatives from u.s. circuit and district courts with authority over space and facilities ; gsa officials in headquarters and the regions ; and other real property management experts . we determined that the rent data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement , i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or the other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . keith cunningham , randy deleon , bess eisenstadt , brandon haller , grant mallie , susan michal - smith , joshua ormond , elizabeth repko , david sausville , and gary stofko made key contributions to this statement .