other opportunities . the nuclear threat initiative , a u.s. nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) , and the center for energy and security studies , a russian ngo , coauthored a report that identified 51 mutually beneficial opportunities to cooperate in nuclear security , nuclear safety , nuclear energy , nuclear science , and nuclear environmental remediation . for example , the report identifies an opportunity for russian and u.s. experts to establish a joint research and development program to improve nuclear security technologies to address emerging threats to nuclear material storage sites , such as drones . russia would likely insist that it and the united states be seen as equal partners under any future arrangement or program for cooperation on nuclear security , according to stakeholders . however , u.s. project team personnel told us that russian nuclear material sites often lack the financial resources to pay travel costs for russian personnel or to cover costs for venues or workshops necessary for training or the exchange of best practices . therefore , the level of funding to support any potential future cooperation might be disproportionate between the united states and russia . because we were unable to obtain views from russian officials and russian nuclear material site representatives , we were unable to establish the extent to which russia would be willing to pursue any form of nuclear material security cooperation with the united states , regardless of funding sources and requirements . training . experts and national laboratory personnel noted that training russian personnel on technical matters — such as how to conduct comprehensive vulnerability assessments — could improve russian security practices . conversations on legal agreements . some stakeholders said that initiating conversations with russia on the status of existing but suspended legal agreements could provide an opening for other forms of cooperation . for example , a few stakeholders mentioned an existing — but suspended — research and development agreement from 2013 under which future nuclear security cooperation might be pursued if both parties were interested in reactivating the agreement . cooperation within multilateral organizations . some stakeholders noted that existing multilateral organizations , such as the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) and the global initiative to combat nuclear terrorism , could provide venues for the united states to pursue cooperative opportunities with russia . for example , russia and the united states could cooperate on developing recommendations to the iaea on physical protection measures for nuclear material , which could then be shared with iaea member states . stakeholders we interviewed were generally pessimistic about cooperation under the current political and diplomatic climate , and they noted that the deterioration of political relations is the most significant challenge to any future cooperation . stakeholders identified other specific challenges , including the following: funding prohibition . some stakeholders said that provisions in recent appropriations acts and national defense authorization acts ( ndaa ) prohibiting nnsa from funding nuclear security activities in russia have been obstacles to cooperating on nuclear security matters .