technical review . the detailed technical review , scheduled for 18 to 24 months , will evaluate the soundness of the scientific data , computer modeling , analyses , and preliminary facility design . the review will focus on evaluating doe's conclusions about the ability of the repository designs to limit exposure to radioactivity , both during the construction and operation phase of the repository ( known as preclosure ) and during the phase after the repository has been filled , closed , and sealed ( known as postclosure. ) if nrc discovers problems with the technical information used to support the application , it may conduct activities to determine the extent and effect of the problem . as part of this review , nrc staff will prepare a safety evaluation report that details staff findings and conclusions on the license application . public hearings . nrc will also convene an independent panel of judges — called the atomic safety licensing board — to conduct a series of public hearings to address contested issues raised by affected parties and review in detail the related information and evidence regarding the license application . upon completion , the board will make a formal ruling ( called the initial decision ) resolving matters put into controversy . this initial decision can then be appealed to the nrc commissioners for further review . in addition , we interviewed nrc's project manager who is responsible for reviewing the postclosure portion of a license application , nrc's on - site representative at the las vegas office , and other nrc regional officials . furthermore , we interviewed the director of epa's office of air and radiation safety regarding the status of epa's rulemaking to set radiation exposure standards for the public outside the yucca mountain site . to determine doe's progress in implementing the recommendations and resolving the additional challenges identified in our march 2006 report , we reviewed prior gao reports that assessed doe's quality assurance process and relevant doe corrective action reports , root cause analyses , and other internal reviews that analyzed doe's efforts to improve its management tools and its corrective action program in general . we also reviewed related nrc documents , such as some observation audit reports . we observed nrc and doe management meetings and technical exchanges in rockville , maryland , and las vegas , nevada , that covered related issues . we also interviewed ocrwm's director in doe headquarters and senior managers at the yucca mountain project office in las vegas about their efforts to address our recommendations . regarding the quality assurance challenges noted in our prior report , we reviewed a january 2007 gao report discussing the usgs issue and reviewed doe documents detailing their actions to restore confidence in the scientific documents . we reviewed internal doe documents regarding requirements management and interviewed the program's chief engineer in charge of resolving this issue . finally , regarding staff turnover in key management positions , we reviewed ocrwm's strategic objectives , business plan , and project documents and interviewed ocrwm's director and other senior project managers about their efforts to improve succession planning .