arbitration . some states have enacted arbitration statutes that address medical malpractice claims specifically . some of these statutes require that the arbitration agreement meets standards that are designed to alert the patient to the fact that he is waiving a jury trial through the use of a specific size of font , or by specifying the precise wording that must be contained in the agreement . although most courts have held that medical malpractice claims can properly be submitted to arbitration , litigation involving the arbitration statutes has involved issues such as whether the patient knew he was waiving the right to a jury trial , whether the patient who agrees to arbitration had appropriate bargaining strength , and whether third parties have authority to bind others to arbitration . by providing an option for arbitration , parties can avoid the larger expense of taking claims to court . however , some industry experts said that these arbitration provisions may not be binding and may result in the losing party deciding to take the case to court in any event , so arbitration can simply increase expenses without affecting the ultimate resolution of the dispute . advanced notice of claim . advanced - notice - of - claim provisions require claimants to give defendants some period of time , 90 days for example , prior to filing suit in court . some insurers and plaintiffs' attorneys we spoke with said that this requirement aids plaintiffs and defendants in resolving meritorious claims outside of the court system and allows plaintiffs' attorneys to obtain relevant records to determine whether a case has merit . however , another group we spoke to said that the advanced notice of claim provision in that group's state was ineffective . bad faith claims . as mentioned in this report , some insurers we spoke with told us that they can be liable for amounts beyond an insurance policy's limits , if the policyholder requests the insurer to settle with the plaintiff for an amount equal to or less than the policy limit , and the insurer takes the case to trial , loses , and a judgment is entered in an amount greater than the policy limits . industry experts we spoke to said that , under those circumstances , the insurer could be liable for acting in “bad faith.” in some states , like nevada , this bad faith claim can be brought only by the insured physician ; that is , the physician can seek payment from the insurance company if the physician has paid a plaintiff beyond a policy's limits . in contrast , in florida , the plaintiff can sue a physician's insurer directly for the insurer's alleged improper conduct in medical malpractice cases . the difficulty of establishing that an insurer acted in bad faith varies according to state law . insurers in three of our study states — texas , california , and florida — said that bad faith litigation was a substantial issue in their states . this appendix describes the specific medical malpractice insurance environment in each the seven sample states we evaluated for this report . ( see figs.10-16. ) typical coverage type and limit .