this is done by either cost or price analysis . cost analysis is an evaluation of the separate cost elements and proposed profit contained in an offerer's proposal . price analysis is the process of examining and evaluating a prospective price without performing cost analysis . an example of price analysis is comparing one offer with other offers . of the 10 mint contracts we reviewed , 8 contained documentation that prices or costs had been analyzed , and 2 had little or no documentation describing how prices or costs were analyzed . however , the staff also stated that the mint's reporting had improved in the last 2 years under the new director of the mint . the mint and bep are both required to disclose the results of their operations in a number of reports to congress and have done so . ( 2 ) did nonmaterials costs increase more than the rate of inflation for the last 5 years ? and ( 3 ) did the agencies use productivity measures for equipment efficiency and labor productivity ? we also reviewed a treasury ig report on the mint's cost accounting system . both the mint and bep have implemented cost accounting systems that track production costs by location , denomination , and cost element and compare actual costs with targeted costs . from fiscal year 1998 through 2002 , the mint's production cost per thousand coins , excluding metal costs , increased 31 percent after adjusting for inflation , and bep's cost to produce a thousand notes , excluding paper and ink costs , increased 4 percent after adjusting for inflation . bep said the primary reason for its increased cost was a 25 percent decrease in note volume during that period , and fixed costs had to be allocated to a lower number of notes in fiscal year 2002 . the mint said its increased cost per thousand coins was due to higher depreciation costs and a change in the mix of coins produced from fiscal year 1998 through 2002 . mint officials provided documentation showing that during this period , new machinery and equipment were bought to replace old equipment and to increase coin production capacity . the mint said that depreciation costs also increased because it found the expected life of coin manufacturing equipment was shorter than what had been estimated . according to mint data , depreciation expenses were $9.5 million in 1998 and $19.8 million in 2002 . the mint also provided data that showed a 17.5 percent increase in the number of full - time staff from 1998 through 2002 , and that the mix of coins changed during that period . more quarters were produced in 2002 , and they are more costly to produce than other coins that were produced in 1998 . the mint data also showed that while the number of full - time staff rose 17.5 percent from 1998 through 2002 , the number of coin equivalents produced per employee changed only slightly ( a 1 percent decrease ) . both the mint and bep have procedures and automated tools for assessing equipment efficiency and labor productivity .