the usta did not provide any comments . the bspa and natoa provided some comments that we incorporated as appropriate . ncta officials provided extensive comments on the draft . these officials expressed concern with certain summary statistics on price differences in bsp markets compared with markets without bsps that appeared in the draft of this report that they reviewed . we modified the presentation of the data on these price differences . in particular , rather than providing summary statistics on price differences across the markets with bsps compared to the markets without bsps , we provide information on the price difference between each bsp market and its match . additionally , ncta made the following points: ncta officials note that a case study of 6 markets with and 6 markets without a bsp competitor is a very small sample of the roughly 10,000 cable systems in operation in the united states . they view the study as thus having no statistical significance . in particular , ncta official express concern that our draft “implies vastly broader conclusions regarding the effect of bsps on cable pricing than are warranted by the limited case studies.” they also note that , as we reported , the larger pricing differences were found for the 3 smaller city - pair case studies , while smaller price differences were found in the medium and larger city pairs . the officials stated that , as such , for the larger percentage of subscribers covered by the study , the differences were much smaller . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . gao response: we agree that our approach in this report — a case study analysis — is not generalizable to the universe of cable systems . we have stated this several times in the report , and have added more discussion of this in response to ncta's comments . however , as stated in the report , our bsp sample represents more than 20 percent of the households nationwide that are in areas where bsps currently offer the three - service package . given the caveats we place on our own work , we do not believe that our conclusions imply a broader interpretation than is warranted . ncta officials note their concern that just 4 months after we released a report on cable pricing that was based on an econometric analysis , we would provide new information on cable pricing in competitive and noncompetitive markets that are based on a different methodology . gao response: we do not believe there is a problem in conducting a second study on cable rates and competition that analyzes the issue using an alternative methodology . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . today , 95 percent of american households purchase local telephone service , 85 percent purchase subscription television service ( usually from a cable company or a satellite provider ) , and about 62 percent purchase some form of access to the internet .