no documentation of the rationale for modifications is required . the recommendations , as modified , are then forwarded to the chairperson of the veterans affairs prb , who reviews the decisions for apparent anomalies , such as awarding bonuses that exceed maximum amounts . the chairperson of the veterans affairs prb then forwards the recommendations from the veterans health administration , veterans benefits administration , and veterans affairs prbs to the secretary for approval . the secretary makes final determinations for ses member performance bonuses , with the exception of ses members in va's office of inspector general . recommendations from the office of inspector general prb are sent directly to the va inspector general for final decision without review by the veterans affairs prb or approval by the secretary . the secretary has sole discretion in accepting or rejecting the recommendations of the prbs . according to an official in the office of human resources and administration , the secretary modified 1 recommendation in 2006 , but a prior secretary modified over 30 in one year . recommendations for bonuses for members of the veterans affairs , veterans health administration , and veterans benefits administration prbs are made after the prbs conclude their work . the highest - level executives of each board rank the members of their respective prbs and make recommendations , which are submitted to the secretary . the secretary determines any bonuses for the highest - level executives of the boards . in 2006 , va's bonus pool was $3,751,630 , or 9 percent of the aggregate basic pay of its ses members in 2005 . va awarded an average of $16,606 in bonuses in fiscal year 2006 to 87 percent of its career ses members . at headquarters , approximately 82 percent of career ses members received bonuses and 90 percent received bonuses in the field . additionally , those in headquarters were awarded an average of about $4,000 more in bonuses than the career ses members in field locations . table 1 shows the average bonus amount , percentage receiving bonuses , and total rated at va among career ses members and by headquarters and field locations for 2004 through 2006 . in 2005 , according to opm's report on senior executive pay for performance for fiscal year 2005 , the most recent report available , va awarded higher average bonuses to its career ses than any other cabinet - level department . opm data show that six other cabinet - level departments awarded bonuses to a higher percentage of their career ses members . when asked about possible reasons for va's high average bonus award , a va official in the office of human resources and administration cited the outstanding performance of va's three organizations and the amount allocated to ses member bonuses . both opm and omb play a role in the review of agency's senior performance appraisal systems and have jointly developed certification criteria . opm issues guidance each year to help agencies improve the development of their ses performance appraisal systems and also reviews agency certification submissions to ensure they meet specified criteria .