( see fig . in general , fda orders a postapproval study to obtain specific information on the postmarket performance of or experience with an approved device . for example , the increase in the number of postapproval studies ordered for cardiovascular devices in 2008 reflects that fda has required that each new implantable cardioverter defibrillator lead undergo a postapproval study . other includes devices for ophthalmic ( eg , intraocular lens ) ; obstetrics and gynecology ( eg , permanent birth control system ) ; gastroenterology - urology ( eg , gastric banding system ) ; anesthesiology ( eg , computer assisted personalized sedation system ) ; clinical chemistry ( eg , artificial pancreas device system ) ; dental ( eg , bone grafting material ) ; ear , nose , and throat ( eg , implantable hearing system ) ; general hospital ( eg , infusion pump ) ; microbiology ( eg , human papillomavirus test ) ; neurology ( eg , intracranial aneurysm flow diverter ) ; and pathology ( eg , breast cancer detection test ) . the pma process is the more stringent of fda's premarket review processes and requires the manufacturer to supply evidence providing reasonable assurance that the device is safe and effective before the device is legally available on the u.s. market . february 23 , 2015 , were for devices approved through the pma process . in terms of study design , more than two - thirds ( 69 percent ) of the 313 postapproval studies ordered during the timeframe we examined were prospective cohort studies — that is , studies in which a group using a particular device was compared to a second group not using that device , over a long period of time . ( see fig . for example , one postapproval prospective cohort study was designed to follow patients who received a certain type of breast implant over a 10-year period and to collect information on complications as they occur . additionally , postapproval studies were conducted using a variety of data sources , including newly collected data and medical device registries . nearly two - thirds ( 196 studies ) of the postapproval studies we examined relied upon new data collected by the manufacturer ; and about one - third ( 98 studies ) used data collected from registries — that is , a data system to collect and maintain structured records on devices for a specified time frame and population.maintained by the manufacturer or another organization , such as a ( see table 4. ) registries may be created and medical specialty's professional association . for example , fda has established a national medical device registry task force to further examine the implementation of registries in postmarket surveillance . according to fda , registries play a unique role in the postmarket surveillance of medical devices because they can provide additional detailed information about patients , procedures , and devices . for example , registries can help assess device performance by collecting information on patients with similar medical conditions . see 21 u.s.c .