the scope of ssa's operations and responsibilities is vast . one of ssa's key responsibilities is to provide financial benefits to eligible individuals through three benefit programs: old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) — provides retirement benefits to older individuals and their families and to survivors of deceased workers . disability insurance ( di ) — provides benefits to eligible individuals who have qualifying disabilities , and their eligible family members . supplemental security income ( ssi ) — provides income for aged , blind , or disabled individuals with limited income and resources . in support of its mission , ssa maintains workers' earnings information and in fiscal year 2017 posted over 279 million earnings items to workers' records . ssa also determines if claimants are eligible for benefits , completing 10 million claims and more than 680,000 hearings decisions in fiscal year 2017 . ssa also maintains birth and death records and issues social security numbers . in fiscal year 2017 , ssa issued almost 17 million new and replacement social security cards . beyond administering its programs and core missions , ssa provides key administrative support to the medicare program , partners with the department of homeland security in verifying employment eligibility for new hires , and assists with the administration of other programs , such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program and programs administered by the railroad retirement board . ssa's workforce is large , as is its physical footprint . about 62,000 federal employees and 15,000 state employees administer ssa programs in about 1,500 facilities nationwide . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . these facilities include regional offices , more than 1,200 field offices , teleservice centers , processing centers , hearings offices , the appeals council offices , and ssa's headquarters in baltimore , maryland . customers can access ssa services in - person at an ssa field office ; by phone with field office staff or through a national 800 number ; or online . in 2018 , ssa reported that , each day , about 170,000 people visit and 250,000 call one of its field offices for various reasons , such as to file claims , ask questions , or update their information . ssa also reported that its national 800 number handles over 30 million calls each year . complex eligibility rules and multiple handoffs and potential layers of review make ssa's disability programs complicated and costly to administer . program complexity arguably has made it challenging for ssa to make significant advances in efficiently managing high disability workloads , ensuring timely and consistent disability decisions , preventing benefit overpayments , and mitigating fraud risks . our recent work highlighted some of the challenges ssa faces in making disability decisions that are timely , consistent and based on current concepts of disability , while also preventing and deterring fraud and ensuring that only beneficiaries who are entitled to benefits receive them . these findings underscore the need for ssa leadership to approach these challenges strategically and follow through with rigorous plans in order to achieve significant improvements in its disability programs .