the initiative has not achieved its goals . in fact , decisions on appealed claims are taking longer to make , fewer decisions are being made , and the backlog of pending claims is growing and approaching crisis levels . the initiative's failure can be attributed primarily to ssa's decision to implement large - scale changes too quickly without resolving known problems . for example , problems with process delays , poorly timed and insufficient staff training , and the absence of the planned automated functions all surfaced during the first phase of implementation and were not resolved before the last two phases were implemented . instead , the pace of implementation was accelerated when the decision was made to implement the second and third phases at the same time . this completes the initial claims process . claimants who are initially denied benefits can ask to have the dds reconsider its initial denial . if the decision at this reconsideration level remains unfavorable , the claimant can request a hearing before a federal administrative law judge ( alj ) at an ssa hearings office , and , if still dissatisfied , the claimant can request a review by ssa's appeals council . the situation is less favorable at the appeals level . one initiative to change the process for handling appealed claims in ssa's hearing offices has resulted in even slower case processing and larger backlogs of pending claims . a second initiative has reduced the processing times for a separate group of appealed claims , though far less than expected . moreover , a cross - cutting initiative to update the agency's quality assurance program — a goal the agency has held since 1994 — is still in the planning stage . finally , ssa's plans to improve its disability claims process relied in part upon hoped for technological improvements ; however , ssa failed to design and develop a new computer software application to automate the disability claims process after a 7-year effort . on the basis of our recent work , we have recommended that ssa take immediate steps to reduce the backlog of appealed cases , develop a long - range strategy for a more permanent solution to the problems at its hearings offices , and develop an action plan for implementing a more comprehensive quality assurance program . ssa agreed with our recommendations and is beginning to make some short - term changes . in addition , ssa has recently announced plans to accelerate implementation of needed technological improvements . however , much work remains . the commissioner faces difficult decisions about long - term strategies for problems at the hearings offices and in the disability claims process as a whole . it will be important to both learn from the past and look to the future . di and ssi provide cash benefits to people with long - term disabilities . while the definition of disability and the process for determining disability are the same for both programs , the programs were initially designed to serve different populations . the di program , enacted in 1954 , provides monthly cash benefits to disabled workers — and their dependents or survivors — whose employment history qualifies them for disability insurance .