hhs did not have any comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact katherine m. iritani , director , health care at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or iritanik@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , tom conahan , assistant director ; shana r. deitch , analyst - in - charge ; kristin ekelund ; and carmen rivera - lowitt made key contributions to this report . also contributing were lori achman , jennie apter , colleen candrl , and emily wilson . 77 percent had been incarcerated . 68 percent had previously experienced homelessness . 12 percent were veterans . 87 percent were employed . 98 percent regularly attended 12-step meetings , such as alcoholics anonymous or narcotics anonymous . 45 percent attended weekly outpatient counseling in addition to average length of sobriety was 13.4 months . the five states we selected for review have taken actions to investigate and oversee recovery housing . four of the five states have conducted law enforcement investigations of recovery homes in their states and some of these investigations have resulted in arrests and changes to public and private insurance policies . in addition to actions taken in response to state investigations , three of the five states in our review have also taken steps to formally enhance their oversight of recovery homes , and the other two states have taken other steps intended to increase consistency , accountability , and quality across recovery homes . officials from four of the five states we reviewed ( florida , massachusetts , ohio , and utah ) told us that since 2007 , state agencies have conducted , or are in the process of conducting , law enforcement investigations of unscrupulous behavior and potential insurance fraud related to recovery housing , and outcomes of some of these investigations included criminal charges and changes to health insurance policies . an official from the fifth state , texas , told us that the state had not conducted any recent law enforcement investigations related to recovery housing . this official , from the texas department of insurance , told us that the department received two fraud reports in 2014 and 2016 related to recovery homes and that the state was unable to sufficiently corroborate the reports to begin investigations . across the four states , officials told us that potential insurance fraud may have relied on unscrupulous relationships between sud treatment providers , including laboratories , and recovery housing operators , because recovery homes are not considered eligible providers for the purposes of billing health insurance .