nobobs . ships with no ballast water in their tanks ( referred to as “no ballast on board” ships or nobobs ) are not required to conduct ballast water exchange or retain their ballast water . while the term “nobob” indicates that a ship has no ballast on board , these ships may , in fact , still be carrying thousands of gallons of residual ballast water and tons of sediment that cannot be easily pumped out because of the design of their tanks and pumps . this water and sediment could harbor potentially invasive organisms from previous ports of call that could be discharged to u.s. waters during subsequent ballast discharges . nobobs are a particular concern in the great lakes , where greater than 80 percent of ships entering from outside the eez fall into this category . while still a concern for other u.s. ports , it appears that a significantly smaller portion ( about 20 percent ) of ships arriving at u.s. ports other than the great lakes from beyond the eez claimed nobob status . officials responsible for gathering and managing data on ship arrivals estimate that about 5 percent of those nobob ships take on ballast water and discharge it in u.s. waters . when the coast guard conducted an environmental assessment of its new national mandatory ballast water exchange regulations in 2003 , it did not review the potential threat that nobob ships pose to future species invasions , although it received comments raising concerns about this omission . in response to comments on its 2004 rule , the agency noted that nobobs were required to submit ballast water reporting forms , that it would continue to explore the issue of nobobs , and that these vessels may be included in a future rulemaking . in may 2005 , the coast guard convened a public workshop in cleveland to discuss and obtain comments on nobobs , particularly as they affect the great lakes . following the public meeting , the coast guard held a closed meeting for an invited group of government officials and technology experts . the overall purpose of the closed meeting was to discuss technological approaches that are now available or soon to be available to address the potentially invasive organisms in nobob ships . the agency has not published any record of the closed meeting . the coast guard just issued a notice , published in the federal register on august 31 , 2005 , containing a voluntary management practice for nobobs that enter the great lakes and have not conducted ballast water exchange . this practice indicates that such ships should conduct salt water flushing of their empty ballast tanks in an area 200 nautical miles from any shore , whenever possible .