ships . seven of the 10 stakeholders we interviewed expressed concern that declines in the size of the u.s. - flag fleet could lead to shortfalls in overall capacity or number of certain types of ships needed to carry defense cargo . defense officials we interviewed and recent dod needs assessments indicated that the current internationally trading u.s. fleet was generally sufficient to meet current needs but also raised some concerns about potential future gaps in certain situations . for example , the current u.s. - flag internationally trading fleet has 6 petroleum tankers — down from 36 in 1990 — and ustranscom has estimated potential needs for 86 tankers to fulfill dod sealift requirements under the national defense strategy . currently , according to ustranscom officials we interviewed , u.s. - flag tankers and tankers flagged in other countries currently meet dod needs , but these officials stated that access to allied foreign - flag petroleum tankers is increasingly uncertain in the current geo - political environment . likewise , roll on / roll off ships ( commonly referred to as ro - ros because it is possible to drive vehicles on and off the ships ) are essential to move military vehicles , and dod officials we interviewed stated they currently have assured access to roughly 3.5-million square feet of commercial capacity , which just meets current needs . a recent dod analysis estimated 3.9 million square feet of ro - ro capacity will be needed in 2023 . seven of the stakeholders we interviewed raised concerns about limits in the overall capacity or a mismatch between the types of ships most needed for defense and those needed for commerce . additionally , three stakeholders added that the jones act fleet — which is larger than the u.s. - flag fleet of internationally trading ships and also includes ships with sealift capabilities — would likely not be available in a time of crisis without significant disruption to u.s. domestic trade . shipyards . seven of the 10 stakeholders we interviewed expressed concerns about declines in u.s. shipyard capacity . according to marad and dod officials , u.s. shipyards are an important part of ensuring government - owned cargo ships can be fully activated . according to a ustranscom official , a shortage of shipyard capacity has contributed to increasing repair time for the government reserve fleet . in august 2017 , we reported that incidents of degraded or out of service equipment in the government reserve fleet had increased over the previous 5 years . according to two stakeholders that operate u.s. - flag ships , u.s. - flag carriers are also experiencing maintenance delays at u.s. shipyards . for example , a representative of one u.s. - flag international carrier stated that it has difficulties scheduling needed work in a timely manner in the united states . in the face of these difficulties , as well as other business considerations , international ocean carriers may turn to foreign shipyards for repair services . currently , according to marad , in april 2019 , there were nine active shipyards in the united states with facilities capable of building large commercial ships .