iv ) . to determine to what extent the u.s. federal government has developed a strategy to combat transnational gangs with connections to central america , we examined the interagency strategy developed by various federal departments and agencies under the auspices of the nsc , called the strategy to combat the threat of criminal gangs from central america and mexico ( the strategy ) , and compared the contents of the strategy to select criteria in our prior work on desirable characteristics of an effective national strategy , including ( 1 ) clear purpose , scope , and methodology ; ( 2 ) discussion of problems , risks , and threats ; ( 3 ) desired goals , objectives , activities , and performance measures ; and ( 4 ) delineation of roles and responsibilities . we also examined the roles and activities of the various federal departments and agencies under the strategy , including doj , dhs , state , dod , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , and usaid , and their component agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) within doj and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) within dhs , that are responsible for carrying out efforts under the strategy . in regard to the nsc , we discussed its role in developing and implementing the strategy with a mix of the departments and agencies that participated in the nsc's iocpcc such as state , doj , and usaid . to determine how u.s. federal agencies have implemented programs to carry out the strategy and combat transnational gangs , coordinated these programs and assessed their results , we examined a mix of doj's , dhs's , state's , usaid's , and their component agencies' plans , performance data , reports , and assessments for fiscal years 2006 through 2009 . we compared federal agencies' efforts to coordinate and share information on their transnational antigang programs to select criteria on effective interagency collaboration and results - oriented government . in addition , we reviewed federal agencies' budget requests for fiscal years 2008 through 2010 ; appropriations acts for doj , dhs , state , and usaid and supplemental appropriations acts for those fiscal years ; and expenditure plans for u.s. provision of antigang assistance to countries in central america . to assess the reliability of statistical information , such as data on performance and outcomes , we discussed the sources of the data with agency officials and reviewed documentation regarding the compilation of data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to obtain information on federal efforts to combat the gangs as well as the extent to which agencies have coordinated their efforts with other agencies , we interviewed a mix of federal , state , and local law enforcement officials in seven locations in the united states as well as a mix of officials from u.s. federal , foreign , and three nongovernmental agencies in el salvador and guatemala .