portfolio review . covered agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness and identify potential waste and duplication . expansion of training and use of it acquisition cadres . covered agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to support timely and effective it acquisitions . in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres ( i.e. , multi - functional groups of professionals to acquire and manage complex programs ) , or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres . government - wide software purchasing program . the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software . in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user . maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative . federal agencies are required to compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative . in june 2015 , omb released guidance describing how agencies are to implement fitara . this guidance was intended to , among other things: assist agencies in aligning their it resources with statutory requirements ; establish government - wide it management controls to meet the law's requirements , while providing agencies with flexibility to adapt to unique agency processes and requirements ; strengthen the relationship between agency cios and bureau cios ; and strengthen cio accountability for it costs , schedules , performance , and security . the guidance identifies a number of actions that agencies are to take to establish a basic set of roles and responsibilities ( referred to as the common baseline ) for cios and other senior agency officials and , thus , to implement the authorities described in the law . for example , agencies are to conduct a self - assessment and submit a plan describing the changes they intend to make to ensure that common baseline responsibilities are implemented . in addition , in august 2016 , omb released guidance intended to , among other things , define a framework for achieving the data center consolidation and optimization requirements of fitara . the guidance directed agencies to develop a data center consolidation and optimization strategic plan that defined the agency's data center strategy for fiscal years 2016 , 2017 , and 2018 . this strategy was to include , among other things , a statement from the agency cio indicating whether the agency had complied with all data center reporting requirements in fitara . further , the guidance states that omb is to maintain a public dashboard to display consolidation - related costs savings and optimization performance information for the agencies . in june 2019 , omb issued memorandum m - 19-19 , which updated the data center optimization initiative and redefined a data center as a purpose - built , physically separate , dedicated space that meets certain criteria .