fns generally agreed with this recommendation . other federal and nonfederal programs that operate solely in the summer , as well as those operating year - round , helped feed low - income children in the summer months . for example , in 2016 , fns data indicated about 26 million meals were served through the nslp's seamless summer option , a separate federal program that streamlines administrative requirements for school meal providers serving summer meals . some children also received summer meals through nonfederal programs operated by entities such as faith - based organizations and foodbanks , though the reach of these efforts was limited , according to our state survey and interviews with providers and national organizations at the time of our report . for example , of the 27 states that reported in our survey awareness of the geographic coverage of these nonfederal programs , 11 states indicated that they operated in some portions of the state — the most common state response . states and sfsp providers reported challenges with issues related to meal site availability , children's participation , and program administration , though federal , state , and local entities had taken steps to improve these areas . for example , a lack of available transportation , low population density , and limited meal sites posed challenges for sfsp implementation in rural areas , according to states we surveyed , selected national organizations , and state and local officials in the three states we visited . in response , state and local entities took steps , such as transporting meals to children by bus , to address these issues — efforts that fns supported through information sharing and grants . states and sfsp providers also reported challenges with meal site safety , and fns's efforts to address this area were limited . more details on our scope and methodology can be found in the issued report . in brief , we found that although usda collects information about the actual number of meals served to children through the sfsp program — which is one indicator of program participation — usda's estimates of the number of children participating in the sfsp were unreliable . as a result , usda's understanding of children's participation in the sfsp was limited , impairing its ability to both inform program implementation and facilitate strategic planning and outreach to areas with low participation . other federal and nonfederal programs helped feed low - income children over the summer to some extent . these federal programs included the national school lunch program's seamless summer option , which provides nutrition assistance benefits solely in the summer , and several federal programs that operate year - round . nonfederal programs , commonly operated by local faith - based organizations and foodbanks , also helped feed low - income children in the summer , but states and local organizations reported that these had limited reach . finally , there were gaps in usda's efforts to address reported challenges related to sfsp meal site safety and program administration .