some grants have been provided to the electricity sector . as of march 2007 , of the more than $14 billion in overall non - u.s. assistance pledged for iraq , about $580 million had been committed and $441 million spent on grants for electricity projects . grd has reported that the united states has committed $93 million for this project , including the workover of 30 wells in the rumaila fields and completion and replacement of tubing in 50 wells in west qurna . this project began in june 2006 and had an expected completion date of december 2006 . as of april 2007 , the work was completed and could result in an increase in crude oil production capacity of 150,000 barrels per day ( 50 wells at 3,000 bpd ) . further , despite capacity building efforts , iraq has experienced difficulty in sustaining the infrastructure rehabilitated with u.s. funds . for example , the u.s. decision to install gas turbine generators without an assured supply of natural gas has resulted in increased maintenance requirements and decreased power output . iraq's inability to sustain the new and rehabilitated oil and electricity infrastructure undermines efforts to reach u.s. program goals . in the oil sector , u.s. agency and contractor officials report that the sector's rebuilding efforts continue to be impeded by the lack of modern technology ; the lack of qualified staff and expertise at the field , plant , and ministry levels ; an ineffective inventory control system for spare parts within the oil sector's 14 operating companies ; and difficulties in spending budgets for equipment upgrades and replacements . the u.s. government has provided additional training and management assistance in response to these needs . according to dod , irrf funds were allocated toward sustainment and capacity development activities including training to state - owned oil companies on preparation of long - term service agreements and training on heavy equipment , procurement of functional and operational spare parts , and the invitation - to - bid process . according to u.s. government reporting , the lack of an adequate operating and maintenance practices is one of many factors inhibiting a robust electrical grid in iraq . u.s. officials also report that rebuilding of the electricity sector has been slowed by the lack of training for plant workers , inadequate spare parts , and an ineffective asset management and parts inventory system . electricity plants are sometimes operated beyond their recommended limits and use poor - quality fuels that rapidly deteriorate parts , involve longer maintenance downtimes , and increase pollution . according to u.s. government officials , iraq needs to develop cleaner and more reliable sources of natural gas for its generators supporting the national grid . currently , iraq's fuel supply does not meet demand and its quality is inconsistent . for example , of the 35 natural gas turbines the u.s. government installed in power generation plants , 16 are using diesel , crude , or heavy fuel oil due to the lack of natural gas and lighter fuels . as a result , maintenance cycles are reportedly three times as frequent and three times as costly .