amendment no . 1020 would expand gao's authority to oversee tarp , including the joint federal reserve - treasury term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) . ..” as noted , however , the federal reserve was only partially correct: section 601 provided gao authority to access records of the treasury - funded talf llc in order to audit treasury , but not authority to audit and evaluate the federal reserve's talf actions . citigroup , bank of america , and bear stearns . this language was enacted as a new subsection ( e ) to 31 u.s.c . finally , the federal reserve commented that because of talf's unique “hybrid” nature — it serves objectives of both monetary policy and tarp — gao has “ample authority” to audit talf operations , treasury's participation in them , and the federal reserve's administration of talf “on behalf of” treasury , all from the perspective of tarp . in this regard , the federal reserve noted that in practice , it obtains treasury's input and agreement on many aspects of talf . however , the view that gao can separately audit the federal reserve's talf performance as long as the audit is limited to tarp objectives , without violating the statutory prohibition against gao auditing federal reserve monetary policy actions , is not supported by either the language of 31 u.s.c . § 714 , its original legislative history , or the amendments congress enacted to it in may 2009 . “inextricably bound up in monetary policy” and is intended to be covered by the prohibition . under this reading , gao is prohibited from auditing the federal reserve's talf discount window lending activities even from the perspective of tarp . the federal reserve's position also conflicts with congress' enactment of § 714 ( e ) in may 2009 , noted above , authorizing gao to audit federal reserve section 13 ( 3 ) actions with respect to a single and specific partnership or corporation . if gao already could audit tarp aspects of “hybrid” treasury and federal reserve activity , such additional authority would have been unnecessary regarding aig , for example , because both treasury and the federal reserve already were providing assistance to aig . yet gao was required , as the federal reserve then agreed , to await enactment of additional authority in order to audit this joint assistance . in light of these statutory restrictions on gao's authority to audit the federal reserve's talf activities , we continue to believe that congress should provide gao with authority to audit the federal reserve's operation and administration of the talf program . in addition to the contacts named above , karen tremba ( assistant director ) , angela burriesci , emily chalmers , rudy chatlos , joe cisewski , rachel demarcus , mike hoffman , robert lee , sarah mcgrath , marc molino , tim mooney , omyra ramsingh , susan sawtelle , and cynthia taylor made important contributions to this report . repay frbny loan interest . repay treasury loan interest . repay any other secured obligations that may arise that have not been specified yet by the agencies .