event space commission report published . to update the status of actions the department of defense ( dod ) has taken to implement the space commission's recommendations , we identified and monitored changes in dod's organization and management of space by reviewing dod and service briefings and internal department directives and memoranda that identified issues and directed initiatives for improving management of space activities . secretary of defense sent letter to congress detailing intended actions . our scope and methodology are detailed in appendix iv . we performed our work from june 2002 to february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . contacts and staff acknowledgements are listed in appendix v. we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; the commander , u.s. strategic command ; the director , defense advanced research projects agency ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 6020 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the secretary of defense agreed with the space commission's finding that the department of defense ( dod ) needed a new and comprehensive national security space management approach to promote and protect u.s. interests in space . in a may 8 , 2001 , letter to the leaders of the defense and intelligence oversight committees , the secretary informed congress that he would take actions to improve dod's management structure and organization for national security space actions . these actions largely represented organizational and management changes the space commission recommended to improve dod's focus on national security space activities and better coordinate military and intelligence space activities . we reported in june 2002 that dod had implemented or was in the process of implementing 10 of the 13 recommendations the space commission directed to it . at that time , dod had completed action on six recommendations and was in the process of implementing four others . the secretary of defense chose not to implement three of the commission's recommendations and instead opted to ( 1 ) establish a focal point for space within the air force rather than create an under secretary of defense for space , information , and intelligence ; ( 2 ) increase the air force's responsibilities by department directive rather than requesting legislative change ; and ( 3 ) direct existing organizations to conduct innovative space research and development rather than create a new organization to do so . as table 2 shows , dod has implemented or is nearing implementation of these 10 recommendations . dod has completed actions to implement three recommendations that were categorized as “in progress” in our june 2002 report , as designated by the arrows in the table . only the recommendation that the air force be named executive agent for dod space remains to be finalized .