we did not independently verify the accuracy of the data . to describe how funds were used by selected medical centers , in may and june 2006 , we conducted site visits to 2 of va's 21 health care networks and 3 medical centers located in those networks , and we also conducted phone interviews with officials in 2 other networks and 4 medical centers located in those networks . we selected these 4 networks because va had identified them as having gaps in substance abuse and / or mental health services prior to the implementation of the mental health strategic plan , and because they received varying levels of funding — from relatively high to relatively low — in fiscal year 2005 for mental health strategic plan initiatives . we interviewed clinical and administrative officials at these networks and medical centers , and at 3 community based outpatient clinics ( cboc ) associated with these medical centers and 5 vet centers . the findings from our site visits and phone interviews with network and medical center officials cannot be generalized to other medical centers or networks . we discussed the information in this statement with va officials who have responsibilities related to mental health services , budgeting , and the allocation of financial resources . these officials agreed that the data are accurate and they also provided updated data which we incorporated as appropriate . we performed our work from january 2006 through september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , va headquarters allocated $88 million of the $100 million va officials said would be used for mental health strategic plan initiatives in fiscal year 2005 by using several approaches . va allocated about $53 million directly to medical centers and certain offices based on proposals submitted for funding and other approaches targeted to specific initiatives . va solicited submissions from networks for specific initiatives to be carried out at their individual medical centers through requests for proposals ( rfps ) . in addition , va headquarters officials said that they allocated $35 million for mental health strategic plan initiatives through va's general resource allocation system to its 21 health care networks , which , in turn , could allocate these resources to individual medical centers . va's decision that $35 million of the funds allocated through its general resource allocation system was for plan initiatives was a retroactive decision . va made this decision several months after resources had been provided to the networks through the general allocation system . moreover , va did not notify networks and medical centers that these funds were to be used for plan initiatives . network and medical center officials we interviewed in 4 networks told us that they were unaware that any portion of their general allocation was to be specifically used for mental health strategic plan initiatives . the approximately $12 million remaining of the $100 million was not allocated by any approach because , according to headquarters officials , there was not enough time during the fiscal year to allocate the funds .