agencies' responsibilities . once the investigation findings are forwarded from the oig , the agency head must determine whether there is a sufficient basis to conclude that a contractor employee was reprised against , and must either issue an order that the contractor take some form of remedial action or issue an order denying relief . during the 30-day period after the agency head receives the oig report , the agency head may ask the oig for additional investigative work . changes in disclosure process . under the pilot program , the number of persons and bodies to whom a contractor employee may disclose protected information has expanded . under the prior statute , a contractor employee was only covered if he or she disclosed certain wrongdoing to a member of congress , an authorized official of an executive agency , or the department of justice . figure 1 above describes the disclosure process under the pilot program . agencies' oig responsibilities . upon receiving a reprisal complaint , oigs must evaluate whether a reprisal complaint is covered under the pilot program . oigs might not investigate for a variety of reasons , such as in cases where the complaint is already under investigation by another authority such as another oig , or otherwise does not allege a violation of the law , such as if the claim was made prior to july 1 , 2013 . if the oig determines the case is not covered under the pilot program , it may then notify the complainant that no further action will be taken on the reprisal complaint . if the reprisal complaint is covered , the oig must investigate the complaint and submit a report of its findings to the agency head , the complainant , the head of the contracting activity , and the contractor . oigs may make a preliminary determination of whether reprisal occurred based on the investigation ; however , the final determination of reprisal must be made by the agency head . as described in figure 1 above , the report provided by the oig to the agency head must be sent within 180 days from receipt of the reprisal complaint . if the oig determines it needs more time to investigate , oigs are able to seek an extension of this timeline by getting permission from the complainant to do so . federal acquisition regulation 52.203-17 contractor employee whistleblower rights and requirement to inform employees of whistleblower rights ( a ) this contract and employees working on this contract will be subject to the whistleblower rights and remedies in the pilot program on contractor employee whistleblower protections established at 41 u.s.c . 4712 by section 828 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( pub . l. 112-239 ) and far 3.908 . ( b ) the contractor shall inform its employees in writing , in the predominant language of the workforce , of employee whistleblower rights and protections under 41 u.s.c . 4712 , as described in section 3.908 of the federal acquisition regulation . ( c ) the contractor shall insert the substance of this clause , including this paragraph ( c ) , in all subcontracts over the simplified acquisition threshold .