interagency coordination . agency officials from doj , labor , and hhs report that they have developed strong partnerships with their counterpart grant makers as a result of prior collaborative initiatives , such as svori and pri . although officials from doj and hhs reported that some of this grant coordination is informal and ad hoc , doj , labor , and hhs have developed more formal and ongoing coordination mechanisms , as well . for example , doj's bureau of justice assistance and hhs's substance abuse and mental health services administration first developed a memorandum of understanding in 2009 to improve formal coordination and communication in various programmatic areas , including reentry . specifically , the agreement states that these agencies will coordinate on the development of grant solicitations , grantee conferences , and the vetting of relevant publications , among other things . reference to this agreement is also included in subsequent orp grant solicitations , stating that these agencies “share a mutual interest in supporting and shaping offender reentry - treatment services , as both agencies fund ‘offender reentry' programs . orp grantees will be expected to seek out and coordinate with any local federally - funded offender reentry initiatives including ‘second chance act' offender reentry programs , as appropriate.” the memorandum assists these agencies in establishing a mutually reinforcing or joint strategy , consistent with best practices for interagency collaboration . agency officials reported that their interagency coordination has encouraged personal relationships among grant - administering staff and as a result , they are in contact at various phases in the grant life cycle . for example , officials from all three agencies said they are sharing some draft grant solicitations with one another to obtain feedback before issuing them . doj and labor officials stated that they share the solicitations when the subject matter is relevant and not on a routine basis with all federal agencies . ( 3 ) to what extent do federal grant - making agencies measure grantees' effectiveness in reducing recidivism ? using the framework established in our prior work addressing overlap , fragmentation , and duplication , we use the following definitions for analysis of reentry grant programs: fragmentation: when more than one federal agency ( or more than one organization within an agency ) is involved in the same broad area of national interest . overlap: when programs have similar goals , devise similar strategies and activities to achieve those goals , or target similar users . overlap may result from statutory or other limitations beyond an agency's control . duplication: when two or more agencies or programs are engaged in the same activities or provide the same services to the same beneficiaries . when granting agencies do not identify overlap , assess its impact , or coordinate their activities in acknowledgment of the overlap , there is a heightened risk of unnecessary duplication because one granting agency may not be knowledgeable of the ways in which its funding decision duplicates another's . at times , federal funding is leveraged by design to achieve a single purpose through multiple federal funding streams .