environment . needed to demonstrate full functionality of the subsystem . well defined . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 , requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment , such as in an aircraft , vehicle or space . examples include testing the prototype in a test bed aircraft . prototype . should be form , fit and function integrated with other key supporting elements / subsystems to demonstrate full functionality of subsystem . in almost all cases , this is the end of the last “bug fixing” aspects of true system development . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . flight demonstration in representative operational environment such as flying test bed or demonstrator aircraft . technology is well substantiated with test data . ( see app . vi for a description of the trl levels. ) according to program officials , these technologies will be demonstrated at trl 6 when key integration tests are completed in fiscal year 2007 . the two main tests facing the program are the second series of integration testing on the next generation processor router and optical standards validation suite ( ngpr - 2 and osvs - 2 ) . program officials said that the program is using these independent tests to reduce risk by uncovering technical problems before awarding the space segment contract for the design and assembly of the satellites . the results of the tests are to be assessed at the second interim program review before dod makes a decision to enter the product development phase of the program . at the time of this report , results from the first series of integration tests were unavailable . dod is taking positive steps to lower tsat program risk , but additional knowledge is needed before entering product development . dod is separating its technology development efforts from product development , continuing to conduct program reviews before making key decisions , reducing program complexity by staggering the awards on its ground and space segment contracts , and incorporating knowledge - based metrics in software development . additionally , dod is reducing risks in technology development efforts by leveraging decades of knowledge on heritage systems and using independent integration tests to demonstrate the maturity of critical technologies . despite these efforts , dod faces gaps in knowledge that could hamper successful outcomes . as dod implements an incremental approach for the tsat program , it has yet to justify the tsat investment in light of other dod investments using the knowledge it has now gained . dod is reducing tsat program risk in the following ways: separating technology and product development — dod is separating technology development from product development and plans to prove that all critical technologies will work as intended before the tsat program enters product development in 2007 . in the past , dod has not successfully implemented acquisition best practices in its space programs to reduce risks and increase the likelihood of better outcomes , particularly in some of its larger and more complex programs .