ry . both army and air national guard officials told us that although they follow up with the states and territories , they cannot force them to comply . officials said that they follow up with states and territories via e - mail or telephone if the reports appear to contain obvious mistakes , su ch as the totals not adding up to the numbers reported in each individual reporting category . they also follow up if no reports have been sub however , they said that it is ultimately up to individual states and territories to submit their reports because the national guard bureau no command and control authority over them . specifically , while the national guard bureau personnel operate under title 10 of the u.s. cod the national guard personnel at the state level typically operate under title 32 . to what extent does osd have oversight over recruiter irregularities that occur across the service components ? in conducting this review , we focused our scope on recruiter irregularities that affect the active , reserve , and national guard components of dod's military services that occurred from fiscal year 2006 through fiscal year 2008 . to provide information on the number and type of recruiter irregularities , we analyzed recruiter irregularity data that osd received from the service components for that period . however , due to possible reporting errors in the 2006 data resulting from the new reporting requirement on recruiter irregularities issued by osd in december 2006 , we were unable to present trends in recruiter irregularities . additionally , we did not include fiscal year 2009 data in our analysis of recruiter irregularities across the service components because the data covering the full fiscal year 2009 will not be reported to osd by the service components in time to be included in our analysis . although we found recruiter irregularity data for the active and reserve components to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report , we could not present the data on recruiter irregularities reported by the national guard because states and territories do not report their data consistently and the different systems used by states and territories for maintaining and reporting these data lead to data reliability issues . as part of our first objective , we also requested and reviewed case files from each of the active and reserve components for all substantiated cases of recruiter irregularities that occurred in fiscal year 2008 to provide illustrative examples of the types of recruiter irregularities that occur and the actions taken by the service components against recruiters responsible for committing recruiter irregularities . however , because the national guard bureau does not maintain centralized data on cases of recruiter irregularities , we selected and obtained case files from all seven states ( alabama , california , indiana , minnesota , oklahoma , pennsylvania , and wisconsin ) that reported more than four substantiated recruiter irregularities in fiscal year 2008 . to assess the extent to which the service components' have guidance and procedures in place to address recruiter irregularities , we obtained and reviewed the service components' written guidance related to the enlistment process and recruiter conduct .