dhs agreed with our recommendation . moreover , in early 2003 , dhs recognized the challenges it faced and commissioned a comprehensive management study to help the department create an operating structure that integrates the department's components and to facilitate a dhs - wide integration plan linked to core missions and capabilities , among other things . this management study also recommended that dhs develop a comprehensive integration plan with major milestones defined , encompassing all of the department's integration initiatives including functional management and mission integration activities . early on , the department made some progress in consolidating the processes and systems of each individual function in areas such as information technology , financial management , procurement , and human capital . for example , according to dhs's performance and accountability report for fiscal year 2004 and updated information provided by dhs officials , the department has accomplished the following activities as part of its integration efforts: reduced the number of financial management service centers from consolidated acquisition support for 22 legacy agencies within 8 major procurement programs , reduced the number of its payroll systems from 8 to 2 , and expects to be using one single payroll system by the beginning of fiscal year 2006 , consolidated 22 different human resource offices to 7 , consolidated 271 processes associated with administrative services consolidated bank card programs from 27 to 3 , and realigned more than 6,000 support services employees ( both government and contractor ) from the legacy u.s. customs service and the legacy immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) to support the 68,000 employees of the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , and citizenship and immigration services ( cis ) organizations . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . in addition to improving the effectiveness of the department , according to dhs , these consolidation activities are aimed at realizing the efficiencies and economies of scale envisioned by the president and the congress in creating dhs , by eliminating overlap and redundancies in these processes , systems , and services . the dhs ig reported in december 2004 that while dhs has made notable progress in integrating its many separate components in one department , structural and resource problems continue to inhibit progress in certain support functions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the dhs strategic plan describes the department's vision , mission , core values , and guiding principles to achieve its mission of protecting the homeland . in addition , one of its seven strategic goals , organizational excellence , acknowledges the need to integrate the systems , processes , and services the department inherited to improve efficiency and effectiveness . draft paper on the 21st century department: in april 2004 , the under secretary for management also developed a draft 21st century paper to provide more details as to how dhs would achieve its strategic goal of organizational excellence .