determining progress against the plan . this involves comparing actual cost and schedule against the documented plan for the full scope of the project and communicating the results . while the three projects meet weekly to monitor the current status of each project and produce monthly reports that document cost and schedule progress , their plans did not include sufficient detail against which to monitor progress . for example , project planning documents for the three projects did not include key information , such as when build - or - buy decisions were to be made or when final systems are to be released . this is especially problematic when the production systems that these projects are expected to produce need to be implemented in time for the 2018 end - to - end system integration test , which begins in august 2017 ( in less than a year and a half ) . bureau officials agreed with our concerns and in june 2016 they stated that they are in the process of updating the project plans and expect to be done by august 2016 . it will be important that these plans include the full scope of these projects to enable the project managers and the cedcap program manager to determine progress relative to the full scope of the projects . document significant deviations in performance . projects should identify and document when deviations from planned cost and schedule occur that , if left unresolved , would preclude the project from meeting its objectives . the bureau's monthly progress reports capture schedule and cost variances and document when these variances exceed the threshold for significant deviation , which is 8 percent . for example , the internet and mobile data collection project had a cost variance of 20 percent in september 2015 and the survey ( and listing ) interview operational control project had a cost variance of 25 percent in september 2015 , which were flagged by the projects as exceeding the significant deviation threshold . however , the projects are measuring deviations against their budgeted amounts , which are based on the 2013 cedcap program office cost estimate . this estimate was developed based on very early assumptions and limited details about the program and is thus out - of - date . in the absence of an up - to - date cost estimate , the program lacks a basis for monitoring true deviations in performance . accordingly , our draft report includes a recommendation that the bureau update the cedcap program office cost estimate to reflect the current status of the program as soon as appropriate information becomes available . taking corrective actions to address issues when necessary . projects should take timely corrective actions , such as revising the original plan , establishing new agreements , or including additional mitigation activities in the current plan , to address issues when cost or schedule deviates significantly from the plan . the cedcap program has established a process for taking corrective actions to address issues when needed and , as of april 2016 , bureau officials stated they have not needed to take any corrective actions to address cedcap program issues .