auth . of new york and new jersey , 706 f. supp . , that ( 1 ) the challenged state action regulated evenhandedly , with only “incidental” effects on interstate commerce ; ( 2 ) the state action served a legitimate local purpose ; and ( 3 ) there were no alternative means to promote this local purpose that would not also affect interstate commerce . ( 3 ) molinari v. new york triborough bridge and tunnel authority , 838 f.supp . 1993 ) – the plaintiffs in molinari brought suit against the new york triborough bridge and tunnel authority , challenging the 1989 and 1993 toll increases on the verrazano - narrows bridge . they maintained that the tolls were “unjust and unreasonable” within the meaning of the 1987 act solely because they were used to subsidize the mass transportation components of the metropolitan transportation authority . the district court granted the authority's motion for summary judgment , finding that “plaintiffs have failed to create even a triable issue of fact on their claim that the challenged toll increases on the verrazano - narrows bridge are unjust and unreasonable.” “f a bridge toll generates more revenue than necessary to provide a fair profit or rate of return,” the court continued , “the toll may not be challenged successfully if it is used to support a single integrated transportation system in which the successful operation of the bridge is dependent in whole or in part on the operation of the other related facilities.” the court also raised serious questions regarding whether a private right of action exists under the 1987 act , finding that not only does the statute not explicitly create such a right , it also lacks the kind of “right - or duty - creating language” that has generally been the most accurate indicator of the propriety of implication of a cause of action.” finally , the court noted that the “supreme court has . been ‘especially reluctant to imply causes of action under statutes that create duties on the part of persons for the benefit of the public at large” and that there was a compelling case to be made that a private right of action should not be implied . ( 4 ) american trucking association v. delaware river joint toll bridge commission , 458 f.3d 291 ( 3d cir . 2006 ) – in this case , the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit found that the 1987 act's “just and reasonable” provision did not create a private right of action for truck drivers to challenge the reasonableness of tolls on bi - state bridges operated by the delaware river joint toll bridge commission . aaa also claimed the toll increases were unreasonable under the constitution's so - called dormant commerce clause because the tolls were not “based on a fair approximation of…use” of the bridges and tunnels and are “excessive in relation to the benefits conferred” on the users . aaa sought to stop the toll increases both temporarily — on an emergency basis — and permanently .