they on all cer that has been conducted . national library of medicine officials told us that they have informally consulted with ahrq on its plans and agree with this approach . in november 2014 , ahrq officials told us that they were sharing their planned approach with senior hhs officials for review and approval . feedback and evaluation process . among other things . to identify stakeholder groups , we took several steps . first , we selected four cer studies as examples from among 101 studies for which information was disseminated to targeted stakeholder groups from june 2012 to june 2014 . the four studies we selected were systematic reviews — syntheses of existing comparative clinical effectiveness research — and each aligned with one of ahrq's 14 priority conditions and with one of the top four chronic diseases and conditions for adults identified by the centers for disease control and prevention . we then requested the marketing plans for these four studies and compared the organizations listed in those plans to the targeted groups specified in ppaca . we selected and obtained information from four stakeholder groups — a physicians' group ; a health care providers' group ; a professional association ; and a patient advocacy group — that appeared most frequently in the marketing plans , from among 56 stakeholder organizations mentioned in the plans two or more times . for stakeholder groups that were specified in ppaca but not included in the marketing plans for the four studies , we requested additional documentation from ahrq to determine the extent to which these stakeholder groups may have appeared in other marketing plans . we also interviewed an official from an additional stakeholder group — a health plan — because ahrq staff indicated that they partnered with this organization to disseminate information , although it was not included in the marketing plans . findings based on information we obtained from these stakeholders cannot be generalized to all targeted groups . in addition , we reviewed relevant internal control standards and key collaboration practices and compared them against ahrq's dissemination activities . to examine ahrq's activities to support training related to cer , we reviewed the relevant legal requirements related to training . we also reviewed ahrq documentation , such as its spending plans for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 and funding announcements for the grants associated with its training grant program for cer . these funding announcements describe the purpose of the grants and funding amounts . additionally , we interviewed relevant ahrq officials responsible for managing the training grant program and inquired about their consultation with nih officials . to examine aspe's activities to coordinate federal programs to support cer by building the capacity to collect , link , and analyze data , we reviewed the relevant legal requirements , as well as relevant agency documentation such as aspe's spending plans for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , which describe the office's proposed projects for its cer - related data capacity activities . we also reviewed other documentation , such as meeting minutes with hhs senior leadership and interagency agreements with other hhs agencies that describe specific cer projects aspe has supported .