weapons . the doe dbt includes a number of weapons not included in the nrc dbt . inclusion of such weapons in the nrc dbt for nuclear power plants would have required plants to take substantial additional security measures . furthermore , doe included other capabilities in its dbt that are not included in the nrc dbt . as discussed below , nrc staff considered some of the weapons in doe's dbt for inclusion in the dbt for nuclear power plants but removed them while drafting the dbt . doe established an even more stringent dbt for its sites that store nuclear weapons ( or material that could be used in a nuclear weapon ) . the security objective for these sites is to prevent the theft or detonation of a nuclear weapon . doe decided on a more stringent dbt to protect nuclear weapons facilities than sites with the potential for radiological sabotage in accordance with its graded approach , which provides for a higher level of protection to sites with greater potential consequences to public health and safety in the event of a terrorist attack . according to doe officials , the consequences of theft or detonation of a nuclear weapon would be “orders of magnitude” greater than radiological sabotage at a doe site or nuclear power plant . consistent with doe's graded approach , nrc officials told us they do not consider comparisons between the doe dbt for nuclear weapons facilities and the nrc dbt for nuclear power plants valid . nrc considers that the potential consequences of the theft of material that could be used in a nuclear weapon could be much greater than radiological sabotage at a nuclear power plant . furthermore , according to nrc officials , terrorists seeking to steal or detonate a nuclear weapon would require greater capabilities to accomplish their objectives than terrorists seeking to cause radiological sabotage . for example , theft of a nuclear weapon ( or material that could be used in a weapon ) would require terrorists to defeat a site's security systems when entering and leaving a site . in contrast , attackers willing to commit suicide in the process of causing the release of radiological material from a nuclear power plant would have to overcome security to enter a site and reach a target set but would not have to leave the site . like doe , nrc uses a graded approach to security , and , therefore , the nrc dbt for nrc - licensed facilities that store or process material that could be used in a nuclear weapon is more stringent than the nrc dbt for nuclear power plants . similarly , the protective strategy at another site focused on the ability of security officers to deny attackers access to the vital area buildings . the site uses cameras and patrols to detect attackers in the owner - controlled area and deploys security officers in bullet - resistant structures . from the structures , located on the roof and attached to the walls of the vital area buildings , security officers could fire upon attackers before they could enter the buildings .