gao - 05-828 . washington , d.c.: august 29 , 2005 . the correct number is 22 . regarding doe's comment , our draft report clearly stated that doe policy does not require ipp project participants reemployed in peaceful activities to cut ties to their home institute . however , more than one institute we visited stated that they are still involved in some weapons - related work , and many institutes remain involved in research and technology development that could be applied to wmd or delivery systems for wmd . we do not believe it is possible for doe to verify the full extent and intended purpose of all activities at the institutes where the ipp program is engaged . moreover , we believe that doe misrepresents the ipp program's accomplishments by counting individuals who have been reemployed in private sector jobs but also are employed by their institutes and , therefore , may still be involved in weapons - related activities . in our view , the reemployment of former weapons scientists into new long - term , private sector jobs — one of the primary metrics doe uses to measure progress of the ipp program — implies that these individuals have terminated their previous employment at the institutes and are dedicated solely to peaceful commercial activities outside of their institutes . while there is no ipp program requirement to exclude former weapons scientists employed on a part - time basis from the total number of jobs created as a result of ipp projects , doe's reported job creation total fails to delineate between part - time and full - time jobs . by not more clearly distinguishing the number of jobs created in each category , this metric is misleading and also misrepresents the program's accomplishments regarding the employment of weapons scientists in commercial activities . however , we have added information to our report that states that there is no ipp program requirement to exclude former weapons scientists employed on a part - time basis from the total number of jobs created as a result of ipp projects . our draft report stated that the ipp program does not prohibit participation of younger scientists in ipp projects . in our view , however , doe has a mistaken and naïve impression of how institutes in the former soviet union view the benefits of allowing younger scientists to participate in the ipp program . doe believes that participation of some younger generation scientists on ipp projects must be permitted to successfully implement projects . this practice has the unintended consequence of allowing former soviet union institutes to use the ipp program as a long - term recruitment tool for younger scientists and , thereby , may perpetuate the proliferation risk posed by scientists at these institutes . as we stated in our draft report , officials at 10 of the 22 institutes we visited in russia and ukraine said that the ipp program has allowed their institutes to recruit , hire , and retain younger scientists . in our view , this is contrary to the original intent of the program , which was to reduce the proliferation risk posed by soviet - era weapons scientists .