gao - 08-619 . washington , d.c.: july 2 , 2008 . these changes will not be easy to make . they will require dod to reexamine not only its acquisition process , but its requirement setting and funding processes as well . they will also require dod to change how it views program success , and what is necessary to achieve success . this includes changing the environment and incentives that lead dod and the military services to overpromise on capability and underestimate costs in order to sell new programs and capture the funding needed to start and sustain them . finally , none of this will be achieved without a true partnership among the department , the military services , the congress , and the defense industry . all of us must embrace the idea of change and work diligently to implement it . the first , and most important , step toward improving acquisition outcomes is implementing a new dod - wide investment strategy for weapon systems . we have reported that dod should develop an overarching strategy and decision - making processes that prioritize programs based on a balanced match between customer needs and available department resources - - - that is the dollars , technologies , time , and people needed to achieve these capabilities . we also recommended that capabilities not designated as a priority should be set out separately as desirable but not funded unless resources were both available and sustainable . this means that the decision makers responsible for weapon system requirements , funding , and acquisition execution must establish an investment strategy in concert . dod's under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics — dod's corporate leader for acquisition — should develop this strategy in concert with other senior leaders , for example , combatant commanders who would provide input on user needs ; dod's comptroller and science and technology leaders , who would provide input on available resources ; and acquisition executives from the military services , who could propose solutions . finally , once priority decisions are made , congress will need to enforce discipline through its legislative and oversight mechanisms . once dod has prioritized capabilities , it should work vigorously to make sure each new program can be executed before the acquisition begins . more specifically , this means assuring requirements for specific weapon systems are clearly defined and achievable given available resources and that all alternatives have been considered . system requirements should be agreed to by service acquisition executives as well as combatant commanders . once programs begin , requirements should not change without assessing their potential disruption to the program and assuring that they can be accommodated within time and funding constraints . in addition , dod should prove that technologies can work as intended before including them in acquisition programs . more ambitious technology development efforts should be assigned to the science and technology community until they are ready to be added to future generations of the product . dod should also require the use of independent cost estimates as a basis for budgeting funds .