unemployment was even higher on some reservations . for example , on the blackfeet reservation , 74 percent of adults were not employed and 22 percent of employed adults were poor . our survey results indicate that poverty and unemployment rates remain high on many reservations . fifty of the 127 tribes with reservations that responded to our survey question reported that at least half of all families living on their reservations had incomes below the federal poverty level . in addition , 51 tribes reported that 50 percent or more of adults living on the tribes' reservations were unemployed . tribal officials we visited indicated that the isolated geographic location and distance from markets of many reservations as well as a lack of education and job skills among workers living on the reservation impact economic growth . for example , a modular home manufacturing plant on the blackfeet reservation in montana has had trouble finding and keeping enough workers with construction skills to expand its business . to overcome this obstacle , the enterprise has worked with the local community college to offer construction training to tribal members on the reservation . the gaming facility owned by the white mountain apache tribe was forced to hire non - tribal members . officials explained that because members lack the basic work and life skills needed to hold such jobs , nonmembers hold most of the better - paid jobs . a number of tribes also lack some key factors research has shown to be important for economic growth on reservations . these include fully exercised sovereignty , effective governing institutions , and a strategic orientation . for example , 45 of the 142 tribes that responded to our survey question stated that they are not participating in a self - governance initiative . in addition , although research indicates the separation of tribal governance and economic development contributes to effective governing institutions , 78 of the 145 tribes that responded to our survey question stated that they do not have an economic development committee or organization that is separate from their tribal government . finally , 56 of the 140 tribes that responded to our survey question reported they did not have a written plan for improving economic conditions on the reservation , although research indicates that having such a formal approach is an indicator of strategic orientation . the number of american indian families receiving cash assistance in state tanf programs in the 34 states with federally recognized indian tribes decreased between 1994 and 2001 , from almost 68,000 to about 26,000.part of this decline occurred because many american indian tanf recipients were served by tribal tanf programs in 2001 and are not included in the data . while data on tribal tanf program caseloads are not available for 2001 , tribes have estimated that they could serve as many as 22,000 families . even if those participating in tribal tanf programs were taken into account , the decline in american indian families receiving tanf is significant . in comparison , the number of all families receiving tanf fell from about 3.4 million families in 1994 to about 1.5 million in 2001 . in some states , the share of the caseload made up of american indians has risen .