we agree with these concerns . state also notes that the general assembly's approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the un's procurement award process . however , per our methodology , we categorize this reform effort under “little or no progress” because there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system . state said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our evaluation methodology . state and the un secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the u.s . permanent representative to the united nations . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . to identify and examine the progress of un management reforms , we reviewed key documents proposing united nations ( un ) management reforms and interviewed officials from several un departments in new york . we obtained and reviewed official reports of the secretariat and the office of internal oversight services ( oios ) , advisory committee on administrative and budgetary questions ( acabq ) documents , general assembly resolutions , secretary - general bulletins , web sites , related budget documents , and statements from un officials . we also interviewed senior officials from un departments in new york city . specifically , we met with officials from the general assembly office of the president , the office of the deputy secretary - general , the department of management , and oios . during the course of our review , we discussed the status of un management reforms with officials from the department of state in washington , d.c. , and the un in new york . we also met with representatives from 17 of 192 member states representing various geographic regions , including africa , asia , europe , the middle east , north america , and south america , to obtain a balance of views on the most critical challenges to reforming un management . we selected management reform issues in the key areas of ethics , oversight , management operations of the secretariat , and review of programs and activities ( known as mandates ) to examine in more detail . we determined that these were the key areas of management reform through our review of un documents and our discussions with un and u.s. officials . we focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005 and did not specifically address the 1997 and 2002 reform agendas .