, by having them all report c - 5 . after reviewing a random sample of commanders' comments from all marine corps units that reported a qualified yes in january 2011 , we estimate that 94 percent included an explanation of the qualified rating . according to federal standards for internal control , management must continually assess and evaluate its internal controls to assure that the control activities being used are effective and updated when necessary . also , managers need to compare actual performance to planned or expected results and analyze significant differences . while the army and marine corps conduct quality assurance reviews , the reviews are not identifying all the inconsistencies in their units' reporting methods and in the reported data . for example , some army installations have offices that review readiness reports on a monthly basis , and higher - level commands from both services review the reports from their subordinates . however , officials from the army readiness division and marine corps readiness branch acknowledged that the quality assurance reviews are incomplete and have not prevented inconsistent data from being reported . also , the army has a management control evaluation checklist that commanders can use to review their readiness reports , but army readiness division officials said the use of this checklist is not required , and some officials we spoke with said the checklist is not used . furthermore , neither the army nor marine corps have comprehensive mechanisms in place to prevent the submission of data that fail to comply with the reporting requirements . army readiness division officials said these mechanisms could be added to the drrs - army system in the future , but this is currently not a top priority . the army officials said there are some warnings in the system , such as one that asks commanders to explain if they choose both c - 4 and yes . marine corps readiness branch officials also said they have warning flags in their system , but these warnings do not prevent submission of inconsistent unit status reports . without further clarifying guidance , effective quality assurance reviews , or system mechanisms to prevent the submission of inconsistent information , the services cannot be assured that they are providing decision makers within and outside of dod with timely and consistent readiness reporting data . the drrs concept of operations calls for a family of systems to be developed and operated under a single framework to share information requirements and data elements seamlessly across the enterprise . specifically , since we last reported on drrs in september 2009 , dod and the services have continued to take steps to develop their respective systems — drrs - army , drrs - marine corps , and drrs - strategic . because the developers have focused on the needs of different system users , and have yet to reach agreement on key elements , progress in achieving interoperability among the three individual systems and across the enterprise has been incremental . in our 2009 report we noted that a number of issues including unclear requirements were affecting system development and the system's ability to display service readiness data .