we disagree with doj . according to the national institute of standards and technology , the detection rate and the false positive rate are both necessary to assess the accuracy of a face recognition system . generally , face recognition systems can be configured to allow for a greater or lesser number of matches . a greater number of matches would generally increase the detection rate , but would also increase the false positive rate . similarly , a lesser number of matches would decrease the false positive rate , but would also decrease the detection rate . reporting a detection rate of 86 percent without reporting the accompanying false positive rate presents an incomplete view of the system's accuracy . we reported in may 2016 that fbi , doj , and omb guidance all required annual reviews of operational information technology systems to assess their abilities to continue to meet cost and performance goals . for example , the fbi's information technology life cycle management directive required an annual operational review to ensure that the fielded system is continuing to support its intended mission , among other things . in may 2016 , we reported that the fbi had not assessed the accuracy of face recognition searches of ngi - ips in its operational setting — the setting in which enrolled photos , rather than a test database of photos are used to conduct a search for investigative leads . according to fbi officials , at the time of our may 2016 review , the database of photos used in its tests was representative of the photos in ngi - ips , and ongoing testing in a simulated environment was adequate . however , according to the national institute of standards and technology , as the size of a photo database increases , the accuracy of face recognition searches performed on that database can decrease due to lookalike faces . at the time of our review , fbi's test database contained 926,000 photos while ngi - ips contained about 30 million photos . we concluded that by conducting an operational review of these systems , fbi officials would obtain information regarding what factors affect the accuracy of the face recognition searches , such as the quality of the photos in the database , and if ngi - ips is meeting federal , state , and local law enforcement needs . as a result , we recommended the fbi conduct an operational review of ngi - ips , at least annually , that includes an assessment of the accuracy of face recognition searches and take actions , as necessary , to improve the system . in may 2016 , doj concurred with this recommendation and has taken steps to seek input from its users . for example , the fbi submitted a staff paper through the fall 2016 advisory policy board process to solicit feedback from its users . specifically , officials said the paper requested feedback on whether the face recognition searches of the ngi - ips are meeting their needs , and input regarding search accuracy . doj partially concurred with our recommendation . specifically , doj concurred with the portion of our recommendation related to the use of ngi - ips .