( app . i presents a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) medicare's home health benefit includes skilled nursing and home health aide services , physical and occupational therapy , speech pathology services , medical social services , and the provision of certain medical supplies and equipment . to qualify for services , beneficiaries must be confined to their homes ; have a plan of care signed by a physician ; and need intermittent skilled nursing care ( other than solely venipuncture for the purpose of obtaining a blood sample ) , physical therapy , speech - language pathology services , or have a continuing need for occupational therapy services . intermittent means that the skilled care is either provided or needed fewer than 7 days each week , or less than 8 hours of each day for periods of 21 days or less , with extensions in exceptional circumstances when the need for additional care is finite and predictable . hhas may serve medicare beneficiaries from a parent office or expand their coverage by delivering services from affiliated branches or subunits . branch locations provide services in the same geographic area as the parent and share administration , supervision , and services with the parent . subunits are semiautonomous entities and provide services in a geographic area different from the parent hha . to participate in medicare , parent offices as well as subunits must generally serve a minimum of 10 patients prior to undergoing an initial survey that certifies compliance with medicare cops . in other words , a subunit must meet the medicare cops independent of its parent office . federal guidance to surveyors about when to cite a cop - level deficiency is limited , and surveyors lack tools to help categorize deficiencies when they are found . cms guidance for surveyors states that an incident with little or no effect on the delivery of patient services does not warrant a deficiency citation . on the other hand , a cop - level deficiency may be cited if , in a surveyor's judgment , the deficiency constitutes a significant or a serious problem that adversely affects , or has the potential to adversely affect , patients . vague requirements for surveying branch offices . despite the fact that branch offices represent about one - quarter of all hha locations , cms guidance on surveying branches is vague . in 1997 , we recommended that hha branch locations be “periodically surveyed.” cms instructed states as of april 2001 that ( 1 ) branch locations should be periodically included in or replace the unannounced standard survey of a parent hha , ( 2 ) standard surveys should be routinely conducted at a branch location when that location serves more patients than the parent , and ( 3 ) all locations of an hha should be visited during the survey whenever possible . officials in cms regional offices told us that no additional guidance was provided to states for defining the terms “periodically,” “included in,” or “routinely.” furthermore , according to cms , some state surveyors currently lack a systematic way of determining the number of patients served by a parent hha or its branch offices prior to the actual survey .