that is not the intent of our recommendation . our recommendation is aimed at having each agency establish utilization criteria based on the specific mission of the vehicles in its fleet . where a single criterion such as mileage , for example , is inappropriate , local officials need to have alternative criteria available , such as hours on station or number of clients served , to validate the need for vehicles . we believe it is the responsibility of agencies to establish clearly defined utilization criteria and guidelines to allow local officials to appropriately apply these criteria . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) agreed with our recommendations and emphasized that it has undertaken efforts , in a relatively short time frame , to establish a departmentwide fleet management program . it noted that the process used by its bureau of customs and border protection for assessing vehicle utilization based on a variety of factors is considered a best practice and will be extended to the rest of the department . in addition , dhs stated that an updated management directive on motor vehicle management sets forth the requirement for maintaining systems for effective control and accountability of motor vehicle assets and for maintaining the minimum number of vehicles needed to meet requirements . the directive is currently being reviewed within the department . in dhs's view , these two actions meet the requirement to establish effective oversight mechanisms to ensure that fleet utilization criteria are defined and fleet assessments are carried out and reviewed on a regular basis . while these are positive actions , dhs needs to ensure that oversight is maintained and that periodic fleet assessments are conducted using the appropriate criteria . veterans affairs stated that it will address our recommendations with several planned initiatives which , when completed , should rectify identified weaknesses . for example , the department will convene a national work group to develop a broad - based fleet management operations manual that will include a section that defines utilization criteria based on vehicle missions . the department is also reviewing various options for establishing a systemwide software application to be used as an oversight tool for managing the fleet . the department of defense agreed with our recommendations . it stated that action will be taken to ensure that utilization criteria , which may be comprised of existing mileage goals or other appropriate criteria , will apply to all nontactical vehicles . it will also require components to review their vehicle inventories annually against fleet assessments and to conduct on - site surveys or inspections on a minimum 3-year cycle ( resources permitting ) with the purpose of purging or fully justifying underutilized vehicles . in oral comments , omb representatives told us that they agree with our findings and recommendations and will consider incorporating the recommended changes to agencies' reporting requirements in new guidance for the fiscal year 2006 budget cycle . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date .