opm did not have comments . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the commissioner of irs , the secretary of the treasury , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 9110 or mctiguej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs are on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . you asked us to review the internal revenue service's ( irs ) enterprise - wide strategic workforce planning efforts . in this report , we assess ( 1 ) how irs defines its workforce needs and develops strategies for shaping its workforce ; ( 2 ) the extent to which irs identified the critical skills and competencies it will require to meet its goals , and describe its strategy to address skills gaps in its workforce ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which irs's human capital office has the capacity to hire employees in hard to fill positions . for our first objective , to determine how irs defines its workforce needs , we conducted a review of irs's implementation of its strategic workforce planning process . we compared irs's strategic workforce planning guidance , policies , and procedures , as well as the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) guidance and policies to ( 1 ) office of personnel management ( opm ) regulations and guidance on strategic workforce planning , ( 2 ) our reports on key principles for effective strategic workforce planning , and ( 3 ) standards for internal controls . to describe how irs workforce planning process aligns with standards , we reviewed irs's documentation of its programs , policies , and practices for recruiting , developing , and retaining the staff needed to achieve program goals . we compared that information with requirements articulated in opm regulations and best practices we has identified . to include prior actions and concerns previously identified as related to irs's strategic human capital planning , we reviewed our prior relevant reports and those from the treasury inspector general for tax administration . we also used several databases to examine irs's workforce trends . to analyze trends in irs's full - time equivalent employment , we used the office of management and budget's ( omb ) budget database , max information system ( max ) , for fiscal years 2011 through 2017 . to analyze employee engagement and employee global satisfaction at irs , we analyzed irs results from opm's fiscal years 2011 through 2017 federal employee viewpoint survey ( fevs ) . to determine retirement eligibility of ses and non - ses irs staff , we analyzed data in opm's enterprise human resources integration ( ehri ) database . to assess the reliability of ehri , omb max , and fevs data , we reviewed our past data reliability assessments and conducted electronic testing to evaluate the accuracy and completeness of the data used in our analyses .