conference proceedings . santa monica , calif.: rand corporation , 2003 . ( recommendation 7 ) . we provided a draft of this report to commerce , dod , doe , nasa , and nih for review and comment . all provided written responses , which are reproduced in appendixes iv - viii . commerce and nih also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . commerce agreed with all three of our recommendations to the agency . in general , the agency stated that it will work through interagency groups , such as the interagency working group for technology transfer and the flc , to address our recommendations , including by creating a specific section in its annual reports to congress with more details on challenges agencies and labs face in patent licensing and by examining and implementing solutions to facilitate the sharing of information among agencies . according to commerce , such solutions could include identifying licensing officers who have expertise and creating a community of practice in which they can share best practices and approaches for establishing license terms . dod , doe , and hhs agreed , and nasa partially agreed , with the recommendation that they or their labs document processes for establishing financial terms in patent licenses . in its written response , dod said it will direct the military departments and appropriate defense agencies to have their labs establish documentation of their licensing processes as appropriate . in their written comments , doe , hhs , and nasa noted the complexity and nuances associated with negotiating license agreements , such as understanding the market for the technology and the level of risk involved . further , doe and nasa noted challenges that limit their ability to document processes and emphasized the importance of maintaining flexibility in establishing financial terms in patent licenses . we agree that some flexibility in establishing financial terms of patent licenses is important . doe , hhs , and nasa all identified steps they would take to ensure that at least some processes for establishing financial terms are documented . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of commerce , defense , and energy ; the administrator of nasa ; and the director of nih . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . we also interviewed officials from nist and uspto . the information we obtained from these interviews is not generalizable to all agency and lab officials and external stakeholders , but we determined that our selection of interviewees was appropriate to obtain varied perspectives on the patent licensing process and related challenges and that the selection would generate valid and reliable evidence to support our work . to understand the level of patent licensing activity and the terms in patent licenses at federal labs , we requested data from each agency on licenses that were active as of the end of fiscal year 2014 . to assess the reliability of the data on active patent license agreements , we asked agency and lab officials questions about the accuracy and completeness of the data and asked them to confirm specific information .