most of these cases were shelved by the ids system . ids shelves some cases upon receipt and others after they have been routed to acs or the field for potential collection action but were not been resolved . cases shelved by ids generally fall into three categories: cases with a low dollar amount owed or where irs is unable to contact the taxpayer or identify a levy source , or a combination of these factors ; cases predicted as unproductive by ids modeling ; and cases that have not been assigned to a revenue officer after 52 weeks of waiting in the field queue . when a case is shelved , irs posts a closing transaction code to the taxpayer's account indicating that the case conditions noted above apply . however , these cases are not necessarily closed permanently . according to officials , irs may reactivate these cases for collection actions if , for example , irs later identifies another tax debt or unfiled return for the taxpayer . internal control standards can serve as tools to help irs management meet the collections program's mission of applying the tax law with integrity and fairness . we reported on the notice phase in 2009 . since fiscal year 2009 , irs's year - end collection inventory has increased by 27 percent ( 14 million to 17.8 million cases ) . during the same period , irs has closed fewer cases , 9.6 million closed in fiscal year 2009 compared to 8.3 million closed in fiscal year 2014 , a 13 percent difference ( see figure 4 ) . as previously noted , cases that are not resolved in the notice phase may be worked in acs or the field , in both functions , put on hold ( known as a shelved case ) , or not worked at all . according to collection officials , shelved cases are generally not worked unless irs later identifies additional tax debts or unfiled returns for a given taxpayer . during the past several years , irs's collection staff has been reduced significantly . at the end of fiscal year 2014 , irs had 27 percent fewer collection staff in acs and the field than it had in fiscal year 2010 ( from 11,210 full - time equivalents ( fte ) to 8,139 ftes ) ( see figure 5 ) . irs uses an automated process to categorize and route most collection cases for potential selection . figure 6 shows how the automated inventory delivery system ( ids ) fits into the collection process . ids's key functions are to analyze cases to ( 1 ) identify and filter out cases that should not be pursued further ( i.e. without clear objectives for the program and case selection processes codified in official irs guidance — including definitions for key terms like fairness and risk — irs is hindered in its efforts to ensure the program is achieving its mission , including ensuring that taxpayers are treated fairly — should fairness become a program objective . further , the lack of clear , widely understood objectives can complicate program management , as assessing risks , developing procedures to respond to risks , and monitoring program controls cannot be performed easily or with clarity .