identifying housing for veterans . staff at vamcs in several locations told us that veterans experienced challenges with finding housing . in wyoming , the vamc staff explained that the market for affordable housing was tight in casper and sheridan , areas served by the vamc . additionally , they said that the partnering pha that served sheridan recently reduced the maximum allowable housing assistance payment from $595 to $571 and this amount limited access to decent housing in the area . the staff added that many landlords also have been reluctant to rent to veterans with criminal histories . vamc staff in south dakota similarly noted that a partnering pha had decreased the housing allowance for the area it served while some landlords had increased their rents . they explained that they used communications with a local homeless coalition , community stakeholders , and landlords to identify options for affordable housing . at greater los angeles health care system , the staff told us that a housing specialist had been hired and kept staff informed of new housing stock while working with developers and realtors to identify suitable housing . that they are eligible for va health care . as previously noted , for fiscal year 2012 , va's goal is for vamcs to refer veterans accepted into hud - vash to the pha within 15 days of acceptance into the program . however , pha staff discussed challenges associated with receiving timely hud - vash referrals from the partnering vamc , particularly at the beginning of a new allocation year . in some instances , veterans were delayed in moving into their units because of a lack of available funds to pay rental application fees , security deposits for rent or utilities , and the first month's rent . in 9 of the 10 locations , pha staff told us that delayed referrals from va slowed the voucher utilization process . while phas generally can begin accepting referrals once hud awards the vouchers , delayed referrals from va extended the time frame between a pha receiving the vouchers and getting the voucher holder into housing . staff at king county housing authority in seattle suggested that va's initial delay in making hud - vash referrals was related to va needing to hire and assign case managers , while hud could move quickly to pass funding on to the phas to issue vouchers . for example , new york city has a department of homeless services that provides a range of services to homeless individuals . through this entity , hud - vash veterans could receive assistance with security deposits , first month's rent , and household items . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from september 2011 through june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .