table 3 . summary of content analysis , by general category of comment affordability ( i.e . cost of funding , administrative cost , cash flow ) non - cost administrative issues ( i.e . complexity , reporting requirements , accounting rules ) workforce issues ( i.e . demographics , recruitment / retention ) disadvantageous compared to dc plans competition ( i.e . industry , international ) strong belief in db system pbgc insurance ( i.e . premiums , incentives for unhealthy plans ) . to produce the estimates from this survey , answers from each responding case were weighted in the analysis to account statistically for all the members of the population , including those that were not selected or did not respond to the survey . estimates produced from this sample are from the population of sponsors represented in pbgc's 2004 research database that had at least 100 participants . because our results are based on a sample and different samples could provide different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( for example , plus or minus 11 percentage points ) . we are 95 percent confident that each of the confidence intervals in this report include the true values in the study population . unless we note otherwise , percentage estimates based on all sponsors ( for example , percent of sponsors with at least one frozen plan ) have 95 percent confidence intervals of within plus or minus 8 percentage points . all other percentage estimates in this report have 95 percent confidence intervals of within plus or minus 11 percentage points , unless otherwise noted . confidence intervals for other estimates are presented along with the estimate where used in the report . in addition to the reported sampling errors , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce other types of errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , differences in how a particular question is interpreted , the sources of information available to respondents , or the types of people who do not respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages for the purpose of minimizing such nonsampling errors . we took the following steps to increase the response rate: developing the questionnaire , pretesting the questionnaires with pension plan sponsors , conducting multiple follow - ups to encourage responses to the survey , contacting respondents to clarify unclear responses , and double keying and verifying all data during data entry . although the overall response rate was 78 percent , we performed an additional analysis to check whether our survey respondents had characteristics that were significantly different from all sponsors in the study population . to do this , we identified several sponsor characteristics that were available for the entire study population and estimated these population values using the survey respondents . for each estimate tested , we found no significant difference between the estimate and the actual population value . we performed computer analyses of the sample data to identify inconsistencies and other indications of error and took steps to correct inconsistencies or errors .