reporting . thirteen of the 24 cfo act agencies reported challenges related to mandatory data act reporting requirements , including concerns with data quality and their ability to report all the required data elements in their initial data act submissions , as well as senior accountable officials ( sao ) certification and reporting non - financial data . for example , one agency reported that its sao may be unable to certify the quality of data if omb's guidance for the sao certification cannot be supported by existing processes . another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial and award data . in addition , two agencies reported challenges with reporting beginning balances at the level of detail required by the data act . two agencies reported concerns with protecting sensitive and classified data . one agency also reported ongoing issues with inconsistent quality of data submitted from their financial systems . another agency reported that certain data elements are not currently available for all document types , and is considering pulling these data elements from other source systems to the extent possible . a lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the data act reporting requirements within the mandated timeframes . guidance . eleven of the 24 cfo act agencies reported ongoing challenges related to the timely issuance of , and ongoing changes to , omb policy and treasury guidance . eight agencies reported that if policy or technical guidance continues to evolve or be delayed , the agencies' ability to comply with the may 2017 reporting deadline could be affected . some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for saos to certify the data reported quarterly . for example , one agency reported that if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed , it may not have time to implement appropriate validation steps needed to give assurance over the data . because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance , agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes , which could adversely affect their ability to meet the data act requirements . as noted above , the information reported by the cfo act agencies in their implementation plan updates indicates that some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the may 2017 reporting deadline because of these challenges . in addition , inspectors general for some agencies , such as the departments of labor and housing and urban development , have issued readiness review reports that also indicate their respective agencies are at risk of not meeting the reporting deadline . as discussed further below , the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving , so any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies' abilities to meet the reporting deadline . in august 2016 , in response to our prior recommendation , omb established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges .