ii ) . cms uses information collected from enrollees through its call center to monitor qhp post - enrollment experiences . qhp enrollees and their representatives , such as assisters , may call the cms exchange call center to request agency assistance in resolving concerns . using its casework system , cms tracks individual issues — referred to as cases — that require action on the part of an issuer , state , or cms to resolve . in 2014 and 2015 , agency officials assigned all cases to one of four broad categories of concerns — plan and issuer , tax filing , eligibility , or legal and administrative — as well as to subcategories within each category that describe the general nature of the issue . cases related to post - enrollment issues may be included in any of these categories . to identify trends in cases and to ensure their timely resolution , cms officials prepare and examine weekly and monthly reports that include information on the type and volume of cases received and resolved by category , among other information . ( washington , d.c.: may 11 , 2016 ) . deloitte center for health solutions , public health insurance exchanges: opening the door for a new generation of engaged health care consumers , 2015 survey of us health care consumers ( washington , d.c.: aug. 3 , 2015 ) . according to our analysis of cms exchange casework data , three - quarters of cms's casework in 2014 and 2015 was in the plan and issuer category , which includes post - enrollment concerns such as enrollee access to services or benefits , among other issues . ( see table 4. ) appendix iii includes more detailed information about cms qhp casework in 2015 . cms shares relevant casework information with the appropriate agency , issuer , or state officials for research and timely resolution , depending on the type of action required , according to cms officials we interviewed . cms and the selected states we reviewed conduct oversight of qualified health plans ( qhp ) offered on the exchanges to ensure that they comply with federal standards . this oversight generally includes certifying that qhps have met these federal standards before consumers enroll in the qhp , although cms also conducts a post - certification review as part of its oversight to ensure that certified qhps are ready for enrollees to use in the plan year . for instance , cms officials told us that cases noting concerns about issuer compliance are forwarded to cms's compliance team for further investigation . cms officials told us that they work with individual issuers to ensure that cases are resolved in a timely manner and the causes of any casework trends are addressed . for example , cms has a monthly call with issuers to discuss casework trends and strategies to improve consumer experiences , in addition to providing ongoing technical assistance with specific casework issues , according to cms officials . in addition to reviewing casework to resolve individual enrollee concerns , cms officials we interviewed reported reviewing casework data relevant to their oversight responsibilities of issuers .