teams . using teams , in which the same people work on similar matters , to help achieve greater consistency and efficiency . for example , the trustee uses teams for different tasks , such as motions , discovery , and litigation . for litigation , for example , the trustee's counsel has set up about 16 teams , which work on similar topics , such as employee - related , review of charities , or family - related matters . the teams follow cases from beginning to end , taking advantage of experience gained through the process and limiting additional costs that could occur if staff were assigned work in unfamiliar areas , according to the trustee . digitizing information . computerizing information as much as possible allows for faster , more efficient retrieval of information . this has involved significant up - front costs , but the trustee noted that it reduces costs over time by avoiding the need to undertake time - consuming , expensive manual searches through thousands of boxes of paper material . budgeting work in advance . the trustee said he uses a process in which consultants must fill out project forms and provide budgets , which are submitted and must be approved by trustee's counsel . sipc also receives some of these budgets . when bills are received later , the trustee's counsel compares the amount claimed with the budget , and there have been instances in which costs exceeding budgeted amounts have been refused , according to the trustee . when the trustee has completed in - house review of costs , he presents them to sipc for review . the trustee may hold informal discussions with sipc before submitting actual costs for formal consideration . sipc also may contact outside vendors directly to inquire about charges . sipc does not pay for some charges , and following discussions with sipc , the trustee may decide to write off some costs , according to the trustee . as sipc senior management said is typical , at the outset of the case , they sought and obtained a 10 percent reduction in the hourly rates of the trustee and trustee's counsel . according to our review , this 10 percent reduction has produced savings of $25 million through may 2011 . in addition , the trustee and trustee's counsel have provided additional reductions of $5.4 million over costs they said would customarily be billed . some have suggested that sipc should have sought a discount greater than 10 percent . for example , the sec office of inspector general has reported that an sec bankruptcy attorney raised questions whether a 10 percent discount for sipc cases is sufficient . similarly , the inspector general noted to us that the madoff case began during the recent financial crisis , when law firms' business was suffering , and suggested that as a result , sipc would have had strong leverage to negotiate lower compensation for firms . sipc senior management , however , told us that a 10 percent reduction is appropriate for several reasons .