, fiber and power ) . we reviewed and consolidated responses . we then convened a one - and - a - half day meeting of 17 experts from academia , industry , and consumer groups to discuss the challenges identified through the questionnaire , as well as potential actions the federal government could take to address those challenges . we selected these experts with assistance from the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine to obtain a range of perspectives on 5g deployment . we also interviewed four localities about their experiences with 5g deployment , which we selected based on , among other things , cities where wireless carriers have announced they will launch 5g services . the information we obtained from these interviews is not meant to be generalizable to other cities' experiences but is meant to provide illustrative examples of actual 5g deployment . we compared fcc efforts to address 5g deployment challenges to fcc's own strategic goals , relevant leading practices for performance management identified in our prior body of work , and the requirements of the government performance and results act ( gpra ) as enhanced by the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) . see appendix i for a detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology , including a list of interviewees . we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to june 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . according to ntia officials , the agency is focused on meeting the spectrum requirements set forth in the making opportunities for broadband investment and limiting excessive and needless obstacles to wireless act ( mobile now act ) of 2018 , which requires ntia and fcc to prepare a report by 2022 identifying potential spectrum for future use . for example , ntia is currently studying the feasibility of spectrum sharing in the 3.45 to 3.55 ghz band . overall , fcc's efforts , in conjunction with ntia , to date have primarily made more high - band spectrum available for 5g purposes . according to the department of commerce's 2019 annual report on the status of spectrum repurposing , 84 percent ( 4,950 mhz out of 5,863 mhz ) of the spectrum made available by fcc and ntia has been within high - band . according to the report , 12 percent ( 709 mhz of 5,863 mhz ) of the spectrum fcc and ntia have made available has been within mid - band . ntia officials said there has been more of a focus on repurposing high - band spectrum because there is a far greater amount of this spectrum available for use and fewer incumbent users within this spectrum . further , ntia officials stated that these amounts are a snapshot as of the time the 2019 report was issued and the ratios will change , as additional spectrum is made available . other recent fcc actions , including those described above , may make more mid - band spectrum available in the future . for example , fcc told us that it has a number of active proceedings that could make additional mid - band spectrum available to commercial users .