al . “combat duty in iraq and afghanistan , mental health problems , and barriers to care” , the new england journal of medicine , 351 ( 2004 ) : 13-22 . you asked that we review the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to identify servicemembers who have served in iraq and afghanistan and are at risk for ptsd , and va's efforts to ensure that ptsd services are available for all veterans . did you take any of the following medications during this deployment ? ( mark all that apply ) pb ( pyridostigmine bromide ) nerve agent pill pills to stay awake , such as dexedrine 6 . do you have any of these symptoms now or did you develop them anytime during this deployment ? are you currently interested in receiving help for a stress , emotional , alcohol or family problem ? ( mark all that apply ) 11 . over the last 2 weeks , how often have you been bothered by any of the following problems ? were you engaged in direct combat where you discharged your weapon ? dd form 2796 , apr 2003 12 . have you ever had any experience that was so frightening , horrible , or upsetting that , in the past month , you .... 15 . on how many days did you wear your mopp over garments ? have had any nightmares about it or thought about it when you did not want to ? tried hard not to think about it or went out of your way to avoid situations that remind you of it ? how many times did you put on your gas mask because of alerts and not because of exercises ? were constantly on guard , watchful , or easily startled ? felt numb or detached from others , activities , or your surroundings ? were you in or did you enter or closely inspect any destroyed military vehicles ? are you having thoughts or concerns that ... 18 . do you think you were exposed to any chemical , biological , or radiological warfare agents during this deployment ? you may have serious conflicts with your spouse , family members , or close friends ? you might hurt or lose control with someone ? ( mark all that apply ) deet insect repellent applied to skin environmental pesticides ( like area fogging ) smoke from burning trash or feces vehicle or truck exhaust fumes fog oils ( smoke screen ) depleted uranium ( if yes , explain ) . date ( dd / mm / yyyy ) . in addition to the contact named above mary ann curran , linda diggs , martha fisher , krister friday , and marion slachta made key contributions to this report . defense health care: dod needs to improve force health protection and surveillance processes . gao - 04-158t , washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2003 . defense health care: quality assurance process needed to improve force health protection and surveillance . gao - 03-1041 , washington , d.c.: september 19 , 2003 . disabled veterans' care: better data and more accountability needed to adequately assess care . gao / hehs - 00-57 , washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2000 .