we intelligence . ( for more on our scope and methodology , see app . we conducted our work between june 2006 and april 2007 in accordance with conducted our work between june 2006 and april 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to this report , gao is conducting two related review efforts for in addition to this report , gao is conducting two related review efforts for the committee . these efforts will review and report on ( 1 ) dod's process the committee . these efforts will review and report on ( 1 ) dod's process to set requirements for isr systems and ( 2 ) dod's process for integrating to set requirements for isr systems and ( 2 ) dod's process for integrating unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) into ongoing combat operations in unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) into ongoing combat operations in support of isr requirements . two separate reports on these issues will be provided later in 2007 . isr directly supports the planning and conduct of current and future military operations . isr encompasses multiple activities related to the planning and operation of sensors and assets that collect , process , and disseminate data . intelligence data can take many forms , including electro - optical ( eo ) and infrared ( ir ) images , full - motion video ( fmv ) , images from a synthetic aperture radar ( sar ) , electronics intelligence ( elint ) , communications intelligence ( comint ) , and measures and signature intelligence ( masint ) . these data can come from a variety of sources , including surveillance and reconnaissance systems that operate in space or on manned or unmanned systems . data can also come from systems that are ground - or sea - based or from human intelligence teams . table 1 summarizes the isr programs that we reviewed , 13 of which are in development . ( a brief description of each of the 20 programs we reviewed is provided in app . ii. ) dod plans significant investments in airborne isr systems . for example , between fiscal years 2007 and 2013 , dod plans to invest $28.8 billion in the 20 systems we reviewed . delays in acs development contributed to the navy's recent decision to pursue its own replacement for the ep - 3 . the epx is the navy's replacement for its aging ep - 3 . in late summer 2006 , after a study on joint isr requirements had been completed , the navy and army concluded that there were significant requirements differences between the two services . over those 3 years , congress increased the reaper budget over $70 million , directing the air force to procure a total of 8 additional air vehicles . similarly , the navy fire scout budget was increased by $17 million in fiscal year 2006 to procure 2 additional air vehicles . in fiscal year 2003 , the global hawk budget was increased by $90 million , primarily to develop advanced payloads for signals and imagery intelligence capabilities .