what is a user fee ? a user fee is a fee assessed to consumers of goods or services provided by the federal government . user fees generally apply to federal programs or activities that provide special benefits to identifiable recipients above and beyond what is normally available to the public . user fees are normally related to the cost of the goods or services provided . an example of a user fee is a fee for entering a national park . in the narrow budgetary sense , a toll for the use of a highway is considered a user fee because it is related to the specific use of a particular section of highway . alternatively , highway excise taxes on gasoline are considered a form of user charge in the economic sense , but since the tax must be paid regardless of how the gasoline is used and since it is not directly linked with the provision of the specific service , it is considered a tax . the customs air passenger inspection is designed to prevent passengers from bringing illegal goods — such as narcotics — into the united states . passengers pay a customs air passenger inspection fee , currently set in statute at $5.50 per passenger , when they purchase their tickets . the fees are remitted to the government quarterly , after which they reimburse cbp appropriations for a specific set of reimbursable expenses . the air passenger inspection fee is only one of several types of customs inspection fees also known as cobra fees — named for its authorizing legislation , the consolidated omnibus reconciliation act of 1985 . for example , commercial vessel passengers also pay a customs inspection fee . the immigration air passenger inspection is designed to prevent passengers from entering the united states without legal entry and immigration documents . passengers pay an inspection fee ( set in statute at $7 per passenger ) when they purchase their tickets . the fees are remitted to the government quarterly , except for the last quarter of the year , when the immigration fees collected to - date are remitted 10 days before the end of the fiscal year , with the remaining fees collected in the fourth quarter remitted along with the first quarter payment of the next fiscal year . the fees are then divided between cbp and ice according to the costs of the immigration inspection activities for which each agency is responsible . the immigration air passenger fee is one of two immigration inspection fees , the other being the international passenger commercial vessel fee . the agriculture air passenger inspection is in place to seize prohibited materials and intercept foreign agricultural pests . passengers pay an inspection fee , set by the agency in regulation at $5.00 per passenger , when they purchase their tickets . the fees are remitted to the government quarterly and are made available to aphis . the fees are then divided between aphis and cbp based on the proportion of costs associated with each agency's agriculture quarantine inspection activities . the air passenger inspection fee is only one of several types of aphis inspection fees , known as aqi fees . for example , commercial aircraft and vessels also pay aqi fees .