ii. ) according to mint officials , the mint used its own staff to conduct marketing events to stimulate the new dollar coin's use in retail operations , such as cafeterias within federal facilities . for example , the mint conducted a new dollar coin event at the pentagon . according to the mint , this promotion distributed about 56,000 new dollar coins . mint officials also met with officials on military bases to discuss the dollar coin's use , but these meetings did not result in formal promotional programs or increase new dollar coin circulation . as part of its federal government marketing efforts , the mint also sought to increase the number of postal vending machines using the new dollar coin but had limited success . in december 1998 , before the coin's launch , a mint contractor study noted that the u.s . the mint director also commented on the different approaches our report discussed that were used to calculate the level of new dollar coin circulation . the director noted that the mint's 4 percent figure is based on the number of dollar coins issued as a percentage of the number of dollars issued and the other measure cited in our report is based on the number of new dollar coins used in financial transactions as a percentage of the number of dollars used in financial transactions . we believe that the latter estimate of 1 percent may be a more representative measure of the coin's actual use by the public because it is based on a nationally representative public poll conducted for the mint that asked questions specifically about the number of dollar coins and notes used in transactions in the past few days . postal service had approximately 11,000 stamp vending machines that distributed dollar coins . however , in april 2002 , over 2 years since the introduction of the new dollar coin , the postal service still had only 12,000 of its 34,000 vending machines able to distribute the dollar coin as change . the postal service said that it was only able to upgrade an additional 1,000 vending machines between 1998 and 2002 because it lacked the funds to upgrade or replace the older machines . despite the lack of progress , the mint said that the postal service is still the largest distributor of dollar coins . in general , the mint did not track the costs for the use of its own staff for marketing efforts to federal government agencies . in general , the mint's april 24 , 2002 , marketing plan for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 describes a program that is much smaller in scope than the marketing campaign used to launch the new dollar coin in 2000 . the mint plan provides a listing of most of the barriers to increasing new dollar coin use . in addition , the plan notes the importance of conducting research and gives a description of planned research regarding consumer resistance , distribution barriers , and sustaining use of the coin by businesses . although the plan estimates that the dollar coin is used in 4 percent of dollar transactions , the plan does not lay out a specific market share or net payout goal for fiscal year 2003 .