gao - 06-467t . washington: d.c.: february 23 , 2006 . disaster preparedness: preliminary observations on the evacuation of hospitals and nursing homes due to hurricanes . gao - 06-443r . washington: d.c.: february 16 , 2006 . investigation: military meals , ready - to - eat sold on ebay . gao - 06-410r . washington: d.c.: february 13 , 2006 . better planning could have alleviated those tensions . while contracts for some items were in place prior to the storm , the federal emergency management agency did not adequately anticipate needs for such services as providing temporary housing and public buildings . the practice of the u.s. army corps of engineers is to establish planning and response teams for various missions assigned to it by fema prior to an event , with specific responsibilities assigned to team members . however , the corps indicated it did not know prior to the hurricane that it would be tasked by fema with some of the mission assignments it received . in one case , faced with a compressed time frame for acquiring portable classrooms and with no prior knowledge about the classroom mission they were assigned , corps contracting officials placed an order , under an existing agreement , with a subsidiary of an alaska native corporation under the small business administration's section 8 ( a ) business development program . the corps accepted the contractor's proposed price of $39.5 million even though the corps had information that the cost for the classrooms was significantly less than that . based on our analysis of a quote obtained by the contractor from a local mississippi business , the price the contractor actually paid for the classrooms , and prices for similar units from general services administration ( gsa ) schedule contracts , our preliminary conclusion is that the corps could have , but failed to , negotiate a lower price . similarly , better management of requirements development could have avoided costs to house workers and victims . based on information provided by local officials , fema spent $3 million for 4,000 base camp beds that were never used . preparation was also lacking in implementation of the stafford act preference for contractors residing or doing business in the affected area . the corps staff expressed uncertainty regarding how to apply preferences or determine if a company was in an affected area . several gsa and fema officials indicated they were aware of the stafford act , but stated it is difficult to immediately factor in local businesses in such a catastrophic event . gsa officials stated they plan to review the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) to see if additional stafford act guidance is necessary . in discussing our findings and observations with fema officials , they indicated that in order to better respond to future disasters , they were taking steps to improve in areas such as staffing and premobilization capabilities . however , they also stated that such pre - planning and preparedness has a cost . the corps commented that contracting staff need to have defined requirements in order to get the right type of contracts put in place , and the contracting staff did not always get defined requirements in a timely manner .