previous studies . the 1999 sandia study is the most recent in a series of federally sponsored studies dating back to the 1970s that have examined the ability of armor - piercing weapons to penetrate spent fuel containers . a draft version of a sandia study from 1978 , for example , concluded that a successful sabotage attack on a spent fuel container would not cause prompt fatalities but could cause several hundred latent cancer fatalities in a densely populated urban area . the final version of this study reduced the total latent cancer fatalities to fewer than 100 , based on a re - evaluation of the quantity of radioactive material released . shipping older spent fuel first . these results are shown in table 1 . the study noted that the results are based on a natural disaster or an accident severe enough to lead to a pool fire and that the risk of such an event occurring is very low . nrc also noted that part of the reason for the low probability is nrc's defense - in - depth policy , which states that nrc establishes requirements to ensure that safety will not be wholly dependent on any single system . instead , nrc's requirements ensure multiple or redundant safety systems . although dedicated trains could enhance the security and safety of spent fuel shipments , these benefits would have to be weighed against potential drawbacks . the benefits would also have to be weighed against constructing a rail line to yucca mountain . currently , no rail line extends to yucca mountain . advocates of dedicated trains told us that such trains offer two primary security and safety advantages . first , the use of dedicated trains would significantly reduce the exposure of spent fuel shipments to a terrorist attack by significantly shortening the trip duration from its point of origin to the repository . a representative of the association of american railroads , which recommended that doe use dedicated trains for the shipment of spent fuel , explained that a spent fuel shipment from the east coast to nevada would take about 3 to 4 days by dedicated rail , while the same trip by regular rail would take about 8 to 10 days . specifically , spent fuel transported by regular rail would spend significant amounts of time in rail yards where trains are broken up and reconfigured . while in the rail yards , spent fuel containers could be stationary targets . second , using dedicated trains would ensure that spent fuel was not shipped with flammable hazardous materials . if spent fuel were released from its containers in an accident or a terrorist attack , a fire fueled by flammable materials could spread radioactive material over a wide area . for example , nrc recently issued an analysis regarding a rail tunnel fire that occurred in baltimore in july 2001 that involved more than 28,000 gallons of a flammable solvent . nrc estimated that temperatures as high as 1,800 degrees fahrenheit were reached at certain locations in the tunnel during the course of the fire but found that temperatures averaged 900 degrees in other parts of the fire .