tva had not done this . according to agency officials , such documentation is under way for its hydroelectric facilities , but not for other facilities . as a result , there is increased risk that the integrity of these networks and devices could be compromised . physical security controls are important for protecting computer facilities and resources from espionage , sabotage , damage , and theft . these controls restrict physical access to computer resources , usually by limiting access to the buildings and rooms in which the resources are housed and by periodically reviewing the access granted in order to ensure that access continues to be appropriate . tva policy requires that appropriate physical and environmental controls be implemented to provide security commensurate with the level of risk and magnitude of harm that would result from loss , misuse , unauthorized access , or modification of information or information systems . further , nist policy requires that federal organizations implement a variety of physical security controls to protect information and industrial control systems and the facilities in which they are located . 2 and fig . fossil plants produce about 60 percent of tva's power , nuclear plants about 30 percent , and the hydroelectric system about 10 percent . tva also owns and operates one of the largest transmission systems in north america . tva's transmission system moves electric power from the generating plants where it is produced to distributors of tva power and to industrial and federal customers across the region . tva provides power to three main customer groups: distributors , directly served customers , and off - system customers . there are 159 distributors — 109 municipal utility companies and 50 cooperatives — that resell tva power to consumers . these groups represent the base of tva's business , accounting for 85 percent of their total revenue . fifty - three large industrial customers and six federal installations buy tva power directly . they represent 11 percent of tva's total revenue . twelve surrounding utilities buy power from tva on the interchange market . sales to these utilities represent 4 percent of tva's total revenue . control systems are essential to tva's operation . tva uses control systems to both generate and deliver power . in generation , control systems are used within power plants to open and close valves , control equipment , monitor sensors , and ensure the safe and efficient operation of a generating unit . many control systems networks connect with tva's corporate network to transmit information about system status . to deliver power , tva monitors the status of its own and surrounding transmission facilities from two operations centers . each center is staffed 24 hours a day and can serve as a backup for the other center . control systems at these centers are used to open and close breakers and balance the transmission of power across the tva network while accounting for changes in network capacity due to outages and changes in demand that occur continuously throughout the day . tva's control systems range in capacity from simple systems with limited functionality located in one facility to complex , geographically dispersed systems with multiple functions .