( see app . i for a list of the 15 utilities we selected for structured interviews. ) in total , 12 of the 15 utilities were relatively large , serving populations ranging from 300,000 to 2,500,000 ; the remaining three were significantly smaller , serving populations ranging from 3,000 to 67,100 . because of the small number of utilities that we interviewed in depth and the way in which they were selected , our results are not generalizable to the larger universe of domestic drinking water and wastewater utilities . because of the utilities' limited experience in implementing asset management , we supplemented the information obtained from domestic utilities with information from six utilities and five government agencies in australia and new zealand , two countries that have taken the lead in implementing comprehensive asset management . ( see app . ii for a list of the utilities and government agencies we contacted in australia and new zealand. ) outside the water industry , we consulted with the private sector council , which identified two companies — the gillette company and sbc communications , inc. — with long - standing experience in using comprehensive asset management in their respective fields . we interviewed officials from these companies to obtain their perspectives on the benefits and challenges of implementing asset management . for information on the potential federal role in promoting asset management at water utilities , we obtained information from epa's office of the chief financial officer , office of ground water and drinking water , and office of wastewater management on the activities that epa is currently sponsoring , including the development of informational materials on asset management ; activities by epa - funded , state and university - based training and technical assistance centers ; and various studies and research projects . we also discussed options for a federal role in promoting asset management with officials from water industry associations , epa , and the 15 utilities selected for structured interviews . in addition , with the help of organizations and officials experienced in asset management , we identified the u.s. department of transportation as being at the forefront of federal involvement in this issue . we obtained and reviewed information about the department's initiatives from the office of asset management within the federal highway administration . we conducted our work between march 2003 and march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we provided a draft of this report to epa for review and comment . we received comments from officials within epa's office of water and office of the chief financial officer , who generally agreed with the information presented in the report and our recommendations . they further noted that while epa has played a major role in bringing asset management practices to the water industry , significant additional activity could be undertaken , and they have placed a high priority on initiating activities similar to those we suggested . the officials also made technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . while comprehensive asset management is relatively new to most drinking water and wastewater utilities in the united states , some utilities say they have already benefited from this approach and have also encountered certain challenges .