gao - 19-478 . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2019 . ( see fig . once funds are allocated and distributed to visns and medical centers , these funds may be redistributed in accordance with law across va's health care system . these redistributions can help address unfunded needs or surpluses that may arise . for example , according to officials , a medical center may need additional funds to provide care for veterans when natural disasters occur . from fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2019 , general purpose funds increased by 33 percent - from $37 to $49 billion — while specific purpose funds increased by 24 percent — from $19 to $23 billion . ( see fig . in fiscal year 2019 , community care accounted for $10.5 billion — 46 percent — of the $23 billion allocated in specific purpose funds . patient care services , homelessness programs , non - recurring maintenance , and medical residency programs also accounted for large portions of specific purpose funds . as of fiscal year 2017 , va primarily receives appropriated funds for all health care it provides or purchases through four appropriation accounts . the amount of funds in each appropriation account is determined by va's annual appropriation . vha allocates both general and specific purpose funds from these appropriation accounts . these accounts include the following: medical services: health care services provided to eligible veterans and other beneficiaries in va facilities and non - va facilities , among other things . medical community care: health care services that va authorizes for veterans and other beneficiaries to receive from community providers . medical support and compliance: the administration of the medical , hospital , nursing home , domiciliary , supply , and research activities authorized under va's health care system , among other things . medical facilities: the operation and maintenance of vha's capital infrastructure , such as the costs associated with nonrecurring maintenance , leases , utilities , facility repair , laundry services , and groundskeeping , among other things . separate from va's health care appropriation accounts , the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 established the veterans choice fund and provided $10 billion in funds for the veterans choice program ( choice program ) , which was implemented in early fiscal year 2015 and authorized until funds were exhausted or through august 7 , 2017 , whichever occurred first . the choice program allowed veterans to elect to receive care from community providers when the services needed were not available at a va medical center , were not available within vha's wait - time goals , or when veterans did not reside near a va medical facility with a full - time primary care provider . eligible veterans could also elect to receive care in the community if they met other eligibility criteria as well . va received additional authority and funds to maintain the choice program through june 6 , 2019 , when it sunsetted , and the new veterans community care program ( vccp ) went into effect . the vccp was established by the va mission act and consolidated the choice program along with several other community care programs .