license exceptions . state regulations contain some country - based license exceptions , including for exports to canada and , more narrowly , to australia and the united kingdom whereas commerce has several different license exceptions under its regulations . for example , commerce regulations have the “strategic trade authorization” ( sta ) exception that permits exports of certain items to countries determined to be low risk , which includes nato partners and other close allies , of which 37 are eligible for a broader sta authorization and seven are eligible for a much narrower sta authorization . commerce's proposed rule specifies that it would revise commerce's regulations to make firearms and most parts , components , accessories , and attachments ineligible for the sta license exception . however , commerce estimates that 450 to 650 license applications per year involving certain eligible items would still be authorized under sta exceptions if the proposed rules are finalized . commerce also has a “limited value shipment” exception , which is available for proposed exports of certain less sensitive firearms parts and components with a value of $500 or less per shipment based on the actual selling price or fair market value . commerce's proposed rule specifies that this exception would only be available for certain parts , components , and accessories and attachments for firearms ; complete firearms would be ineligible for this exception . state offers a similar exemption but only for licenses with a value of $100 or less , based on the wholesale price . state and commerce both conduct end - use monitoring to verify the reliability of foreign end - users and legitimacy of proposed transactions and to provide reasonable assurance of compliance with the terms of the license and proper use of the licensed items . state recommends that end - use checks involve a site visit whenever possible , while commerce policy requires that the end - use check include a physical verification on - site with a party to the transaction , according to commerce officials . state and commerce also apply their own means of risk - based targeting to select the licenses or exports that will undergo end - use monitoring , however , similarities exist involving selection criteria . for example , state and commerce may target transactions that involve unfamiliar foreign parties , unusual shipping routes , or derogatory information from watch lists , according to the departments . commerce noted that it conducts mostly post - shipment verifications because it controls a higher share than state of items that are exported without a license . the aeca requires state to notify congress before state can approve certain export licenses for firearms , artillery , and ammunition . these notification requirements depend on the proposed export value and type of export , among other factors . for example , the aeca requires state to notify congress of proposed licenses for the export of usml category i firearms in the amount of $1 million or more . additionally , state must notify congress of proposed licenses for commercial agreements that involve the overseas manufacture of certain usml items , including many firearms , artillery , and ammunition items , regardless of the proposed value .