ii. ) to determine the extent of private and public insurance coverage of mental health services for children , we reviewed available employer survey data ; reviewed the benefit design of health plans provided by 13 insurers in the individual market as well as state medicaid programs and schip programs ; and interviewed representatives of private insurers and public officials in california , georgia , illinois , massachusetts , minnesota , and utah . we selected these states on the basis of variation in the number of beneficiaries covered , in geographic location , in the extent to which the insurance market is regulated , and in the design of the schip program . to describe other federal programs that can help pay for mental health services for children who have experienced trauma or that try to ensure that these children receive needed services , we reviewed grant program documents obtained from officials of federal agencies , such as hhs , justice , the department of education , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and interviewed agency officials and representatives of national health care and child advocacy organizations . to gather information on services provided to children and on problems in obtaining needed services , we reviewed the relevant literature and contacted state and local mental health agencies , state crime victim compensation and assistance agencies , child welfare and protective service agencies , and other organizations receiving federal grants in california and massachusetts , as well as additional service providers with federal grants in colorado , illinois , minnesota , and oregon . the programs and efforts we discuss in this report do not represent an exhaustive list of all federally funded programs that can address the mental health needs of children exposed to traumatic events ; they highlight a range of programs that target varied populations , services , and systems that come into contact with this population . in addition , we obtained data on child abuse and neglect , intimate partner violence , and sexual assault that were collected and analyzed by hhs's administration for children and families ( acf ) and justice's bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , and federal bureau of investigation . we did not verify the accuracy of these data . ( for additional information on our methodology , see app . we conducted our work from september 2001 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . many children across the country have been victims of , or witnesses to , violence in their homes , schools , or communities . in 1999 , according to the most recent edition of a joint justice and education report , students aged 12 through 18 were victims of about 186,000 violent crimes at school and about 476,000 violent crimes away from school . in addition , thousands of children have been exposed to natural disasters or terrorist acts such as those that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , placing them at risk for mental health problems . while many children respond to these situations with resilience , others suffer acute and chronic effects .