participants . to qualify for the program , exchange visitors under the swt program must meet certain criteria , including being full - time college or university students . participants from most countries are required to be preplaced in a job before entering the united states . state's records show that as of november 2014 , the swt program had 41 active sponsors . sponsors are the participants' primary point of contact and are responsible for addressing issues that affect the health , safety , and welfare of participants while they are in the united states . other aspects of sponsors' roles and responsibilities include the following: sponsors may recruit prospective swt participants directly or through overseas agents . sponsors are required to enter selected participants' data in the student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) . sponsors are responsible for ensuring that participants have employment in the united states and are required to vet potential employers and their job offers by contacting each employer directly and verifying the business owner's or manager's contact information and location as well as the company's line of business . before participants arrive in the united states , sponsors are required to provide an orientation to prepare them for life in the united states as well as information about what to do in an emergency . after participants arrive in the united states , sponsors are required to monitor participants' health , safety , and welfare and ensure that participants receive exposure to u.s. culture . sponsors submit this information in incident reports . according to state , most incident reports involve matters such as deaths , accidents , crimes or arrests , medical issues , sexual abuse , or missing persons . overseas and domestic agents . state logs and maintains information about each incident report , using the same database that it uses for registering complaints . according to state's procedures , state maintains contact with the sponsor regarding the incident until it is resolved . for example , if the incident report involved the death of an swt participant , state would follow up with the sponsor until the participant's body was repatriated , or if a participant was hospitalized , until the participant was released from the hospital . if a sponsor fails to submit an incident report about a serious problem or controversy , state notes the failure as a potential regulatory violation and may sanction the sponsor . state provided data showing that in 2013 , state received relatively few complaints and incidents — 592 and 143 , respectively — given the approximately 86,500 participants in the swt program that year . examples of the 2013 complaints range from participant problems with pay or living conditions to lack of response from sponsors . examples of incidents in 2013 include participants' arrests for theft , involvement in car and bicycle accidents , and deaths . according to state , approximately 38 percent of 2013 complaints and incident reports resulted from field site reviews , 22 percent were called in by sponsors , 20 percent came into state's hotline , 14 percent were sent to state's e - mail in - box , and 7 percent came from unspecified sources .