b . the total cost of consolidated ship maintenance operations on an ongoing basis . c. the ability to distinguish between depot and intermediate work of consolidated ship maintenance activities . d. the costs associated with buyout expenses for the transfer of the shipyards of the navy on the east coast of the united states from funding through the working capital fund of the navy to funding on a direct basis . e. the flexibility of the shipyard to continue routine ship maintenance operations during a potential funding gap at the beginning of a fiscal year or when expected maintenance costs exceed annual appropriations . f. operational and financial flexibility and responsiveness of funding on a direct basis compared to funding through the working capital fund of the navy . g. long - term funding for the capital improvement programs of the shipyard . h. compliance with section 2460 of title 10 , united states code , which defines the work that is considered to be depot - level maintenance and repair versus work that is considered to be a major modification of a weapons system . compliance with section 2466 of title 10 , united states code , which limits the amount of depot - level maintenance and repair workload of the department of navy that is performed by nonfederal government personnel in any fiscal year to not more than 50 percent of the total depot workload reported to the department in that fiscal year . j . compliance with sections 1115 and 1116 of title 31 , united stated code , which require agencies to set annual performance goals , measure performance toward the achievement of those goals , and publicly report on progress . k. compliance with chapter 35 of title 31 , united states code , which requires audited financial statements to include the ability to properly charge and account for reimbursable workload . in addition to the contact named above , thomas gosling , assistant director ; grace coleman ; lee cooper ; and amy sheller were major contributors to this report . the matters are listed below . the cost visibility of specific work performed . dod concurred with our recommendation . the dod - ig report also found that the navy lacked adequate performance metrics for the consolidated puget sound facility . the dod - ig found that the navy did not have metrics and goals for puget sound that would help show the impact of direct funding on operations at the consolidated shipyard . the report recommended that osd and the navy jointly establish metrics and goals and baseline these metrics to evaluate puget sound's transition to direct funding . it also recommended that the navy establish policies and procedures for direct - funded metrics and goals to ensure information is consistently collected and reported and supporting documentation is maintained to fully support reported results . the navy concurred , but did not identify the proposed actions and completion dates . the navy further stated that the primary advantage of converting the shipyards to direct funding is that it allows fleet commanders as opposed to fleet support activities to control priorities and , further , that this benefit does not fit neatly into a metric that can be compared in “before and after” snapshots .