i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . more detail on our scope and methodology is included in these issued products . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . transitioning technologies from defense research organizations and technology development programs , such as the sbir program , to military users has been a long - standing challenge for dod . to address technology transition challenges in dod's sbir program , congress and dod have established several program provisions and mechanisms over the past decade , including the following: congress directed the establishment of the commercialization pilot program , subsequently renamed the commercialization readiness program , in fiscal year 2006 to accelerate the transition of sbir - funded technologies to phase iii , especially those that lead to acquisition programs and high priority military requirements , such as fielded systems . as part of the program , congress authorized the military departments to use up to 1 percent of sbir funding to administer the program . this funding is used to provide assistance to sbir awardees , including efforts to enhance networking and build relationships among small businesses , prime contractors , and dod science and technology and acquisition communities . each military department's sbir program also has a network of transition facilitators who manage the commercialization readiness program and other sbir activities that support technology transition . the facilitators are located at military laboratories , acquisition centers , and program executive offices and work directly with government stakeholders to help ensure projects are responsive to warfighter needs . although the roles and responsibilities vary somewhat across the military departments , in general , transition facilitators foster ties among small businesses , military research laboratories , and the acquisition community in support of transition opportunities , and monitor project progress , including outcomes . further , the military departments conduct conferences and workshops to provide opportunities for sbir companies to interact with users and showcase their projects . in the fiscal year 2012 reauthorization of the sbir program , congress authorized a pilot effort to allow the dod sbir program the opportunity to use more of their sbir funds ( up to 3 percent ) for program administration , technical assistance , and commercialization and outreach activities . in addition , dod sbir components may offer special awards that supplement or extend phase ii projects . the military departments have developed mechanisms to do this , which provide awardees additional sbir funding to move phase ii projects closer to transition . in some cases , the military departments require formal technology transition agreements or matching funding from intended military users as a condition to receiving the additional phase ii funding .