tsunamis can be classified as local or distant . a tsunami generated by an earthquake off the coast of alaska would be considered a local tsunami for that state's coastal areas , striking within minutes of the event , while the same event would be considered a distant tsunami for the coast of washington , which would not likely be hit until 3 or more hours later . both types of tsunami pose an inundation threat to low - lying coastal communities from multiple destructive waves that can penetrate far inland . local tsunamis pose particular emergency preparedness challenges because there may not be enough time to sound a warning . in this situation , public education and outreach can save lives by teaching the community to recognize the emergency and move immediately to higher ground . the process that the tsunami warning centers use to detect potential tsunamis and issue warnings involves several steps . the warning centers first monitor and evaluate data from seismic networks , and if a tsunami is likely , they transmit a tsunami warning message to noaa's weather - forecasting offices and state emergency management centers , among others . the warning centers also monitor coastal water - level data , as well as data from noaa's network of deep - ocean assessment and reporting of tsunamis ( dart ) detection buoys , to determine if a tsunami has actually been generated and , if not , to cancel any warning ( see fig . noaa's pacific marine environmental laboratory ( pmel ) conducted the research and developed the dart buoys and conducts other research in support of the tsunami program , such as the development of tsunami inundation forecast models for at - risk locations . tsunami forecast models are used by scientists at the warning centers and the research laboratory to help estimate the size of the expected waves and their potential impact on coastal areas . this process includes checkpoints for noaa officials to ensure that all activities have been successfully completed before a research project can proceed to the next step ( see fig . when pmel began the sift transition , it prepared an initial transition plan in 2006 . this plan did not follow noaa's transition policy , however , and as a result , did not undergo checkpoint reviews or contain all of the plan elements required by noaa's policy and implementation procedures . tsunami program and pmel officials told us they did not realize that this policy applied to the transition of relatively small research efforts like the sift system , which the officials said accounted for their failure to follow noaa's transition policy . although a transition team consisting of officials from the warning centers and pmel was assembled , the warning center officials were not actively involved in developing the transition plan , which should identify requirements for the new technology and criteria it must meet to be implemented , among other things . thus , the 2006 transition plan did not identify requirements for the sift system or performance measures to enable pmel and the warning centers to test and evaluate the system .