ii. ) however , the numbers of views do not provide any indication of ctrs' usefulness to any specific law enforcement effort or establish a link to any specific outcome of an investigation . moreover , data on views during this period may not reflect future trends because of the changes in access to the ctr database discussed previously . for example , the numbers of ctrs viewed by state and local users may increase due to the expanding number of users with access and with more understanding of how ctrs can assist their efforts . several officials from state and local law enforcement agencies we interviewed indicated that they believed the use of ctr data through gateway probably would increase as users better understand the value of bsa data . also , as noted , fincen has recently made bulk downloads of data available to several federal agencies . a second difficulty in measuring the impact specifically of ctr requirements involves the way that ctrs are used — primarily to support investigations that also draw upon many other sources of information . exemptions allow institutions to avoid filing ctrs for the exempt customers , but the institutions are not required to exempt eligible customers . according to the results of our survey , institutions that made use of exemptions primarily did so because it allowed them to file fewer ctrs , was cost - effective , and the determinations involved were fairly easy . as shown in figure 7 below , the reasons generally were consistent for both phase i and phase ii exemptions . the primary reason cited for using the exemption process was that it allowed institutions to file fewer ctrs . while it would be difficult for an institution to track the number of ctrs it “saved” or avoided by exempting a customer , some had ; for example , a smaller institution reported that it recently began using exemptions more extensively , and by exempting five more phase ii eligible customers , the institution anticipated filing almost 200 fewer ctrs . ( however , the effect of exempting a single customer on the number of ctrs filed cannot be generalized ; for example , an exemption might avoid 8 ctrs or 100 , depending on the volume of cash transactions in which the customer typically engaged. ) institutions also frequently cited the cost - effectiveness of using exemptions ; while they had difficulty estimating the cost of establishing exemptions , just as they did for the costs of filing ctrs , some institutions regarded exempting customers as less costly than filing ctrs . officials at other institutions we interviewed cited recent advances in commercial software systems that made exemptions easier . for example , software can identify the customers potentially eligible for the phase ii exemption due to the volume of high cash transactions they engaged in during the year . in addition , at least one software vendor makes available for purchase a database of companies listed on stock exchanges that are eligible for the phase i exemption . despite the cost - effectiveness of using exemptions , institutions responding to our survey did not exempt all of their eligible customers .