national capacity building grant . this grant is intended to provide federal funding to eligible national , regional , or statewide organizations with multiple sites to build capacity among their local affiliates / members to promote immigrant integration through direct citizenship services to lawful permanent residents . the funds are intended to provide support for organizations' program management , organizational capacity building , and technical assistance , as well as for affiliates / members to develop and implement sustainable local citizenship preparation programs . during the first year of the grant program in fiscal year 2009 , ooc received 293 applications for citizenship grant funds and made competitive 1-year grant awards totaling $1.2 million to 13 organizations to help them improve and enhance their existing citizenship assistance programs . for this first year of the grant program , ooc reported that nearly 55,000 immigrants were provided outreach , received direct citizenship services , or both . of the approximately 55,000 immigrants who received services from grantees , ooc reported that about 50,000 received information on citizenship preparation and the rights and responsibilities of citizenship provided through outreach activities and it was estimated that at least 5,000 participated in a citizenship education class or received assistance with the naturalization application . specifically , grantees used funds to provide services to a range of immigrants defined by uscis as priority immigrant groups , including elderly immigrants in retirement communities in san diego , california ; low - income immigrants in new york ; and refugees with low literacy levels in st. louis , missouri . grantees also built community partnerships to strategically increase their impact . the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) has responsibility for a key immigrant integration - related area — the naturalization and citizenship process . the office of citizenship ( ooc ) within uscis is responsible for implementing immigrant integration activities that fall within the naturalization and citizenship process . the primary focus of these activities is to prepare lawful permanent residents for citizenship by , among other things , helping them attain the english language skills and civics knowledge required for naturalization . ooc aims to accomplish this by awarding grants to help immigrant - serving organizations with citizenship preparation programs , conducting outreach and public education activities to promote integration and citizenship , and developing educational materials on the naturalization process . the largest single activity that accounted for nearly half of ooc's budget over the past 3 years was its citizenship and integration grant program , which provides competitive grants to public and private nonprofit organizations to facilitate their ability to assist lawful permanent residents in becoming naturalized u.s. citizens . in addition to uscis , other federal agencies provide some assistance for immigrant integration . for example , the department of health and human services provides economic integration assistance as part of its refugee resettlement program and the department of education provides funding to states to support linguistic integration in connection with its english language acquisition grants . in addition , various state and local governments and nongovernmental organizations provide an array of services that assist with the integration process .