p ( . ) indicates whether the observation falls into either policy intervention period , when 2013-07-09 ≤ t < 2014-05-03 or t≥ 2014-05-03 , respectively . m is a vector of 11 month and 6 day of week indicators ( when aggregated daily ) to allow for cyclical variation ( absorbing april and wednesday into β ) . we used the model to estimate several quantities of interest for a wednesday in april ( i.e. , at β0 ) : π: estimated isf - 10 submission probability logit - 1 ( β + ( β + β ) t ) - logit - 1 ( β + β ) : change in probability at time t from counterfactual mean outcome in the absence of intervention 1 . logit - 1 ( β + ( β + β ) t ) - logit - 1 ( β + β ) : change in mean outcome at time t from counterfactual mean outcome in the absence of intervention 1 and 2 . ( 2 ) to what extent has cbp taken actions to enforce compliance with the isf rule and assessed whether its enforcement actions have contributed to increased compliance among importers and carriers ? ( 3 ) to what extent has the isf program improved cbp's ability to identify high - risk cargo shipments prior to their arrival in the united states , and to what extent are the data submitted under the program accurate ? this report is a public version of a prior sensitive report that we provided to you . cbp deemed some of the information in the prior report law enforcement sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information regarding enforcement actions used at individual ports , methods for using the isf rule data to identify high - risk shipments , and the results of an analysis that examined the consistency between isf and entry data , among other things . the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , as it excludes such sensitive information , but it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report and the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine importers' and carriers' submission rates for isf rule requirements , we analyzed cbp's isf data to determine national submission rates for isfs from january 2012 through december 2015 — the 4 most recent years of data available at the time of our review . to assess the reliability of cbp's isf data , we reviewed the data for obvious errors , such as duplicative or missing fields . we discussed with cbp officials how isf data are processed and maintained . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable to illustrate the national isf submission rate . we obtained cbp data on vessel stow plan submissions ; however , as described later in this report , we were not able to determine submission rates because cbp was not able to provide us data on vessel stow plans that were required , but ultimately not submitted to cbp .