some of these uncertainties have been clarified . for example , we noted that costs in equipment and facilities would increase significantly if the secretary of defense decided to add 5 brigades to the army's active component to create a total of 48 brigade combat teams — a decision that was scheduled to be made in fiscal year 2006 . the decision about the number of brigades was made based on the qdr . instead of a 5 brigade combat team increase , the report stated that the army would create a total of 42 such brigades in the active component , a 1 brigade combat team reduction from the army's plan . in addition , the number of national guard brigade combat teams was reduced from 34 to 28 . in sum , the qdr decisions reduced the number of planned brigade combat teams from 77 to 70 . however , army officials stated that the army plans to fully staff and equip these units . moreover , army officials told us that the army plans to use resources freed up by this decision to increase support units in the reserve component and to fund additional special operations capability in the active component . we also noted in our september 2005 report that the army had not completed designs for all the support units at the time the estimate was set . according to army officials , these designs have been finalized . despite these refinements to the design and changes to the planned number of combat and support brigades , the army has not made revisions to its $52.5 billion cost estimate or funding plan based on these changes . moreover , as i will discuss shortly , uncertainty remains in the army's evolving strategy for equipping its modular combat brigades . as a result , based on discussions with army officials , it remains unclear to what extent the $41 billion will enable the army to equip units to levels in the army's tested design . in addition , it is not clear how the army will distinguish between modularity , costs associated with restoring equipment used in operations , or modernizing equipment . in estimating its equipment costs for modularity , the army assumed that some equipment from ongoing operations would remain in operational condition for redistribution to new and restructured modular units . to the extent equipment is not returned from operations at assumed rates , it is not clear how this will affect equipping levels of modular units or how the army would pay for such equipment . as a result , the secretary of defense and congress may not be in a sound position to weigh competing demands for funding and assess whether the army will be able to fully achieve planned capabilities for the modular force by 2011 within the planned funding level . the army has made progress in creating active component modular combat brigades , but it is not meeting its equipping goals for these brigades and is still developing its overall equipping strategy , which raises concerns about the extent to which brigades will be equipped in the near and longer term .