chief architect exists . in february 2004 , faa designated the chief architect for the nas architecture project . organization head has approved current version of ea . faa has yet to complete development of a nas architecture for the administrator to approve . return on ea investment is measured and reported . faa has yet to develop metrics and processes for measuring nas architecture benefits ; therefore , return on investment is not measured and reported . compliance with ea is measured and reported . agency is aware of ea . it serves as the foundation for the fea . version 2.0 of the model was released in june 2003 . the service component reference model is intended to identify and classify it service ( i.e. , application ) components that support federal agencies and promote the reuse of components across agencies . version 1.0 of the model was released in june 2003 . the data reference model is intended to describe , at an aggregate level , the types of data and information that support program and business line operations and the relationships among these types . version 1.0 of the model was released in september 2004 . the technical reference model is intended to describe the standards , specifications , and technologies that collectively support the secure delivery , exchange , and construction of service components . version 1.1 of the model was released in august 2003 . the security and privacy profile is intended to provide guidance on designing and deploying measures that ensure the protection of information resources . omb has released version 1.0 of the profile . although these various enterprise architecture frameworks differ in their nomenclatures and modeling approaches , they consistently provide for defining an enterprise's operations in both ( 1 ) logical terms , such as interrelated business processes and business rules , information needs and flows , and work locations and users and ( 2 ) technical terms , such as hardware , software , data , communications , and security attributes and performance standards . the frameworks also provide for defining these perspectives for both the enterprise's current or “as is” environment and its target or “to be” environment , as well as a transition plan for moving from the “as is” to the “to be” environment . the importance of developing , implementing , and maintaining an enterprise architecture is a basic tenet of both organizational transformation and it management . managed properly , an enterprise architecture can clarify and help to optimize the interdependencies and relationships among an organization's business operations and the underlying it infrastructure and applications that support these operations . employed in concert with other important management controls , such as portfolio - based capital planning and investment control practices , architectures can greatly increase the chances that an organization's operational and it environments will be configured to optimize its mission performance . our experience with federal agencies has shown that making it investments without defining these investments in the context of an architecture often results in systems that are duplicative , not well integrated , and unnecessarily costly to maintain and interface .