ii. ) however , once it became apparent that the results of project newton would not become available to further revise the requirements , tsa did not establish a plan with time frames for completing the additional testing related to staffing . standard practices for planning and project management suggest tsa should have defined the operational testing plan and milestones as part of a road map for assessing potential staffing changes when these edss were first deployed after the 2005 requirements were established . establishing reasonable time frames to complete the operational testing could help tsa ensure it achieves its desired goal of activating edss capable of detecting the explosives established in the 2005 requirements in a timely manner . in january 2010 , tsa revised the eds checked - baggage explosives detection requirements partly in response to credible and immediate threats to civil aviation . tsa plans to meet the 2010 eds requirements using a tiered and phased approach: one tier is to be implemented over a number of years and expands the types of explosives that edss must detect , and another tier adds the use of the results of the computer - modeling effort known as project newton . tsa is not certain when this tier of requirements will be implemented . tsa plans to deploy edss that meet one tier of the 2010 requirements in a phased approach beginning in late fiscal year 2011 as part of its planned eds acquisition . regarding the other tier , tsa officials stated that project newton is to enhance tsa's understanding of explosives effects by simulating hundreds of explosives tests using computer modeling to determine the effects explosives will have when placed in different locations within an aircraft . tsa's and s&t's understanding of how explosives affect aircraft has largely been based on data obtained from live - fire explosive tests on retired aircraft hulls and other data . project newton is jointly managed and funded by dhs's s&t and tsa . through fiscal year 2009 , s&t and tsa had invested about $12.5 million in national laboratories for computer modeling activities as part of project newton , according to a senior tsa official . we discuss project newton and its budget in more detail in appendix ii . we completed a separate assessment of tsa's revised schedule . the following table presents our two assessments . this report addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine the status of tsa's efforts to revise explosives detection requirements for checked baggage screening , we reviewed tsa's explosives detection requirements for edss established in january 2010 and compared them to explosives detection requirements previously established in 2005 and 1998 to determine how the requirements differed . we also identified , analyzed , and discussed with tsa officials how the 2010 eds requirements compare with current explosives detection requirements for the etd established in 2006 . we also visited three of the department of energy's national laboratories — lawrence livermore national laboratory , los alamos national laboratory , and sandia national laboratories — to determine the status of additional efforts to further revise the requirements .