in progress . cbp has taken steps such as ( 1 ) hiring a contractor to develop cost estimates ( including contract task order cost estimates ) that are independent of cbp's estimates , and ( 2 ) tasking a support contractor with evaluating both the independent and cbp estimates against the criteria defined by sei . according to the results of the support contractor's evaluation , the independent estimates satisfied the sei criteria ; cbp's estimates largely satisfied the criteria . however , according to the support contractor , cbp's cost estimating had limitations . first , the cbp estimate did not adequately consider past projects in its cost and schedule estimates . in addition , the cbp estimate was an aggregation of estimates developed separately for three ace components , each according to a different cost estimating methodology ; the support contractor advised against this approach , recommending that component estimates be based on the same methodology . immediately develop and implement a human capital management strategy that provides both near - and long - term solutions to program office human capital capacity limitations , and report quarterly to the appropriations committees on the progress of efforts to do so . in progress . cbp has expanded its contractor and government workforce dedicated to the ace program by merging staff assigned to trade - related legacy systems with the ace program staff . in addition , it is beginning to use subject matter experts from existing field operations advisory boards to help program officials define requirements for future releases . however , it does not have a documented human capital strategy covering its ace program . have future ace expenditure plans specifically address any proposals or plans , whether tentative or approved , for extending and using ace infrastructure to support other homeland security applications , including any impact on ace of such proposals and plans . in progress . the expenditure plan describes steps both planned and under way to ensure that ace infrastructure supports both ace and other homeland security applications . for example , it states that both ace and the united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program should conform to the dhs enterprise architecture , which is to define standard shared services that the two systems can request . such a services oriented architecture is intended to promote reuse , as well as reducing overlap and duplication . define measures , and collect and use associated metrics , for determining whether prior and future program management improvements are successful . in progress . cbp continues to make changes that are intended to improve overall program management , but it has not consistently defined measures to determine whether the changes are successful . for example , cbp has reorganized its office of information technology ; this reorganization is intended to improve program management by providing ( 1 ) enhanced government oversight of ace development , ( 2 ) better definition of requirements for future ace releases , and ( 3 ) faster and cheaper delivery of ace capabilities . however , program officials told us that they have not established measures or targets for determining whether the reorganization is providing these benefits .