cbp . cbp's trade policy , processing , and enforcement operations , including those related to ipr , are primarily carried out by two offices — the office of trade and the office of field operations . the office of trade develops policies to guide trade enforcement efforts . the office of field operations conducts a range of trade processing and enforcement activities at more than 300 ports , where people and goods enter the country by land , air , or sea . at these ports , cbp officers and import specialists target potentially ipr - infringing goods , conduct examinations , and detain items if officers suspect they are counterfeit . import specialists working for the office of field operations' 10 centers appraise and evaluate detained goods to identify any ipr violation . as we reported in june 2017 , the creation of the centers represented a shift in cbp's approach to trade operations , centralizing the processing of imported goods on a national scale through industry - focused centers rather than individual ports of entry . in determining goods' authenticity , cbp relies on product information supplied by rights holders and prioritizes enforcement of ipr that rights holders have recorded with cbp , using the intellectual property rights e - recordation database . cbp also uses product identification manuals that are prepared by rights holders and linked to the database . in addition , cbp may consult with rights holders as part of the examination process . if cbp determines that a good is counterfeit , it seizes and destroys the good and may assess penalties if warranted . ipr enforcement is one of seven priority trade issues around which cbp focuses its activities and resources for trade facilitation and enforcement . priority trade issues represent high - risk areas that can cause significant revenue loss , harm the u.s. economy , or threaten the health and safety of the american people , according to cbp . in 2017 , we evaluated cbp's trade enforcement efforts and found that cbp's plans for its priority trade issues generally lacked performance targets that would enable it to assess the effectiveness of its enforcement activities . we recommended that cbp include performance targets in its plans for priority trade issues ; cbp concurred with this recommendation . ice . ice's homeland security investigations is responsible for a wide range of domestic and international criminal investigations arising from the illegal movement of people and goods into , within , and out of the united states , including the importation and exportation of counterfeit goods . ice field agents work with cbp and various partners in their investigations of identified cases of ip crime . in addition , the ice - led , multi - agency ipr center coordinates with other federal agencies on ipr infringement investigations , law enforcement training , and private sector and public outreach . the ipr center brings together many of the key domestic and foreign investigative agencies to leverage resources and promote a comprehensive response to ip crime . counterfeit goods may pose risks to the health and safety of consumers .