b . eliminate actual or potential conflicts of interest of reserve bank directors ? did you do any of the following ? ( check one box per question ) standard of conduct  receive training on the code at your frb at the beginning of your term in office ?  receive training on the code in washington , d.c. at the beginning of your term in office ? sign an oath of office at the beginning of your term agreeing to adhere to the code ?  receive an annual briefing on the code of conduct by a member of the bank's senior management ? sign an annual certification agreeing to adhere to the code ? gao asked directors who answered “no” to any of the above questions to provide an explanation . four directors stated they were unable to attend the training in washington , d.c. two directors said they attended the training but did not receive training on the code of conduct and two other directors said they did not recall if they signed an annual certification . are you aware of any past or current conflicts of interest with any frb directors in your district ? gao asked directors who responded “yes” to this question to explain the conflict and how it was resolved . five directors provided responses to this open - ended question on the survey . two of the responses described actual or potential conflicts of interest involving procurement matters and the directors recused themselves from voting on the matter . one of those directors also noted that the ceo of lehman brothers , inc. , resigned as a director because the company was requesting assistance from the frb . another described a director who resigned because he expressed a desire to be involved in a political campaign . one director declined a board position at another entity because of perceived conflicts of interest . another director noted that the board was apprised of a potential conflict of interest between a branch director and frb auditors , and that the situation was resolved and reported to the audit committee . we are interested in learning about your views on how , if at all , federal reserve bank governance practices could be strengthened . in terms of federal reserve bank governance , how would you strengthen achievement in the following areas , if at all ? please include examples of practices in your district or from other relevant board experience that may assist the federal reserve system in strengthening achievement in the following areas . improve public representation on frb boards ? c. increase the availability of information useful for the formation and execution of monetary policy ? d. increase the effectiveness or efficiency of reserve banks ? the open - ended responses were analyzed and included as examples in the report when appropriate . the reserve bank boards use committees to help oversee the operations of the reserve banks and their branches . the federal reserve board requires all reserve banks to have standing audit committees and as needed search committees for the selection and appointment of a president . the reserve banks use various other committees , including budget and governance committees .