this statement is incorrect . although figure 4 did note that state was able to locate some of the missing documentation in ancillary files , it did not note that this was due to the need to compartmentalize sensitive information . in addition to the contact named above , timothy j. dinapoli ( director ) , anthony moran ( assistant director ) , joe carney , martin de alteriis , karen deans , etana finkler , ernie jackson , jill lacey , mike ten kate , and ramon rodriguez made key contributions to this report . this comparison identified no discrepancies . all four performance standards board reports from 2011 and 2012 . there were two performance standards board reports each year for 2011 and 2012 , contained within a single folder for each year . we received both reports for each year . all 32 board reports for reconstituted boards — convened in response to grievances pertaining to selection board promotion or low - ranking determinations , and convened after october 2011 , when state issued new standard operating procedures for these boards , through april 2013 . to ensure we reviewed the accurate universe of reconstituted board files within this timeframe , we compared the files provided by state against an inventory list provided by state ; identified several discrepancies and resolved them with hr officials ; and presented a master list of reconstituted boards to state officials , who confirmed the list reflected all reconstituted boards relating to promotions within our requested timeframe . near the conclusion of our engagement , we reviewed those reconstituted boards that had taken place following our initial file review . to help conduct our review of the three types of boards , we developed a data collection instrument with data categories reflecting the information required and routinely captured in each type of report . to determine the data included in these reports , we reviewed applicable precepts and standard operating procedures outlining required information , reviewed a sample of the board reports , and discussed the reports with hr officials . to summarize and organize the selection boards' written recommendations or observations to the director general , two analysts read and entered this information into the data collection instrument . in 41 selection board reports , the team identified 306 separate recommendations or observations . to analyze this written information , the two analysts developed a set of summary statements and higher - level categories to be used for reporting purposes . we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to review the procedural changes state has made to its foreign service promotion process in response to identified concerns , we focused on concerns identified since march 2010 , when the state office of inspector general ( oig ) issued its report of inspection , “review of the integrity and fairness of the foreign service selection board process.” we also focused on state procedural changes made since march 2010 . in addition to the oig's report , we reviewed the record of proceedings for the foreign service grievance board's case 2008-051 from july 2010 , which addressed concerns with state's procedures governing reconstituted boards , which are convened if it is determined a promotion candidate was not properly reviewed .