this was not our intent . hhs and doj officials can and should develop a mechanism for notifying congress of delays that would not place an undue burden on their staff or interfere with issuing and clearing the hcfac report itself . such a mechanism could be as simple as sending an electronic mail message to all the committees of jurisdiction . doj also commented on the status of two remaining open recommendations from our prior report . we will continue to work with doj to obtain documentation to support the actions that doj said it is implementing . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs , the attorney general , and other interested parties . copies will be made available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8341 or by e - mail at calboml@gao.gov . additional gao contacts and acknowledgments are provided in appendix iv . to assess the reliability and reasonableness of information reported by hhs and doj in the joint hcfac reports for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 as deposits to the trust fund and the sources of such amounts , we did the following . we reviewed the joint hhs and doj hcfac reports for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 to identify amounts deposited to the trust fund . we interviewed hhs and doj officials to update our understanding of procedures related to deposits . we obtained data from hhs and doj reports and electronic databases for the various deposits as of september 30 , 2002 , and september 30 , 2003 , and selected deposit transactions on a statistical basis to determine whether the proper amounts were deposited to the trust fund . we assessed the reliability of the data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . the transactions that we selected on a statistical basis included the following: we selected a dollar unit sample of penalties and multiple damages totaling $276.8 million from a population totaling $322.6 million for fiscal year 2002 , and a dollar unit sample totaling $181.2 million from a population totaling $229.8 million for fiscal year 2003 . we selected a dollar unit sample of criminal fines totaling $435.5 million from a population totaling $443.5 million for fiscal year 2002 and a dollar unit sample totaling $1.9 million from a population totaling $2.5 million for fiscal year 2003 . we selected a dollar unit sample of civil monetary penalties totaling $1.7 million from a population totaling $6.9 million for fiscal year 2002 and a dollar unit sample totaling $1.7 million from a population totaling $7.1 million for fiscal year 2003 . we obtained supporting documentation for each sample transaction from various sources depending on the type of deposit .