however , this library is no longer updated . other information sharing tools have not been effectively maintained . consular affairs' office of consular fraud prevention maintains a web site and “e - room” with some information on fraud alerts , lost and stolen state birth documents , and other resources related to fraud detection , though fraud prevention officials told us the web site is not kept up to date , is poorly organized , and is difficult to navigate . we directly observed information available on this web site during separate visits to state's passport - issuing offices and noted that some of the material was outdated by as much as more than a year . the issuing office in seattle developed its own online fraud library that included information such as the specific serial numbers of blank birth certificates that were stolen , false driver's licenses , fraud prevention training materials , and a host of other fraud prevention information resources and links . most of the 16 fraud prevention managers we talked to believed that the bureau of consular affairs should maintain a centralized library of this nature for offices nationwide . we recommended that state establish and maintain a centralized and up - to - date electronic fraud prevention library that would enable passport agency personnel at different locations across the united states to efficiently access and share fraud prevention information and tools . commenting on our draft report , state said that it now intends to design a centralized online passport “knowledgebase” that will include extensive sections on fraud prevention resources . in january 2004 , state eliminated the assistant fraud prevention manager position that had existed at most of its domestic passport - issuing offices , and most fraud prevention managers believe that this action was harmful to their fraud detection program . state eliminated the position primarily to enable more senior passport examiners to serve in that role on a rotational basis to gain deeper knowledge of the subject matter and enhance overall fraud detection efforts when they returned to adjudicating passport applications . however , managers at 10 of the 12 offices that previously had permanent assistants told us that the loss of this position had been harmful to their fraud detection program . in particular , managers indicated that the loss of their assistant impacted their own ability to concentrate on fraud detection by adding to their workload significant additional training , administrative , and networking responsibilities , while also diverting from their fraud trend analysis and preparation of reports and case referrals . fraud prevention managers and other state officials have linked declining fraud referrals to the loss of the assistant fraud prevention manager position . in the 12 offices that previously had permanent assistants , fraud referral rates from the managers to diplomatic security decreased overall by almost 25 percent from fiscal year 2003 through 2004 , the period during which the position was eliminated , and this percentage was much higher in some offices .