( see fig . specifically , regulations require data on meals served that qualify for federal reimbursement to be recorded at the point of service in schools and reported from sfas to states , and states to fns . both sfas and states are required to regularly check meal counts to assess their reliability and reconcile any incorrect counts before submitting meal claim data for federal reimbursement . federal regulations also require fns , state agencies , and sfas to conduct reviews of the school meal programs . fns regions must conduct management evaluations of each state's administration of the school meal programs and share evaluation findings with the state . through the coordinated review effort , states are required to conduct reviews of each sfa's administration of the lunch program at least once during each 5-year review cycle and share review findings with the sfa and fns . at the local level , sfas are required to conduct annual on - site reviews of the meal counting and claiming procedures in each school participating in the lunch program . the school meal programs' oversight and monitoring requirements are part of their internal controls , which are an integral component of management . internal control is not one event , but a series of actions and activities that occur on an ongoing basis . effective internal controls include creating an organizational culture that promotes accountability and the reduction of error , analyzing program operations to identify areas that present the risk of error , making policy and program changes to address the identified risks , and monitoring the results and communicating the lessons learned to support further improvement . to comply with the improper payments information act of 2002 , in november 2007 usda released the “access , participation , eligibility , and certification study” ( apec ) , which provided the first national measure of improper payments in the school meal programs . apec estimated th approximately $860 million in improper payments occurred in the school lunch and breakfast programs due to meal counting and claiming errors during school year 2005-2006 . meal counting , or cashier , errors occur when a student's specific meal selection does not meet the menu planning and nutritional requirements of a reimbursable meal , the sfa's planned meal components do not meet the menu planning and nutritional requirements of a reimbursable meal , or a cashier incorrectly records the student's categorical eligibility ( i.e. , free , reduced price , or paid ) . meal claiming , or aggregation , errors generally occur because data on meals served are compiled and totaled by several different entities before they are submitted to fns as a meal claim for reimbursement . specifically , aggregation errors occur when the daily meal count totals from the school cafeteria cashiers or points of sale are not summed correctly , school meal count totals are incorrectly reported to or recorded by the school meal count totals are incorrectly reported from the sfa to the state . apec found that a substantial source of meal counting and claiming errors were cashier errors , particularly for the breakfast program . concerning aggregation , apec found that school to sfa meal count reports were the most likely to be erroneous .