standardization . the process of developing and agreeing on ( by consensus or decision ) uniform engineering criteria for products , processes , practices , and methods for achieving compatibility , interoperability , interchangeability , or commonality of materiel . there are five types of defense standards: interface standards , design criteria standards , manufacturing process standards , standard practices , and test method standards . dod's unified facilities criteria ( facilities criteria ) and unified facilities guide specifications ( ufgs ) provide facility planning , design , construction , operation and maintenance , sustainment , restoration , and modernization criteria for facility owned by the dod . the facilities criteria contain technical guidance ; introduce new and innovative technology ; or provide mandatory requirements to implement laws , regulations , executive orders , and policies prescribed by higher authority documents . they estimate that this effort will be completed in august 2020 . senate report 115-262 , accompanying a bill for the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , included a provision for us to evaluate the effectiveness of the centers , including whether they are achieving their objectives . this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) the centers have identified activities that support their key objectives ; ( 2 ) the army tracks the centers' progress in meeting their key objectives ; and ( 3 ) increased liability may be introduced to the centers during construction when standard designs are used . for objective one , we assessed the centers' roles and responsibilities — as stipulated in army and usace regulations — to identify activities that the centers undertake on construction projects . we identified eight army projects that were authorized in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 for our analysis . we selected projects from those years because military construction projects typically take multiple years to complete . therefore , selecting projects from this time frame increased the likelihood that the contractor had completed construction of the projects and that the centers had conducted post - occupancy evaluations , which are used to assess users' satisfaction with completed projects . we then compared these activities to the objectives expressed in the centers' 2006 charter to determine whether the activities supported the objectives . we reviewed supporting documentation for eight army projects that the service identified as being built using standard designs to determine whether evidence existed to demonstrate that the centers had engaged in these activities . while our observations on these projects are not generalizable to all army projects , they illustrate the kinds of activities the centers engage in on army projects that use standard designs . we further evaluated whether the centers' activities are consistent with key principles and concepts in office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance to agencies for a disciplined capital programming process ( for example , federal buildings ) . we also interviewed cognizant officials concerning the centers' objectives and activities they engage in to support those objectives . for objective two , we reviewed information on processes related to the centers' project documentation and performance metrics . we also reviewed dod annual performance reports to identify any goals and performance measures that are related to the objectives of the centers .