privacy . cios are responsible for compliance with the privacy act and related laws . statistical policy and coordination . cios are responsible for the agency's statistical policy and coordination functions , including ensuring the relevance , accuracy , and timeliness of information collected or created for statistical purposes . information disclosure . cios are responsible for information access under the freedom of information act . enterprise architecture . federal laws and guidance direct agencies to develop and maintain enterprise architectures as blueprints to define the agency mission , and the information and it needed to perform that mission . systems acquisition , development , and integration . we have found that a critical element of successful it management is effective control of systems acquisition , development and integration [44 u.s.c . 3506 ( h ) ( 5 ) and 40 u.s.c . e - government initiatives . various laws and guidance direct agencies to undertake initiatives to use it to improve government services to the public and internal operations [44 u.s.c . 3506 ( h ) ( 3 ) and the e - government act of 2002] . we then developed and administered a questionnaire to the cios of the 27 major departments and agencies requesting information on whether these officials were responsible for each of these areas , their reporting relationships , their professional and educational backgrounds , and their challenges . we also asked each agency to supply the name , beginning and ending dates in office , and circumstances ( eg , whether they were in an acting or permanent position ) of each of the individuals who had served as cio at the agency since the enactment of the clinger - cohen act . we subsequently interviewed each of the cios who were in place at the time of our review ( see app . i for the list of the cios ) in order to corroborate their responses and obtain more detailed explanations of these responses . in addition , as applicable , we collected and reviewed the resumes or biographies of the current cios . in analyzing cios comments on their challenges , two gao analysts reviewed the responses and arrived at agreement for the broad categories . each comment was then placed into one or more of the resulting categories , and agreement regarding each placement was reached between the two analysts . we also conducted two panel discussions with former agency it executives ( six in each panel ) , including former cios , that addressed their experiences and challenges . appendix ii lists these panelists . finally , we discussed our findings with representatives of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs and the members of our executive council of information management and technology — a preexisting panel of outside industry , state government , and academic experts — to obtain their views . we conducted our work at the 27 agencies during november 2003 through may 2004 in greater washington , d.c. in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . cios generally were responsible for most of the 13 key areas we had identified as either required by statute or among those critical to effective information and technology management , and most reported directly to their agency heads .