ii ) . we also received oral comments from six external reviewers representing industry organizations . the external reviewers were the advanced medical technology association ( advamed ) , which represents manufacturers of medical devices , and representatives from five class iii device manufacturers — the four manufacturers of osteogenesis stimulators and one manufacturer of both implantable infusion pumps and automatic external defibrillators . in commenting on a draft of this report , hhs agreed with our recommendation to establish a uniform payment update to the dme fee schedule for 2007 for class ii and class iii devices . the agency did not comment on whether the congress should consider establishing a uniform payment update to the dme fee schedule for 2008 for these devices . hhs agreed with our finding that the costs of class ii and class iii dme have been factored into the fee schedule amounts for these devices , noting that cms is committed to effectively and efficiently implementing dme payment rules . it stated that our report did a thorough job of reviewing medicare payment rules associated with the costs of furnishing class iii devices . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . industry representatives who reviewed a draft of this report did not agree or disagree with our matter for congressional consideration or our recommendation for executive action . they did , however , express concern that we did not recommend a specific update percentage for class iii devices . our report recommends a uniform payment update to the dme fee schedule for class ii and class iii devices ; we believe that this recommendation satisfies the requirement in mma to make recommendations on the appropriate update percentage for class iii devices . appendix i contains a more complete description of our methodology . one manufacturer stated that it would have been more appropriate to interview manufacturers of class ii devices that are not similar to class iii devices in terms of complexity . the other manufacturer expressed concern that we did not speak with more class ii manufacturers . we conducted our work from december 2004 through february 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fda is responsible for regulating the marketing of medical devices to provide reasonable assurance of their safety and effectiveness for human use . as part of its regulatory responsibility , fda reviews applications from manufacturers that wish to market their medical devices in the united states . prior to marketing new devices , manufacturers must apply for fda marketing approval through either the premarket notification ( also referred to as 510 ( k ) ) process , or the premarket approval ( pma ) process , a more rigorous regulatory review . new devices are subject to pma , unless they are substantially equivalent to an already marketed device , in which case they need to comply only with the premarket notification requirements . applications for premarket notification are generally reviewed more quickly than applications for pma and do not usually require clinical data . medical devices are regulated using a three - part classification system and are subject to different levels of control based upon their classifications as class i , ii , or iii devices .