for example , see the following . carrier underwriting practices can vary considerably . for example , an official from one carrier said that only applicants with serious cases of depression and obsessive - compulsive disorders who are heavily medicated would be declined coverage , while another carrier indicated it would decline any applicant with chronic depression , regardless of severity , if currently under treatment . officials from two carriers pointed out that declined individuals could reapply and be accepted later if their health problems resolve themselves . one of the carrier officials said an initially declined applicant could be offered coverage under a plan other than the one applied for , although the premiums would likely be higher . to what extent do states require individual market carriers to guarantee access to coverage and limit premiums for applicants and their families with mental disorders ? how do individual market carriers' coverage and premium decisions affect applicants with mental disorders , and how do these decisions compare to those for applicants with other chronic health conditions ? when denied coverage , what other health insurance options are available to those with mental disorders ? to determine the extent to which states require carriers to guarantee access to coverage and the coverage options available to declined applicants in states without guaranteed access , we reviewed published summary data on insurance laws and programs to provide coverage for applicants denied individual market coverage in all of the states , including the district of columbia . we discussed state insurance laws and regulations with regulators in 6 states — california , connecticut , georgia , illinois , mississippi , and montana — that are among the states in which carriers are not required to guarantee access to coverage in the individual market . we also interviewed health insurance agents in each of these states to discuss their experiences finding health insurance coverage for applicants with mental disorders . to identify health insurance carrier practices related to coverage and premium decisions , we interviewed or obtained data from seven large health insurance carriers regarding their health plans and underwriting practices . although we cannot generalize the practices of these seven carriers to all individual market carriers , the seven carriers collectively insure more than 10 percent of all individual market enrollees and sell coverage in most of the states in which carriers are permitted to medically underwrite . we examined the underwriting practices of the seven carriers for hypothetical applicants with one of six mental disorders and 1 of 12 other chronic health conditions . we selected the six mental disorders based on their prevalence — each affects over 1 million americans — and we selected the 12 other chronic health conditions based on certain clinical characteristics they share in common with the mental disorders . we also analyzed 1997 health care cost and utilization data from the medical expenditure panel survey , a national survey administered by the department of health and human services . we conducted our work from july 2001 through february 2002 according to generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides more details about our scope and methodology , and a list of related gao products is included at the end of this report .