we will be reporting on this work in the fall of this year . according to omb officials , including the deputy administrator of oira and the chief of the information technology and policy branch , omb staff identified projects for the management watch list through their evaluation of the exhibit 300s that agencies submit for major it projects as part of the budget development process . the omb officials added that the scoring of agency exhibit 300s is based on guidance in omb circular a - 11 that is intended to ensure that agency planning and management of capital assets are consistent with omb policy and guidance . we can also be reached by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov or diamondl@gao.gov . as described in circular a - 11 , the scoring of a business case consists of individual scoring for 10 categories , as well as a total composite score of all the categories . ( examples of these 10 categories are performance goals , security and privacy , performance - based management system — including the earned value management system — and support of the president's management agenda. ) according to circular a - 11 , scores range from 1 to 5 , with 5 indicating investments whose business cases provided the best justification and 1 the least . omb officials said that , for fiscal year 2005 , an it project was placed on the management watch list if its exhibit 300 business case received a total composite score of 3 or less , or if it received a score of 3 or less in the areas of performance goals , performance - based management systems , or security and privacy , even if its overall score was a 4 or 5 . omb reported that agencies with weaknesses in these three areas were to submit remediation plans addressing the weaknesses . the integrity of this review process presupposes that the exhibit 300s are accurate . in response to a request from this committee , we are currently reviewing the quality of the information that underlies exhibit 300s at several agencies . according to omb management , individual analysts were responsible for evaluating projects and determining which projects met the criteria to be on the management watch list for their assigned agencies . to derive the total number of projects on the list that were reported for fiscal year 2005 , omb polled the individual analysts and compiled the numbers . omb officials said that they did not aggregate these projects into a single list describing projects and their weaknesses , because they did not see such an activity as necessary in performing omb's predominant mission . further , omb officials stated that the limited number of analysts involved enabled them to explore governmentwide issues using ad hoc queries and to develop approaches to address systemic problems without the use of an aggregate list . they pointed at successes in improving it management , such as better compliance with security requirements , as examples of the effectiveness of their current approach . nevertheless , omb has not fully exploited the opportunity to use its management watch list as a tool for analyzing it investments on a governmentwide basis .