monitoring . monitoring is the final component of an effective internal control structure and is closely linked to information and communication . in addition to performance monitoring , the effectiveness of the control structure itself also needs to be monitored and reviewed . control monitoring can be undertaken in two ways , by ongoing monitoring and by separate reviews and evaluations . transparency international is an organization dedicated to curbing both international and national corruption . transparency international launched its corruption perception index ( cpi ) in 1995 . the cpi is a collection of polls , drawing on 15 surveys from 9 independent sources for its 2002 results . the goal of the cpi is to provide data on extensive perceptions of corruption within countries . the 2002 cpi shows that the bank group entities function in environments that are perceived to have high levels of corruption , underscoring the importance of internal control over operations and compliance within the bank group entities that are providing loans to those countries . the cpi serves as an important indicator of the image a country conveys to investors and potential business partners . because the cpi is derived from 15 different surveys that garner the perceptions of both residents and expatriates , both business people and risk analysts , the index provides a snapshot of the views of the people who make key decisions on investment and trade . the cpi builds public awareness of the corruption issue , and it adds to pressure on governments to directly address the issue and the damaged image of their nation that low rankings in the cpi reflect . the cpi is a composite index that consists of credible sources using diverse sampling frames and different methodologies , including one used by the world bank . the methodology is reviewed by a steering committee consisting of leading international experts in the fields of corruption , econometrics , and statistics . members of the steering committee make suggestions to improve the cpi , but the management of transparency international makes the final decisions on the methodology used . for the 2002 cpi , data was included from the following organizations' surveys and documents: world bank , world business environment survey ; world economic forum , africa competitiveness and global institute for management development , world competitiveness pricewaterhousecoopers , opacity index ; political & economic risk consultancy , asian intelligence issue ; economist intelligence unit , country risk service and country freedom house , nations in transit ; gallup international on behalf of transparency international , bribe columbia university , state capacity survey . no country was included in the cpi without results from a minimum of three surveys undertaken over the past 3 years . for this reason , not all countries with high levels of corruption may have been added . figure 4 includes the borrower countries by region . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .