( see fig . combined , in 2080 almost one - quarter of gdp will be devoted to federal spending for these three programs alone . to move into the future with no changes in federal health and retirement programs is to envision a very different role for the federal government . our long - term budget simulations serve to illustrate the increasing constraints on federal budgetary flexibility that will be driven by entitlement spending growth . assume , for example , that all expiring tax provisions are extended , revenue remains constant thereafter as a share of gdp , and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy . one is to adequately educate people about the current divisions between personal and societal responsibilities . only if the limits of public support are clear will individuals be likely to take steps to prepare for a possible disability . currently , one of the factors contributing to the lack of preparation for long - term care among the elderly is a widespread misunderstanding about what services medicare will cover . another public sector role may be to assure the availability of sound private long - term care insurance policies and possibly to create incentives for their purchase . progress has been made in improving the value of insurance policies through state insurance regulation and through strengthening the requirements for policies qualifying for favorable tax treatment enacted by the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 . furthermore , since 2002 the federal government has offered long - term care insurance to federal employees , military personnel , retirees , and their families , providing the largest offering of long - term care insurance . while the federal government's program is still very new , other employers and policymakers will likely be carefully watching the federal government's experience in offering long - term care insurance . long - term care insurance remains an evolving product , and given the flux in how long - term care services are delivered , it is important to monitor whether long - term care insurance regulations need adjustments to ensure that consumers receive fair value for their premium dollars . recognizing the benefits , burdens , and costs of informal caregiving . the public sector has at least two important potential roles in encouraging personal preparedness . family and other informal caregivers play a critical role in supplying the bulk of long - term care to disabled persons . effective policy must create incentives and supports for enabling informal caregivers to continue providing assistance . further , care should be taken to avoid creating incentives that result in informal care being inappropriately supplanted by formal paid services . at the same time , it is important to recognize the physical , emotional , and social burdens that providing care impose on the caregiver and its economic costs to the caregiver and to society . caregiving may create needs in caregivers themselves that require respite or other relief services . in addition , caregiving can conflict with caregivers' employment , creating economic losses for caregivers and society . such losses in productivity will become even more important in the coming decades as the proportion of the population that is working - age declines .