phmsa agreed to consider this recommendation . we also found that phmsa needs to do a better job of sharing information on ways operators can make decisions to install automated valves . included in the nation's pipeline network are an estimated 200,000 or more miles of onshore gathering pipelines , which transport products to processing facilities and larger pipelines . many of these pipelines have not been subject to federal regulation because they are considered less risky due to their generally rural location and low operating pressures . for example , out of the more than 200,000 estimated miles of natural gas gathering pipelines , the pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) regulates roughly 20,000 miles . similarly , of the 30,000 to 40,000 estimated miles of hazardous liquid gathering pipelines , phmsa regulates about 4,000 miles . while the safety risks of onshore gathering pipelines that are not regulated by phmsa are generally considered to be lower than for other types of pipelines , phmsa does not collect comprehensive data to identify the safety risks of unregulated gathering pipelines . without data on potential risk factors — such as information on construction quality , maintenance practices , location , and pipeline integrity — pipeline safety officials are unable to assess and manage safety risks associated with gathering pipelines . further , some types of changes in pipeline operational environments could also increase safety risks for federally unregulated gathering pipelines . specifically , land - use changes are resulting in development encroaching on existing pipelines , and the increased extraction of oil and natural gas from shale deposits is resulting in the construction of new gathering pipelines , some of which are larger in diameter and operate at higher pressure than older pipelines . as a result , phmsa is considering collecting data on federally unregulated gathering pipelines . however , the agency's plans are preliminary , and the extent to which phmsa will collect data sufficient to evaluate the potential safety risks associated with these pipelines is uncertain . in addition , we found that the amount of sharing of information to ensure the safety of federally unregulated pipelines among state and federal pipeline safety agencies appeared limited . for example , some state and phmsa officials we interviewed had limited awareness of safety practices used by other states . increased communication and information sharing about pipeline safety practices could boost the use of such practices for unregulated pipelines . we recommended that phmsa should collect data on federally unregulated onshore hazardous liquid and gas gathering pipelines , subsequent to an analysis of the benefits and industry burdens associated with such data collection . data collected should be comparable to what phmsa collects annually from operators of regulated gathering pipelines ( eg , fatalities , injuries , property damage , location , mileage , size , operating pressure , maintenance history , and the causes of incidents and consequences ) . also , we recommended that phmsa establish an online clearinghouse or other resource for states to share information on practices that can help ensure the safety of federally unregulated onshore hazardous liquid and gas gathering pipelines .