gao - 06-374t . washington , d.c.: february 9 , 2006 . ( see app . ii for a description of the 10 issues and app . iii for additional information on the scope and methodology for this review. ) in march 2005 , we reported that tsa had made progress in developing and testing secure flight , but had not completed key system testing , had not finalized system requirements or determined how certain aspects of the program would operate ( such as the basis on which passengers would be selected for preflight scrutiny ) , and had not clearly defined the privacy impacts of the program . at the time , we recommended that tsa take several actions to manage the risks associated with developing and implementing secure flight , including finalizing system requirements and test plans , privacy and redress requirements , and program cost estimates . in february 2006 , we testified that tsa had committed to take action based on our recommendations that the agency manage the risks associated with developing and implementing secure flight . although we noted that tsa had made some progress in these areas , we reported that it had not completed any of the actions that were scheduled to be accomplished and long - standing issues related to systems development and testing , program management , and privacy and redress protections remained . following our february 2006 testimony , tsa announced a temporary suspension of secure flight's development to rebaseline the program . tsa is responsible for securing all modes of transportation while facilitating commerce and the freedom of movement for the traveling public . passenger prescreening is one program among many that tsa uses to secure the domestic aviation sector . the process of prescreening passengers — that is , determining whether airline passengers might pose a security risk before they reach the passenger - screening checkpoint — is used to focus security efforts on those passengers that represent the greatest potential threat . currently , u.s. air carriers conduct passenger prescreening by comparing passenger names against government - supplied terrorist watch lists and applying the computer - assisted passenger prescreening system rules , known as capps rules . gao - 04-504t washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2004 . computer - assisted passenger prescreening system faces significant implementation challenges . gao - 04-385 washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2004 . in march 2003 , this office began developing the second - generation computer - assisted passenger prescreening system , known as capps ii , to provide improvements over the current prescreening process , and to screen all passengers flying into , out of , and within the united states . based in part on concerns about privacy and other issues expressed by us and others , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) canceled the development of capps ii in august 2004 . gao - 04-592t washington d.c.: march 30 , 2004 . aviation security: challenges delay implementation of computer - assisted passenger prescreening system .