ii ) from the remaining 15 questions . these questions addressed: ( 1 ) billing for beneficiaries transferred from one hospital to another , ( 2 ) billing for services delivered by therapy students , ( 3 ) billing for multiple surgeries for the same patient on the same day , and ( 4 ) billing for an office visit and procedure for the same patient on the same day . we did not inform cms before making the calls of the final questions we selected . cms requires carriers to monitor the performance of their call centers . however , the performance standards that carriers are required to use , and the technology available to most of them , do not facilitate thorough assessments of whether csrs provide correct and complete responses to policy - oriented questions . in addition , cms's own monitoring efforts — cpes and remote monitoring of select calls — do not provide sufficiently detailed or meaningful information regarding csr accuracy . we identified confusion among csrs when they responded to such questions . in response to two of the four questions we posed , csrs should have included specific modifiers with their answers because our questions were general and did not involve specific claims information . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . only 4 percent of the responses we received from csrs were correct and complete . our test suggested several factors that may account for poor performance , including fragmented information scattered among a variety of sources , confusing information that may be difficult for csrs to understand and interpret , and difficulties in retaining csrs . cms is developing two initiatives that may improve csrs' access to information ; however , neither of these new tools is designed to provide a comprehensive source of information to support the csrs who respond to providers' policy - oriented questions . we found that csrs provided incorrect , partially correct , or incomplete responses to 96 percent of the 300 policy - oriented test calls we made to carrier call centers . the four questions we posed concerned a variety of circumstances on the proper way to bill medicare in order to be paid for services rendered . our questions specifically addressed the following topics: billing for beneficiaries transferred from one hospital to another , billing for services delivered by therapy students , billing for multiple surgeries on the same day , and billing for an office visit and services on the same day . the results of our test , which cms medicare coding and policy experts validated , are shown in table 1 . our analysis of csr responses to test questions and discussions with cms officials identified several factors that contributed to csrs' errors . they include the following: fragmentation of information: when responding to medicare inquires from providers , csrs rely on fragments of information from multiple electronic sources . in addition , many csrs use printed medicare program information , including policy changes , which cms estimates at about 200 per year .