ears . food assnce for qualifying low - income individua . ( from date of hanawon graduation , in years ) . subsidy of p to $2,291 for reettling oide of the cpitl city , seol . locl police officer provide protection . fll tition t public middle chool , high chool , nd niverity ; hlf tition t privte niverity . bording chool for north koredent to prepre them for the trition to the sth korechool tem . north korean refugees in the united states and south korea may receive additional benefits ( see fig . for example , eligible refugees in the united states can qualify for food assistance under snap . aside from the major federal benefit programs available to eligible refugees , there are additional programs such as school lunch programs for children of eligible refugees . the south korean government provides north koreans with a personal safety counselor for protection indefinitely as well as a subsidy to resettle outside of the capital city , seoul . in addition , the south korean government may provide long - term tuition assistance for those north koreans attending higher education institutions . notably , the south korean government has established a system to support the education and integration of north korean children . for example , the government - funded hangyeore middle and high school , established in 2006 , was specifically designed to address the needs of north korean students and serve as a transition school until the students are ready to enter regular south korean schools . children at hangyeore stay at the boarding school for 6 months to 2 years depending on their individual performance . according to the school's principal , the school's mission is to ( 1 ) match the age group of the students with their abilities in school , ( 2 ) enhance students' learning capabilities , ( 3 ) help students to overcome cultural differences , and ( 4 ) help students to heal psychologically . north koreans who have resettled in the united states and in south korea come from an isolated society with limited or no exposure to capitalism and can therefore face economic difficulties . according to some of the north korean refugees we spoke with in the united states , they have encountered difficulties finding jobs and affording basic living expenses . south korean and u.s. officials also noted that north koreans in south korea have high rates of unemployment . in addition , north koreans also have difficulties learning basic day - to - day skills , such as using supermarkets , credit cards , and public transportation . according to ngos and government officials , north koreans face linguistic , cultural , and social challenges in both the united states and south korea . for example , north koreans who are now resettled in the united states told us about their struggles adjusting to a new language and culture . even in south korea , north koreans face difficulties with the korean language due to the differences in dialects . in addition , north koreans in south korea face social problems and have higher school drop - out , crime , and alcoholism rates , according to south korean and u.s. government officials .