we conducted quantitative and qualitative analyses of the responses . at the time of our review the flat rate per diem policy was in effect at 13 of the 17 depots for bargaining unit employees and at all depots for non - bargaining unit employees , and therefore we believed that the depots could provide knowledgeable perspectives on the benefits and challenges of the policy . however , subsequent to our dissemination of the questionnaire , marine corps officials indicated that civilian employees at the production plant in barstow , california , never travel on long - term tdy , and therefore we excluded their questionnaire responses from our analysis related to benefits and challenges of the policy . we also conducted discussion groups with depot workers at puget sound naval shipyard to obtain the perspectives of civilian employees affected by the policy . although the results from the discussion groups are not generalizable , they provide important insights . we also held interviews with officials from the depots in the scope of our review , such as portsmouth naval shipyard . to determine the extent to which dod established clear guidance regarding the policy , we reviewed and analyzed the flat rate per diem policy in the jtr and compared the guidance with the federal standards for internal controls related to information and communications to identify areas of the policy that could be clarified to assist dod in meeting its objectives to simplify travel . we also interviewed relevant agency officials from dtmo and department of the navy , office of civilian human resources . to determine the extent to which dod followed its processes for considering the flat rate per diem policy change and included an assessment of benefits and costs prior to making the change , we analyzed and reviewed the per diem , travel and transportation allowance committee organization and functions manual and other relevant documents related to the process , such as memorandums . the per diem , travel and transportation allowance committee organization and functions manual provides guidance for how the committee should operate and coordinate major changes to the jtr , as described in figure 2 , below . specifically , the committee coordinates a proposed major change through a series of memorandums to members of the advisory panels . memorandum 1 provides the advisory panels with information and instructions concerning the policy change , such as information concerning the source of the proposed policy change ; examples of the proposed revisions to the jtr ; and the due date for comments . the advisory panels' comments and positions ( concurrence or non - concurrence ) concerning a proposed major policy change are formalized in a subsequent memorandum , described in the guidance as memorandum 2 . subsequent to the memorandums , the advisory panels vote to approve the proposed major policy change . information concerning the advisory panels' actions and comments regarding the policy change is then forwarded to the committee's members and chair for further coordination , review , and approval . the flat rate per diem policy for long - term tdy became effective november 1 , 2014 .