gao - 12-565r . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2012 . the army has plans to expand the capabilities of lmp . gao - 11-566r . washington , d.c.: july 14 , 2011 . amc is using lmp to support operations at its industrial sites . officials at all 14 of the sites we visited between october 2012 and march 2013 told us that lmp provided the core functionality they needed to conduct their operations . specifically , officials from each of the five army depots stated that they were able to perform their maintenance , repair , and overhaul responsibilities using lmp ; rock island arsenal officials stated that they could perform their manufacturing operations using lmp ; and officials at the army ammunition sites we visited told us they used lmp to manage their inventory . similarly , officials at the life cycle management commands stated that they were able to carry out their operations , which include the management of spare parts inventory . additionally , periodic status reports submitted to amc headquarters show that industrial sites where lmp has been deployed have been able to conduct their repair and manufacturing operations . these reports — which include data on the workload planned and completed for the current fiscal year — are submitted and discussed during regularly - held meetings to provide amc headquarters with an update on the status of operations . furthermore , the army's fiscal year 2013 and 2014 working capital fund budget documents state that lmp is functional at each of amc's life cycle management commands . we reported in november 2010 that the army sustainment command , the joint munitions and lethality command , and arsenals under the tank - automotive and armaments command — all of which had been in the final deployment phase of lmp in october 2010 — required additional system functionality to perform their unique operations and that this functionality had not yet been delivered . we followed up on each of these previously reported issues for our current review . the army sustainment command needed ( 1 ) an interface between lmp and the army war reserve deployment system , a separate system used to track inventory and transfer accountability of pre - positioned stocks to units and ( 2 ) software functionality to conduct mass uploads — the automated movement of thousands of items of inventory between the army sustainment command and the warfighter . during our current review , we found that the army sustainment command had established an interface between lmp and the army war reserve deployment system , and officials stated that lmp now has the capability to perform a mass upload . the joint munitions and lethality command required specific functionality to ship , receive , inventory , and perform stock movements for ammunition . to accomplish these tasks , the joint munitions and lethality command required the development of an interface between lmp and a system commonly referred to as smartchain . we found during our current review that the interface between lmp and smartchain has been established , and officials stated that lmp and smartchain provide the capability needed to perform these tasks .