iv ) . as of july 2005 , however , 20 percent or more of surveyors in 20 of the 25 states had 2 years' experience or less ( see table 9 ) . surveyor vacancy rates in the 25 states ranged from about 3 percent in tennessee to 31 percent in alabama and florida ; overall , 15 states had double - digit vacancy rates . officials in 18 states believed that inexperienced surveyors contributed to interstate variability in the citation of serious deficiencies . one state survey agency indicated that staff attrition resulted in a workforce of less experienced surveyors who demonstrated a hesitance to cite actual harm and contributed to understatement . state survey agency officials in several states , however , suggested that the problem for less - experienced surveyors was not identifying harm but rather investigating and documenting the circumstances that led to the harm , including facility culpability , a skill that surveyors develop as they gain more experience . because state survey agency salaries are rarely competitive with the private sector , state survey agencies told us that it is difficult to retain surveyors and to fill vacancies . rns , a major component of states' surveyor workforce , are in high demand and short supply , according to ahfsa . furthermore , 9 states responding to our july 2005 inquiry indicated that state civil service requirements can make it more difficult to fill vacancies . several of the 9 states characterized the hiring process as either cumbersome or time - consuming , or both , and 1 state noted that the process takes close to 9 months . two states reported that they had to select candidates to interview from a certified list . one of the states indicated that the certified list often contained unqualified applicants , while the other state noted that some of the applicants were not the “best fit.” of the 25 states , 21 indicated that they had implemented initiatives to help retain surveyors . the most popular retention strategies were to increase starting salaries and to implement flexible surveyor work schedules . for example , new york instituted a locality pay differential for new york city . while 5 of the 25 states indicated that they had a state - imposed hiring freeze , 1 state reported that budget pressures prevented it from taking steps to improve retention rates . a continuing problem cited by ahfsa is that federal funds are distributed late in the fiscal year , which does not tie into state budget cycles for approving additional positions . this problem may be particularly acute in the 5 states that reported having a hiring freeze . cms and states have experienced increased survey workloads due to the greater intensity of nursing home oversight , the increasing number of initiatives , and growth in the number of medicare and medicaid providers requiring oversight . this workload growth required the prioritization of initiatives that , in some cases , has resulted in implementation delays for some key initiatives . the consensus - building process necessary to bring initiatives to fruition also has contributed to some delays .