( see fig . key processes that span these life cycle phases include managing the people , processes , and technologies within each phase and across phases , and testing the systems and components during and at the end of each phase . additionally , voting system standards are important through all of the phases because they provide criteria for developing , testing , and acquiring voting systems , and they specify the necessary documentation for operating the systems . the product development phase includes activities such as establishing requirements for the system , designing a system architecture , developing software , and integrating components . activities in this phase are performed by the system vendor . the acquisition phase includes activities such as publishing a solicitation , evaluating offers , choosing a voting technology and a vendor , and awarding and administering contracts . for voting systems , activities in this phase are primarily the responsibility of state and local governments but entail some responsibilities that are shared with the system vendor ( eg , entering into the contract ) . the operations phase consists of activities such as ballot design and programming , setup of systems before voting , pre - election testing , vote capture and counting during elections , recounts and system audits after elections , and storage of systems between elections . responsibility for activities in this phase typically resides with local jurisdictions , whose officials may , in turn , rely on or obtain assistance from system vendors for aspects of these activities . standards for voting systems , as will be discussed in a later section , were developed at the national level by the federal election commission in 1990 and 2002 and were updated by eac in 2005 . in the product development phase , voting system standards serve as requirements to meet for developers to build systems . in the acquisition phase , they also provide a framework that state and local governments can use to evaluate systems . in the operations phase , they specify the necessary documentation for operating the systems . testing processes are conducted throughout the life cycle of a voting system . voting system vendors conduct product testing during development of the system and its components . federal certification testing of products submitted by system vendors is conducted by national voting system testing laboratories ( vstl ) . states may conduct evaluation testing before acquiring a system to determine how well products meet their state - specific specifications , or they may conduct certification testing to ensure that a system performs its functions as specified by state laws and requirements . once a voting system is delivered by the system vendor , states and local jurisdictions may conduct acceptance testing to ensure that the system satisfies functional requirements . finally , local jurisdictions typically conduct logic and accuracy tests related to each election and sometimes subject portions of the system to parallel testing during each election to ensure that the system components perform accurately . management processes ensure that each life cycle phase produces a desirable outcome .