reg . an awo decision contains two sentences prescribed by regulation , without any additional language or explanation about the reasons for the affirmance . the sentences state , “the board affirms , without opinion , the decision below . the decision below is , therefore , the final agency determination.” 67 fed . reg . what changes in asylum backlogs and outcomes occurred following the streamlining of appeals procedures at the bia ? what information exists on the effects of the 1-year rule on reducing fraudulent asylum applications and preventing applicants from being granted asylum , and what resources have been expended in adjudicating it ? to address the first objective , we analyzed data from eoir on all decisions rendered by immigration judges from october 1 , 1994 , through april 30 , 2007 , that involved asylum seekers from the 20 countries that produced the most asylum cases and the 19 immigration courts that handled the largest numbers of asylum cases . each of the 20 countries and 19 immigration courts contributed a minimum of 800 affirmative and 800 defensive asylum cases to our analyses . the combination of countries and immigration courts yielded more than 198,000 cases for our analyses and constituted 66 percent of all asylum cases decided during the 12 ½ year period . we used eoir's case management database to identify immigration court proceedings where an immigration judge had made a decision to grant or deny an applicant's asylum claim . we statistically controlled for the effects of a number of asylum applicant and immigration judge characteristics that were potentially related to asylum outcomes in order to determine whether the likelihood that an immigration judge would grant or deny an asylum application could be statistically attributed to those characteristics . in examining potential differences in asylum outcomes across immigration courts , we analyzed the following seven factors available in the eoir immigration court proceedings data: ( 1 ) filed affirmatively or defensively ; ( 2 ) the nationality of the applicant ; ( 3 ) the time period in which the asylum decision was made ; ( 4 ) whether the applicant had representation ; ( 5 ) filed the application within 1 year of entry to the united states ; ( 6 ) claimed dependents on the asylum application ; and ( 7 ) had ever been detained ( defensive cases only ) . in examining potential differences in asylum decisions across immigration judges , we analyzed an additional nine factors available from eoir immigration court proceedings and biographical data , and the office of personnel management's central personnel data file . these included immigration judges' ( 1 ) age , ( 2 ) caseload size , ( 3 ) gender , ( 4 ) length of experience as an immigration judge , ( 5 ) race / ethnicity , ( 6 ) veteran status , ( 7 ) prior government immigration experience , ( 8 ) prior experience doing immigration work for a nonprofit organization , and ( 9 ) the presidential administration under which the judges were appointed . our analyses did not control for factors related to the merits of asylum claims because such data were not available .