monitoring . an organization should continually monitor and evaluate all aspects of management control to assess the quality of performance over time . serious management control deficiencies should be reported to higher levels , including top management and the board of directors . information and communication . an organization should identify , capture , and communicate information in a form and time frame that enable people to carry out their responsibilities . in 1995 , the bank established a 5-year timeline to ensure that , by the end of fiscal year 2000 , management will be able to express assurance that adequate controls are in place , not only for financial reporting purposes , but also for efficiency and effectiveness of operations . the office of controller made a commitment to meet the coso standards for control effectiveness across the bank's extend the coso standards for prudential controls to nonfinance organizational units in the bank in fiscal year 1997 ; assert that both the international bank for reconstruction and development and the international development association have maintained effective controls over financial reporting as of june 30 , 1997 , and obtain the external auditor's agreement ; expand the application of the coso framework so that issues of organizational efficiency and effectiveness are brought to light ; and become an institution in which bank management and staff will have the ability and process in place to analyze the effectiveness of internal controls for their areas of responsibility . in order to meet these goals , the office of controller adopted the control self - assessment methodology for assessing controls based on the coso framework . this approach uses the staff from various bank units to review the business unit's objectives , key processes supporting the stated objectives , associated risks , and mitigating controls ; under normal circumstances , testing of key controls and documentation of testing is required ; hold workshops to ( 1 ) analyze obstacles and strengths that affect the organization's ability to achieve key business objectives and ( 2 ) decide upon an approach to address issues arising from the process ; identify reportable conditions requiring control enhancements together with the results of the control self - assessment workshop in the business unit's action plan ; and obtain representation letters from all the bank's senior managers acknowledging their responsibility for effective controls and confirming that they have maintained an effective system of management control . world bank initiated the control self - assessment methodology during fiscal year 1996 . bank management has issued a series of reports to the audit committee of the executive board on the bank's progress made in implementing the coso management control framework . the internal audit division also issued annual reports starting in 1998 providing independent observations and findings on internal controls in the bank based on prior audits and the control self - assessment workshops . in 1999 , the bank concluded that it met the coso criteria for effective internal control over financial reporting for the international bank for reconstruction and development and the international development association . the bank's external auditor examined management's assertions and concluded that it was fairly stated , in all material respects .