according to the u.s . fish and wildlife service , many species of wildlife face grave risk from the spill , as well as 36 national wildlife refuges that may be affected . in recent testimony , the epa deputy administrator described the deepwater horizon spill as a “massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster. to date , the fund has been able to cover costs from major spills that responsible parties have not paid , but risks and uncertainties remain . we reported in 2007 that the current liability limits for certain vessel types , notably tank barges , may have been disproportionately low relative to costs associated with such spills . in addition , the fund faced other potential risks to its viability , including ongoing claims from existing spills and the potential for a catastrophic oil spill . the current spill in the gulf of mexico could result in a significant strain on the fund , which currently has a balance of about $1.6 billion . the fund has been able to cover costs from major spills that responsible parties have not paid , but additional focus on limits of liability is warranted . limits of liability are the amount , under certain circumstances , above which responsible parties are no longer financially liable for spill removal costs and damage claims , in the absence of gross negligence or willful misconduct , or the violation of an applicable federal safety , construction , or operating regulation . if the responsible party's costs exceed the limit of liability , the responsible party can make a claim against the fund for the amount above the limit . major oil spills that exceed a vessel's limit of liability are infrequent , but their effect on the fund can be significant . in our 2007 report , we reported that 10 of the 51 major oil spills that occurred from 1990 through 2006 resulted in limit - of - liability claims on the fund . these limit - of - liability claims totaled more than $252 million and ranged from less than $1 million to more than $100 million . limit - of - liability claims will continue to have a pronounced effect on the fund . npfc estimates that 74 percent of claims under adjudication that were outstanding as of january 2007 were for spills in which the limit of liability had been exceeded . the amount of these claims under adjudication was $217 million . in 2007 , we identified two key areas in which further attention to these liability limits appeared warranted and made recommendations to the commandant of the coast guard regarding both — the need to adjust limits periodically in the future to account for significant increases in inflation and the appropriateness of some current liability limits . regarding the need to adjust liability limits to account for increases in inflation , we reported that the fund was exposed to about $39 million in liability claims for the 51 major spills from 1990 through 2006 that could have been saved if the limits of liability had been adjusted for inflation as required by law , and recommended adjusting limits of liability for vessels every 3 years to reflect significant changes in inflation , as appropriate .