we agree . the intention of our recommendation is for dod to determine those uas for which all - weather capabilities are cost effective and to add such capabilities when appropriate . finally , dod partially concurred with our recommendation that u.s. strategic command ensure that the performance measurement system being developed at a minimum includes quantifiable goals , performance baselines , systematic collection procedures , measures of communications and payload interoperability , and performance indicators against which to measure performance . dod indicated that the u.s. strategic command has drafted a joint functional component concept of operations that includes metrics to gauge the force's ability to meet intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance requirements . moreover , dod stated that in conjunction with the services , intelligence community , combatant commanders , and other dod organizations , this action would facilitate not only the evaluation of uas performance but would enable dod to have the necessary information available to assess such factors as uas requirements , mission accomplishment , uas capabilities , and customer satisfaction . dod also pointed out that the performance measures are in development and will require service participation to define the specific data and methodology which will result in useful information . while we acknowledge that these actions should address many of the data elements that we believe are necessary to evaluate uas , we continue to believe that effective communications , interoperability , and avoidance of frequency congestion are important contributors to the success of joint operations . therefore , we continue to believe that dod should ensure that , at a minimum , the u.s. strategic command includes the data elements we recommended in its performance measurement system . in addition , we agree that other organizations including the services , should participate in the development of this measurement system if appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to other appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to other interested parties upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-9619 or email at pickups@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . the gao contact and key contributors are listed in appendix iii . to evaluate the operational performance of unmanned aircraft systems ( uas ) in recent operations , we examined the department of defense ( dod ) regulations , directives , and instructions as well as service guidance and documentation on uas . we met with key dod and service officials , including those from the uas planning task force and uas program managers , to discuss the current status and future plans for these systems .