this is our third report in response to your request . our first report , issued in august 2000 , presented information on the human capital management practices of selected public and private call centers . our second report , issued in january 2001 , evaluated irs' human capital management practices in identifying human capital needs , implementing human capital practices to achieve irs' goals , and evaluating those practices to continuously improve . according to irs , some of the key factors were the demand for assistance , staffing levels , assistor productivity , assistor skills , and irs' guidance for assistors . additionally , many of the factors were interrelated — changes in one factor could cause changes in others . according to an analysis by customer service field operations officials , irs was able to answer a greater percentage of calls in the 2000 filing season compared with 1999 because demand for service substantially decreased . irs measured demand in two ways: total call attempts and unique telephone number attempts . total call attempts includes repeat calls and is the sum of calls answered , calls abandoned by the caller before receiving assistance , and calls that received a busy signal . according to irs statistics , for its tax law , account , and refund assistance lines , the average wrap times increased 94 , 204 , and 176 percent , respectively , from 1998 to 1999 . second , 1999 was the first filing season with increased restrictions on supervisors using productivity data to evaluate assistors' performance or discuss their performance . some irs studies of the 1999 filing season concluded that the restrictions negatively affected productivity . for example , one irs study found that many site managers were concerned about their inability to properly manage assistors' use of wrap time without using productivity data . five of the seven supervisors we spoke to about the 2000 filing season said they were dissatisfied with the restrictions . they said assistors know supervisors are restricted from using productivity data to evaluate employees' performance and that supervisors do not have adequate time to devote to monitoring and physical observation . therefore , they said assistors are free to spend more time than necessary in wrap status . our conversations with irs officials , including supervisors at call sites and officials in the organizational performance division , and review of related documents indicated officials were uncertain about the basis for the restriction , and some thought that it was mandated by the irs restructuring and reform act . we discuss this issue near the end of this report . third , increasing the hours of telephone assistance to 24 hours a day , 7 days a week for the 1999 filing season may have decreased overall productivity because irs disproportionately shifted staffing away from the hours when most taxpayers call . according to an irs review , the diversion of staff away from hours when most taxpayers called resulted in a lower level of service because taxpayers waited longer for assistance , more taxpayers hung up while waiting , and demand increased because taxpayers redialed more .