florida . on september 24 , 2018 , florida opened the registration period for a program that provides rehabilitation or replacement assistance to owner - occupied homes and rental properties impacted by hurricane irma . according to florida officials , residents have until march 29 , 2019 , to register . the purpose of the registration process is for florida to evaluate the potentially eligible population . according to florida officials , florida began taking applications from registrants on november 27 , 2018 , and staff were conducting eligibility reviews on completed applications as of late december 2018 . puerto rico . puerto rico officials said they planned to stagger the implementation of their approved cdbg - dr activities . they would begin with activities they considered to be critical such as providing assistance for the rehabilitation , reconstruction , or relocation of owner - occupied units and gap financing for properties being developed with low - income housing tax credits . officials said they planned to begin taking applications by the end of calendar year 2018 or early 2019 but that the start dates depended on hud's approval of the activities' policies and procedures . texas . before expending funds , hud required grantees to submit planning documentation , but its review of this documentation was limited . specifically , hud did not have adequate guidance for staff to use when assessing the adequacy of grantees' financial controls , procurement processes , and grant management procedures and of their capacity and unmet needs assessments . hud also did not maintain documentation to substantiate staff's conclusions that the grantees' submissions were sufficient . by developing additional guidance for staff to use in evaluating the quality of grantees' financial processes and procedures and capacity and unmet needs assessments , hud can provide better assurance that its reviews are thorough and consistent . further , without documenting the basis for its conclusions when reviewing future grantees' submissions , stakeholders and decision makers lack information on why hud concluded that grantees' financial processes and procedures and capacity and unmet needs assessments were adequate . hud also misses an opportunity to leverage this information later to mitigate risk and inform its monitoring of grantees . hud's monitoring of the 2017 grantees will be critical given challenges that the hud oig has identified with grantees' procedures and our concerns about hud's reviews of grantees' initial submissions . but hud did not have a monitoring plan that reflected the specific risk factors of each grantee and outlined the scope of its monitoring . a comprehensive monitoring plan would help hud ensure that its oversight of grantees' compliance with grant requirements focused on grantees' areas of greatest risks . further , hud did not yet have the staff in place to effectively oversee cdbg - dr funds . without strategic workforce planning that determines if the number of staff the agency will be able to hire is sufficient to oversee the growing number of cdbg - dr grants , identifies the critical skills and competencies needed , and includes strategies to address any gaps , hud will not be able to identify the staffing resources necessary to oversee cdbg - dr grants .