mixing zone . allows dischargers to use the areas around a facility's discharge pipe where pollutants are mixed with cleaner receiving waters to dilute pollutant concentrations . within the mixing zone , concentrations of pollutants are generally allowed to exceed water quality criteria as long as standards are met at the boundary of the mixing zone . this flexibility expires in november 2010 with some limited exceptions . these flexibilities are generally only available to permit holders that operated before march 23 , 1997 , and are in effect for 5 years or the length of the permit . gli allows states to grant such permit flexibilities under certain circumstances , such as when the imposition of water quality standards would result in substantial and widespread economic and social impacts . table 2 shows the number and type of bcc permit flexibilities being used as of november 2007 in the great lakes basin for mercury , pcbs , and dioxin , as well as bcc discharge limits contained in permits . according to epa and state officials , in many cases , facilities cannot meet gli water quality criteria for a number of reasons , such as technology limitations , and the flexibilities are intended to give the facility time to make progress toward meeting the gli criteria . with the exception of compliance schedules , the gli allows for the repeated use of these permit flexibilities . as a result , epa and state officials could not tell us when the gli criteria will be met . in our 2005 report , we described several factors that were undermining epa's ability to ensure progress toward achieving consistent implementation of gli water quality standards . to help ensure full and consistent implementation of the gli and to improve measures for monitoring progress toward achieving gli's goals , we made a number of recommendations to the epa administrator . epa has taken some actions to implement the recommendations contained in our 2005 report , as the following indicates: ensure the gli clearinghouse is fully developed . we noted that epa's delayed development of the gli clearinghouse — a database intended to assist the states in developing consistent water quality criteria for toxic pollutants — was preventing the states from using this resource . to assist great lakes states in developing water quality criteria for gli pollutants , we recommended that epa ensure that the gli clearinghouse was fully developed , maintained , and made available to great lakes states . epa launched the gli clearinghouse on its web site in may 2006 and in february 2007 , epa region 5 provided clearinghouse training to states . the clearinghouse currently contains criteria or toxicity information for 395 chemicals . epa officials told us that the clearinghouse is now available to the states so they can independently calculate water quality criteria for gli pollutants . epa officials told us that some states , including ohio , wisconsin , and illinois , plan on updating their water quality standards in the near future and believe that the clearinghouse will benefit them as well as other states as they update their standards . gather and track information to assess the progress of gli implementation .