telephone services . perhaps the most significant impact of the budget reduction was in the area of telephone services . according to irs officials , irs's telephone services received a direct budget reduction of $5 million . direct costs . about $18 million of the $103 million budget reduction shown in table 4 was a reduction in direct costs and these reductions did have some impact on taxpayer service , primarily telephone service . support costs . most of the $103 million reduction , about $85 million , was in support costs . support costs are composed of both indirect costs and overhead costs such as rent , management , information services , legal services , and security . according to irs officials , while large , this reduction did not impact taxpayer service because the services are not directly related to the funding of irs programs . we examined those budget adjustments that we believed could have significantly affected the filing season activities we review annually . we found the following: tax return processing . processing received a slight overall budget reduction of direct funds of $7.6 million , about 1 percent , in fiscal year 2005 . in particular , submission processing received a direct reduction of $11 million . in spite of the budget reduction , the number of tax returns filed electronically increased 11 percent from 2004 . however , irs officials are becoming increasingly concerned about the potential impact of future reduction on their ability to increase electronic filing . as a result , taxpayers' ability to talk to a customer service representative ( csr ) was more limited than the year before , their wait time increased , and more taxpayers hung up before speaking with a csr . walk - in & volunteer sites . irs's budget for walk - in sites remained stable , and due to congressional concerns , plans to close some walk - in sites in 2006 are on hold . for its volunteer sites , irs shifted resources from taxpayer service to enforcement , resulting in an overall reduction in the stakeholder partnership , education , and communication ( spec ) budget of about $3 million . spec absorbed approximately $2 million of the budget reduction by implementing a voluntary reassignment program that allowed 28 spec staff , including 10 front - line managers , to transfer to enforcement work . although spec had planned to reorganize its field management structure for the 2006 filing season as a result of changes made in 2005 , as with the walk - in sites , it no longer plans to do so . also , irs officials stated that future budget reductions could impede sustainable growth and negatively impact taxpayer service in the future because their model of leveraging resources relies on partnerships and networking opportunities . web site . web services , which oversees irs's web site , received an overall budget reduction of approximately $4 million ( 10 percent ) in 2005 . as a result , web services reduced some contract services . the rest were miscellaneous calls . figure 4 shows how irs handled those calls .