( see figure 3 ) . while close to half of the nation's population lived less than 5 miles from a disposal bin as of april 2017 , the availability of nearby disposal bins varied significantly for people depending on whether they lived in an urban or a rural area . our findings cannot be generalized beyond the stakeholder organizations we interviewed . we conducted this performance audit from november 2016 to october 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the dea , within the department of justice , is responsible for ensuring the availability of controlled substances for legitimate uses while preventing their diversion through its administration and enforcement of the controlled substances act and its implementing regulations . under the controlled substances act , all persons or entities that manufacture , distribute , or dispense controlled substances are required to register with dea , unless specifically exempted . dea regulates these entities to limit diversion and prevent abuse . for example , dea regulates pharmaceutical companies that manufacture controlled substances , health care providers who prescribe them to patients , and pharmacies that dispense them . in october 2010 , the disposal act amended the controlled substances act to allow the public to deliver unused controlled substances to an entity authorized by dea to dispose of the substances . dea was given responsibility for promulgating the implementing regulations , and the disposal act stipulated that the regulations should prevent diversion of controlled substances while also taking into consideration public health and safety , ease and cost of implementation , and participation by various communities . in addition to disposal bins , dea's regulations describe two other options for the public to transfer controlled substances for the purpose of disposal: mail - back programs and take - back events . law enforcement agencies may use all three methods of drug disposal without the need for authorization by dea . the disposal act stipulates that the regulations cannot require an entity to participate in or establish any of the disposal options . in 44 states , less than 5 percent of the eligible entities had registered . ( see figure 2 and appendix i for more information on the participation rates of authorized collectors in each state ) . as of april 2017 , connecticut , missouri , and maine had the lowest participation rates , with 0.11 , 0.22 , and 0.70 percent , respectively . in contrast , north dakota had the highest participation rate , with 32.0 percent of its pharmacies and other eligible entities registered to be authorized collectors . the state with next highest participation rate was alaska , with 8.96 percent . dea's website contains a public search feature to identify authorized collectors located near a specific zip code or address . authorized collectors must install , manage , and maintain the disposal bins following dea regulations .