contracting for intellectual property rights is difficult . it is clearly appropriate to address these concerns . the government's need for advanced technologies is growing at a seemingly exponential rate . while the needs are growing , the government's control over the development of the underlying intellectual property supporting those technologies is declining . the government is no longer the leading supplier of research and development ( r&d ) dollars in the united states . while the government's share of r&d funding was as high as 67 percent of r&d dollars in the 1960s , its share fell to below 47 percent in the 1980s and to 26 percent in 2000 , according to the national science foundation . instead of driving research and its outcomes , the government must increasingly rely on the commercial sector . the government's ability to successfully deal with issues over intellectual property constitutes a key factor in being able to acquire the new technologies necessary to meet increasingly sophisticated operational needs . to address your question , we held extensive interviews with agency officials , commercial companies , and industry associations involved in intellectual property rights . the act applied to small businesses , universities , and other nonprofit organizations and generally gave them the right to retain title to and profit from their inventions , provided they adhered to certain requirements . the government retained nonexclusive , nontransferable , irrevocable , paid - up ( royalty - free ) licenses to use the inventions . a presidential memorandum issued to the executive branch agencies on february 18 , 1983 , extended the bayh - dole act to large businesses . it extended the patent policy of bayh - dole to any invention made in the performance of federally funded research and development contracts , grants , and cooperative agreements to the extent permitted by law . on april 10 , 1987 , the president issued executive order 12591 , which , among other things , required executive agencies to promote commercialization in accordance with the 1983 presidential memorandum . below are highlights of requirements related to the bayh - dole act and executive order 12591 . in addition to the traditional categories of intellectual property protections , government procurement regulations provide a layer of rights and obligations known as “data rights.” these regulations describe the rights that the government may obtain to two types of data , computer software and technical data , delivered or produced under a government contract . these rights may include permission to use , reproduce , disclose , modify , adapt , or disseminate the technical data . a key feature of the dod framework for data rights , and one implicit in the civilian agency framework , is that the extent of the government's rights is related to the degree of funding the government is providing . in some cases , the government may decide that it is in its best interest to forgo rights to technical data . for example , if the government wants to minimize its costs of having supercomputers developed exclusively for government use , it could waive its rights in order to spur commercial development .