million . accordingly , in august 1999 , the secretary of commerce proposed closing ntis by september 30 , 2000 , because he believed that declining sales revenues would not continue to be sufficient to recover all of the agency's operating costs . the secretary attributed this decline partly to other agencies' practice of making their research results available to the public for free through the web . he also proposed transferring ntis's research report archives to the library of congress and requiring federal agencies to give the public free online access to new research reports . gao - 01-490 . consideration that congress look at how this information was defined ; whether there was a need for a central repository of this information ; and if a central repository was maintained , whether all information should be retained permanently , and what business model should be used to manage it . the secretary of commerce agreed with our assessment and raised as a primary question whether there was a need for a central repository in view of the increasing availability of newer publications from sources other than ntis . the secretary also noted that the need for a central repository depended on whether the information would be permanently maintained by agencies and whether the information would be easy to locate without the kind of bibliographic control that ntis provides . subsequent to the issuance of our reports , in december 2003 , congress passed the 21st century nanotechnology research and development act , which provided a coordinated federal approach to stimulating nanotechnology research and development . the act directed the secretary of commerce to establish a clearinghouse for information related to the commercialization of nanotechnology research using the resources of ntis to the extent possible . as of september 2012 , ntis noted that it held over 700 publications in its nanotechnology collection . ntis currently operates as one of 12 independent bureaus within commerce , with the mission to help promote the nation's economic growth by providing access to information that stimulates innovation and discovery . headquartered in alexandria , virginia ( with warehouses in alexandria , virginia and in brandywine , maryland ) , the agency is organized into five primary offices . to carry out its statutory functions of collecting and maintaining a permanent repository and bibliographic record of research reports , and to disseminate them , the agency offers a variety of products , such as fee - based access to the reports in its repository . in addition , ntis offers information - related services to federal agencies , such as distribution and order fulfillment , web hosting , and e - training , that are less directly related to its basic statutory function . while ntis's service offerings have resulted in increased revenues , allowing the agency to remain financially self - sustaining , it has experienced a net cost relative to its products , calling into question whether the agency's function of acting as a self - financing repository of technical information is still viable . ntis is led by a director , who is aided by two executives — a chief information officer and a chief financial officer .