education concurred with our recommendation . education's comments are reproduced in appendix v. education also provided technical comments , which were incorporated as appropriate . officials did report some changes in commercial activities . three of these districts reported stronger ties with local businesses , and three schools in two districts reported they now sell healthier soft drinks . one district reported a new relationship with a computer firm headquartered in its area that provided tutors as well as cash donations to schools in the district . ( 2 ) to what extent have districts developed policies implementing the ppra provisions in nclba on the use of student data for commercial purposes ? ( 3 ) what is the department of education ( education ) doing to help districts implement the new provisions on the use of student data for commercial purposes ? to answer these questions , we reviewed state laws and regulations in all 50 states and washington , d.c. , as of may 2004 . also , we reviewed proposed legislation that had been introduced between january 1 , 2003 , and february 2004 to obtain a snapshot description of possible future state legislative activities . we conducted a national sample survey of school districts to determine if their policies were consistent with the ppra provisions on the use of student data for commercial activities and asked them to report on any activities in which they engaged that used student data for commercial purposes . we obtained an 87 percent weighted response rate . we also asked superintendents in the districts we surveyed to send us copies of their policies that govern activities involving the use of student information for marketing and selling purposes . we evaluated the extent to which these policies implemented ppra requirements by examining whether they covered the collection , disclosure , and use of student data for commercial purposes . to discern changes in commercial activities in the seven school districts we visited in 2000 , we interviewed district and school officials in those districts by telephone . we had selected these seven districts , located in california , michigan , and new mexico , to illustrate a range of commercial activities in states identified as having legal frameworks generally supportive of such activities as well as a range of geographic , economic , and demographic characteristics . finally , we interviewed officials at education and examined its guidance and initiatives on ppra's commercial provisions . see appendix i for a detailed explanation of our scope and methodology . we conducted our work between november 2003 and august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as we reported in 2000 , commercial activities in school can generally be classified in four categories — product sales , direct advertising , indirect advertising , and market research — although each category encompasses a wide range of activities . for example , advertising activities could range from selling advertisements for a high school football game to selling naming rights to a school .