fig . 2 below shows the polar sea in dry dock . polar star ( inoperative since 2006 ) : the polar star is a heavy icebreaker commissioned in 1976 with an expected 30-year lifespan . the polar star is currently undergoing a $62.8 million service life extension , and is expected to return to service in 2013 . the ongoing service life extension is expected to extend the polar star's service life through at least 2020 . healy ( operative ) : the healy is a medium icebreaker , commissioned in 2000 , with an expected 30-year lifespan . the healy is less capable than the heavy icebreakers and is primarily used for scientific missions in the arctic . as a medium icebreaker , the healy does not have the same icebreaking capabilities as the polar sea and polar star . because of this , it cannot operate independently in the ice conditions in the antarctic or ensure timely access to some arctic areas in the winter . abs consulting , u.s. polar icebreaker recapitalization: a comprehensive analysis and its impacts on u.s. coast guard activities , prepared for the united states coast guard , ( october 2011 ) . icebreakers ( recapitalization report ) , which assessed options for recapitalizing its existing icebreaker fleet , including building new icebreakers , or reconstructing the polar sea and polar star to meet mission requirements , among other options . this october 2011 report found that the most cost - effective option would be to build two new heavy icebreakers , while performing minimal maintenance to keep the existing icebreakers operational while construction is taking place . in addition to having the lowest acquisition cost of any option — at $2.12 billion — this option also has the lowest risk due to the complexity ( and therefore risk ) associated with the other options of performing major service life extensions or reconstructing the polar sea and polar star . the risk associated with these options is driven by high levels of uncertainty in terms of cost , scheduling , and technical feasibility for reconstructing the existing fleet . given the time frames associated with building new icebreakers , the recapitalization report concluded that the coast guard must begin planning and budgeting immediately . high latitude study . abs consulting , high latitude study mission analysis report . medium icebreakers ) . the study does provide cost estimates for acquiring the recommended icebreakers , but it does not directly assess the feasibility of its recommendations . as mentioned above , the coast guard faces budget uncertainty and it may be a significant challenge for the coast guard to obtain arctic capabilities , including icebreakers . given our analysis of the challenges that the coast guard already faces in funding its existing acquisition programs , it is unlikely that the agency's budget could accommodate the level of additional funding ( estimated by the high latitude study to range from $4.14 billion to $6.9 billion ) needed to acquire new icebreakers or reconstruct existing ones . the recapitalization report similarly concludes that the recapitalization of the polar icebreaker fleet cannot be funded within the existing or projected coast guard budget .