mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that your or other members of the committee may have at this time . we reported that fema had not yet defined the outcomes of where the nation should be in terms of domestic preparedness . thus , identifying measurable performance indicators could help fema track progress toward established goals , provide policy makers with the information they need to make rational resource allocations , and provide program managers with the data needed to effect continual improvements , measure progress , and to enforce accountability . in september 2007 , dhs issued the national preparedness guidelines that describe a national framework for capabilities - based preparedness as a systematic effort that includes sequential steps to first determine capability requirements and then assess current capability levels . according to the guidelines , the results of this analysis provide a basis to identify , analyze , and choose options to address capability gaps and deficiencies , allocate funds , and assess and report the results . this proposed framework reflects critical practices we have identified for government performance and results . at the time of our review of fema's efforts in 2008 and in 2009 , fema was in the process of refining the target capabilities to make them more measurable and to provide state and local jurisdictions with additional guidance on the levels of capability they need . we recommended in our april 2009 report that fema enhance its project management plan with , among other things , milestones to help it implement its capability assessment efforts ; fema agreed with our recommendation . we reported in october 2010 that fema had enhanced its plan with milestones in response to our prior recommendation and that officials said they had an ongoing effort to develop measures for target capabilities — as planning guidance to assist in state and local assessments — rather than as requirements for measuring preparedness by assessing capabilities ; fema officials had not yet determined how they plan to revise the list . in july 2005 , we reported that dhs had established a draft target capabilities list that provides guidance on the specific capabilities and levels of capability that fema would expect federal , state , local , and tribal first responders to develop and maintain . we reported that dhs defined these capabilities generically and expressed them in terms of desired operational outcomes and essential characteristics , rather than dictating specific , quantifiable responsibilities to the various jurisdictions . dhs planned to organize classes of jurisdictions that share similar characteristics — such as total population , population density , and critical infrastructure — into tiers to account for reasonable differences in capability levels among groups of jurisdictions and to appropriately apportion responsibility for development and maintenance of capabilities among levels of government and across these jurisdictional tiers . according to dhs's assessment and reporting implementation plan , dhs intended to implement a capability assessment and reporting system based on target capabilities that would allow first responders to assess their preparedness to identify gaps , excesses , or deficiencies in their existing capabilities or capabilities they will be expected to access through mutual aid .