eligible activities . finally , stakeholders said that designing and implementing a clean water trust fund would involve determining the type of wastewater infrastructure activities that the fund would support . most stakeholders who responded to our questionnaire supported using a trust fund for planning and designing wastewater projects ( 18 of 21 ) and for capital costs ( 19 of 21 ) . some stakeholders noted that these two activities are closely linked — planning and designing are essential components of carrying out capital projects . stakeholders that supported using the trust fund for capital costs identified many of the activities that are currently eligible for funding under the cwsrf as those that should be eligible to receive support under a clean water trust fund . these activities include expanding wastewater systems to meet existing needs , replacing or rehabilitating wastewater collection systems or treatment facilities , and correcting wastewater overflows from wastewater systems . many of these stakeholders said that capital costs should be given priority because these are major costs and represent the most pressing needs for utilities . moreover , according to some stakeholders , capital costs should be eligible for funding because communities may incur significant costs when upgrading or rehabilitating their wastewater systems in order to comply with clean water act requirements or other federal mandates . in addition to capital costs , stakeholders identified other activities that should be eligible for funding , including providing rate - payer assistance to low - income households , supporting green infrastructure and nonpoint source pollution projects , and training wastewater plant operators . only 2 stakeholders responded that a trust fund should be used to support operations and maintenance for wastewater utilities . appendix ii provides the full range of stakeholder responses to the questionnaire on design issues . appendix iii provides a list of stakeholder groups that responded to our questionnaire . although a variety of options have been proposed in the past to generate revenue for a clean water trust fund , generating $10 billion from any one of these alone may be difficult . in addition , each funding option poses various implementation challenges , including defining the products or activities to be taxed , establishing a collection and enforcement framework , and obtaining stakeholder support . various funding options , including excise taxes on products that may contribute to the wastewater stream , an additional tax on corporate income , a water use tax , and an industrial discharge tax , could generate a range of revenues for a clean water trust fund . however , it may be difficult to raise $10 billion for a clean water trust fund from any one of these options because of the small size of the tax bases of many of these options . excise taxes on products that may contribute to the wastewater stream could be used to generate revenue for a clean water trust fund . these products include beverages , fertilizers and pesticides , flushable products , pharmaceuticals , and water appliances and plumbing fixtures . while past proposals for funding a clean water trust fund have identified these products as contributing to the wastewater stream , limited research has been done on their specific impact on wastewater infrastructure , according to epa .