, equity ) . the equity raised by the tax credits reduces the need for debt financing , and , as a result , these properties can offer lower , more affordable rents . after the 2005 hurricanes , congress passed the gulf opportunity zone act of 2005 ( go zone ) , which temporarily increased the amount of allocated tax credits for the five states along the gulf coast by a total of about $330 million . we reported in july 2008 that although the gulf coast states had awarded nearly all of their go zone lihtcs , few of the units funded by these credits were in service as of april 2008 . we determined that the data provided were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . however , it is important to note that the demographic data in nemis are largely self - reported by applicants , and fema does not independently verify all of the data it collects . such assistance is also being provided through a pilot program modeled after hud's housing choice voucher program , a rental subsidy program that serves more than 2 million low - income , elderly , and disabled households nationwide and is administered by local public housing agencies . in the summer of 2007 , fema and hud entered into an interagency agreement to pilot a federal housing assistance grant program , dhap , to temporarily extend rental assistance for victims displaced by hurricanes katrina and rita . appendix i discusses our scope and methodology in more detail . the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) grants the principle authority for the president to provide assistance in mitigating , responding to , and preparing for disasters and emergencies , such as earthquakes , hurricanes , floods , tornadoes , and terrorist acts . fema administers the stafford act and provides direct housing assistance ( eg , travel trailers and manufactured homes ) under its individuals and households program . fema provides these units at no charge to disaster victims who cannot use financial assistance to rent alternate housing because such housing is not available . the stafford act limits direct housing assistance to an 18-month period , after which fema may charge rents at the fair market rent levels established by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , but the president can also extend the initial 18-month period because of extraordinary circumstances . according to fema guidance , manufactured housing and recreational vehicles are the two most common forms of temporary housing units ( see fig . manufactured housing is factory - built housing designed for long - term residential use . the term “mobile home” is sometimes used to refer to manufactured homes . in addition , this type of housing must be located on sites that are not in a designated floodplain area . recreational vehicles , which include park model and travel trailers , are designed for short - term use when no other options are available .