gao - 08-740 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2008 . incomplete support planning is not a new issue . in 2006 , dod's inspector general reported that mda had not developed an overall , integrated , bmds - wide support plan , but had developed a summary document containing only general support planning information for four elements . the dod inspector general's report concluded that without improving support planning , mda faced increased risk in successfully integrating elements into a single system that will meet u.s. requirements . in 2006 , mda revised the document to include information on a total of 8 elements , but the document still did not contain more than high - level information on how each individual element would be supported and did not contain specific detail for how support would be managed across the integrated system . however , army officials stated that , as of july 2008 , the estimates are not complete because some of the assumptions may change and the estimates have not been reviewed and approved by the army cost review board . for example , an army cost estimator told us that the estimate for the forward - based radar is not complete because many of the major assumptions that will drive costs , such as physical site location , infrastructure , and security requirements , remain undetermined . air force — european radar: the air force and mda began to develop a joint estimate for the european radar in august 2008 and plan to update the estimate as assumptions are refined . however , since all base operating support requirements are not finalized , the air force spending plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2015 , which is due to the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) in august 2008 , may not include all the operation and support costs for the european radar . navy — sea - based radar: the navy and mda plan to develop a joint estimate in fiscal year 2009 . however , mda and the navy have separately developed operation and support cost estimates for this element . using their separate estimates , mda and navy officials met to discuss the differences . according to mda and navy cost estimators , the navy's estimate was approximately $10 million a year higher than mda's , but mda officials agreed that the navy's estimated platform maintenance costs were more accurate . the resulting cost estimate is intended to support a cost - sharing agreement between mda and the navy which , as of august 2008 , had not been finalized . as of august 2008 , mda still had not developed an overall , integrated , bmds - wide support plan . without current support plans for every element and an integrated , system - wide support plan , mda will be unable to conduct a support readiness assessment of the overall , integrated ballistic missile defense system as directed by its guidance . as a result , mda cannot ensure that the integrated system has appropriate plans in place to support operations . dod's planning to support bmds over the long term has not followed dod's key principles of weapon system life - cycle management .