table 6 provides additional details about these costs . armed forces sports championships are hosted by one of the services and must include at least three of the services in competition for all team sports and most individual sports . higher level competitions are attended by the most competent athletes from the armed forces sports championships or athletes selected based on other qualifying events or criteria and may include u.s. national , international military sports council , or other international events . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from august 2016 to june 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod instruction 1330.04 outlines the following roles and responsibilities regarding the armed forces sports program: principal deputy under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness: provides guidance and oversight concerning the participation of servicemembers in armed forces , national , and international amateur sports competitions . senior military sports advisor: serves as the service personnel chief who is responsible for the management and operation of the program and reports to the principal deputy under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . armed forces sports council: serves as the governing body of the program , and is composed of the morale , welfare , and recreation representatives from each service or their designated representatives . armed forces sports council secretariat: serves as the executive office for the council and serves as the u.s. liaison to the international military sports council . armed forces sports council working group: serves as the staffing body of the armed forces sports council , which is composed of morale , welfare , and recreation representatives from each service . secretaries of the military departments: develop sports programs based on specific needs and mission requirements that provide the opportunity for servicemembers to prepare for and compete in national and international amateur sports competitions on a voluntary basis . according to sports council secretariat officials and the policies for managing servicemembers' participation in national and international amateur sports competitions , the sports council secretariat and the service sports offices each have responsibilities for managing the armed forces sports program . table 1 further describes the responsibilities of the armed forces sports council secretariat's and the service sports offices for the armed forces sports program . the number of staff members working in the armed forces sports council secretariat and the service sports offices and the percentage of time staff members spend working for the armed forces sports program varies . for example , the navy sports office has two staff members who work on the program nearly full time , while the army sports office has four staff members who work on the program part time . in addition , the staff members working for the armed forces sports program include both civilians and active - duty servicemembers .