but it has not been completed . while the agencies are now in a better position to do so , they must build on the progress made to date by completing data and modeling efforts underway , updating their fire management plans with the results of these data efforts and ongoing research , and following through on recent cost - effectiveness and affordability initiatives . however , time is running out . further delay in completing a strategy that cohesively integrates these activities to identify options and related funding needs will only result in increased long - term risks to communities , ecosystems , and federal budgetary resources . because there is an increasingly urgent need for a cohesive federal strategy that identifies long - term options and related funding needs for reducing fuels , we recommended that the secretaries of agriculture and of the interior provide the congress , in time for its consideration of the agencies' fiscal year 2006 wildland fire management budgets , with a joint tactical plan outlining the critical steps the agencies will take , together with related time frames , to complete such a cohesive strategy . in an april 2005 letter , agriculture and interior said that they will produce by august 2005 , for the wildland fire leadership council's review and approval , a joint tactical plan that will identify the steps and time frames for completing a cohesive strategy . we look forward to the agencies completing this important step . however , as noted at the outset of this testimony , the window of opportunity for effectively addressing wildland fire is rapidly closing . thus , developing a cohesive strategy should not wait until 2009 , when landfire and the fire program analysis are fully developed . as we have noted , the 2002 interagency analysis of long - term options and costs is a good starting point that can serve as a basis for providing the congress with interim updates on options and funding needs to respond to wildland fires . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact robert a. robinson at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or robinsonr@gao.gov , or robin m. nazzaro at ( 202 ) 512-3841or nazzaror@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included david p. bixler , janet frisch , richard johnson , and chester joy . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the agencies also adopted a common interagency template for preparing plans to ensure greater consistency in their contents . coordination among federal agencies and their collaboration with nonfederal partners , critical to effective implementation at the local level , also has been improved .