( recommendation 3 ) . failure to do so can have significant consequences . for example , by not establishing clear time frames for updating guidance that defines the asd - so / lic's acquisition roles , the asd - so / lic is at risk for having unclear roles and responsibilities that may overlap between socom and the office of the secretary of defense on functions related to acquisitions . according socom officials , having clearer time frames to update dod guidance could enable oasd - so / lic and socom to operate more efficiently and effectively . without establishing clear time frames for the implementation of key oversight functions and other actions , the asd - so / lic may not be able to fully execute oasd - so / lic's service secretary - like authority , and dod decision - makers may not be well positioned to track progress and evaluate whether or how the asd - so / lic's completed and pending actions support the full implementation of section 922 . while the asd - so / lic's responsibilities , functions , relationships , and authorities are established in dod directive 5111.10 , assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low - intensity conflict ( asd so / lic ) ( mar . 22 , 1995 ) ( incorporating change 2 , oct. 21 , 2011 ) , this directive is outdated and does not reflect the asd - so / lic's statutory roles under section 922 and codified at 10 u.s.c . for example , dod directive 5111.10 states that the asd - so / lic shall serve under the authority , direction , and control of the usd ( p ) . however , section 922 states that the asd - so / lic's exercise of authority of all special operations - peculiar administrative matters related to the organization , training , and equipping of sof shall be subject to the authority , direction , and control of the secretary of defense . according to dod officials , while there is other guidance that broadly lays out dod roles and responsibilities , this guidance lacks details concerning operationalizing asd - so / lic's roles and responsibilities under the new administrative chain of command , creating potential confusion regarding the asd - so / lic's roles and responsibilities on some key sof - related issues . for example: sof personnel issues: sof personnel activities include readiness reporting , training , education , warrior care , awards , decorations , and death notification . support for sof personnel issues is generally dispersed among different components , including the military services , socom , the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ( usd ( p&r ) ) , and oasd - so / lic . although dod directive 5111.10 states that the asd - so / lic “shall advise and coordinate with the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness on manpower” issues , it does not define whether manpower issues include sof career management , such as special pay and promotion . according to dod officials , dod lacks overarching guidance that would clarify asd - so / lic's role on manpower issues .