risk analysis . as mentioned earlier , va asked the department of health and human services to conduct an independent risk analysis on the provider data loss in the january 2007 incident in birmingham ; this analysis showed that there was a high risk that the loss of personal information could result in harm to the individuals concerned . conducting such risk analyses after incidents is a recommended procedure , since appropriate incident response and notification depend on determining the level of risk associated with the particular information that is compromised . in addition , conducting periodic risk assessments before an incident occurs facilitates a rapid response , by enabling the development of mitigation activities and appropriate coordination for potential data losses . assessments of both systems and the information they contain are important , particularly information with a high potential risk for inappropriate use or fraud . however , va is still in the process of finalizing and approving its guidance for completing risk assessments on va's systems . as a result , the department does not have a current assessment of risk for the information located at its facilities and in its information systems , which could affect the coordination and mitigation activities that are developed by the department to respond to potential data losses . until va assesses the risk for information located at its facilities and in its information systems and uses this assessment to develop and document mitigation activities and appropriate coordination for potential data losses ( particularly high - risk losses ) , it may not be able to adequately address potential risks associated with loss of sensitive information at its facilities and on its systems . additional va actions . va has taken additional actions to improve incident response and notification . in february 2007 , va chartered the incident resolution team structure , a group of officials from organizations within the department who are responsible for responding to incidents and handling notification requirements at the national , regional , and local levels . this action was in response to an omb memorandum issued in september 2006 , which recommended that all departments and agencies develop a core management group responsible for incident response to losses of personal information , as well as a response plan for notifying individuals affected by security incidents . roles and responsibilities within the incident resolution team structure are organized according to the level of activity , the nature of the incident , and how the incident is categorized based on risk levels . coordination with other agencies . in the incident in birmingham in january 2007 , medical provider and physician information from the centers for medicare & medicaid services of the department of health and human services was lost , requiring va to coordinate with this department to respond to the incident . at the time of the incident , va had drafted interim procedures for incident response , including notifying individuals affected by security incidents . these draft procedures described steps to be taken to respond to incidents involving the loss of information on veterans . however , they did not include processes for coordinating incident response and mitigation activities with other agencies .