usda . depending on the type of facility , usda conducts inspections at least once per operating shift or maintains a constant presence . specifically , usda conducts carcass - by - carcass inspection at all federally inspected meat and poultry slaughter facilities and verifies that these establishments follow all food safety and humane handling requirements . at facilities that process meat and poultry products , usda conducts inspections at least once per production shift , following the agency's longstanding interpretation of its statutes requiring it to do so . among other things , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act requires that food additives be approved by fda before they can be lawfully used in foods . substances added to food are considered unsafe unless the agency establishes that the use of the food additive , under specific conditions for use , will be safe , or unless the substance is generally recognized as safe ( gras ) under the conditions of its intended use among qualified experts . as we reported in 2010 , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act exempts gras substances from the act's general requirement that companies obtain fda approval before marketing food containing a new additive . gras substances include hundreds of spices and artificial flavors , emulsifiers and binders , vitamins and minerals , and preservatives that manufacturers add to enhance a food's taste , texture , nutritional content , or shelf life . the gras exemption allows companies , without notice to or approval from fda , to determine whether there is enough support to claim a substance is gras . for a company to claim a substance is gras , it must conclude that there is common knowledge about the safety of the substance among experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate its safety . in addition , as part of their oversight of the food supply , fda and usda oversee food labeling of the products under their respective jurisdictions . usda , by statute , is charged with assuring that products under its jurisdiction , including meat , poultry , and catfish , in interstate or foreign commerce are properly marked , labeled , and packaged . usda develops and applies the labeling requirements for these products , and food manufacturers are responsible for complying with the usda labeling rules and adhering to the process maintained by usda for the evaluation and approval of these product labels . consistent with its statutes , usda requires preapproval of all labels before manufacturers can market their products . the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act prohibits the misbranding of food , which includes food labeling that is false or misleading . consistent with its statutes , fda ensures that foods within its jurisdiction are not misbranded by focusing on the labels of products already in the market . fda establishes regulations for the enforcement of these provisions and issues guidance . food manufacturers are responsible for compliance with misbranding provisions in the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act and its implementing regulations . from time to time , new technologies , such as those used to make cell - cultured meat , generate challenges for fda's and usda's regulatory structure .