the advertisements . the disclaimer requirements apply to any kind of communications media carrying public political advertising and are not limited to broadcast or cablecast advertisements . similar to fcc , fec initiates most enforcement activity pursuant to complaints received from the general public , including individuals and organizations associated with federal political campaigns . complaints are filed with the office of complaints examination and legal administration ( cela ) , which reviews the complaint to determine if the complaint states facts , identifies the parties involved , and provides or identifies supporting documentation . if the complaints are deemed sufficient , cela informs the complainants that they will be notified once the case has been resolved . if fec discovers violations , enforcement can include negotiated corrective action , including civil penalties , or other commission initiated legal action seeking judicially imposed civil penalties or other relief . as previously stated , sponsorship identification statutes and regulations require broadcasters and cablecasters to identify commercial content — usually an advertisement , an embedded advertisement , or a video news release ( vnr ) that has been broadcast in exchange for money or payment in - kind . according to most broadcasters we spoke with , commercial content is fairly straightforward to identify , and they are accustomed to dealing with such content and report that compliance is manageable . for content considered political or discussing a controversial public issue , requirements , enforced by fcc and fec , are more extensive and require more detailed on - air announcements and tracking of all related communications and agreements in a public file for fcc . according to fcc , commercial advertisements do not always require a sponsorship announcement . fcc does not require an announcement when an obvious connection exists between the content and sponsor , such as with a standard commercial advertisement . for all commercial advertisements where the true sponsor is not apparent , even for infomercials that may be 30 minutes or longer , fcc requires a written or verbal announcement to occur only once during the program . this announcement must fully and fairly disclose the true identity of those who are paying for the advertisement . in addition , whenever an individual , such as a deejay , receives money or payment in - kind for airing specific content or favorably discussing a specific product a sponsorship announcement must be made . therefore , station employees must disclose such transactions to the station . thus , if a record company or its agent pays a deejay to play records or talk favorably about an artist or record on the air , and he does so , the result is considered sponsored content . fcc guidance directs that the deejay must reveal the payment to the broadcaster and a sponsorship announcement must be made when the content goes on - the - air . according to broadcasters , industry trade groups , and others we spoke with , compliance with these standards and requirements is not a problem because the requirements are part of their standard review process .