canines are paired with a leo or tsi handler during their training course . after canine teams complete this training , and obtain initial certification , they acclimate to their home operating environment for a 30-day period . upon completion of the acclimation period , ctc conducts a 3-day operational transitional assessment to ensure canine teams are not experiencing any performance challenges in their home operating environment . after initial certification , canine teams are evaluated on an annual basis to maintain certification . during conventional explosives detection evaluations , canine teams must demonstrate their ability to detect all the explosive training aids the canines were trained to detect in five search areas ( eg , aircraft ) . the five search areas are randomly selected among all the possible types of search areas , but according to ctc , include the area that is most relevant to the type of canine team . for example , teams assigned to airports will be evaluated in areas such as aircraft and cargo . canine teams must find a certain percentage of the explosive training aids to pass their annual conventional evaluation . in addition , a specified number of nonproductive responses — when a canine responds to a location where no explosives odor is present — are allowed . after passing the conventional evaluation , psc teams are required to undergo an additional annual evaluation that includes detecting explosives on a person , or being carried by a person . psc teams are tested in different locations within the sterile areas and passenger screening checkpoints of an airport . for example , tsa analyzed canine teams' compliance with the training requirement throughout fiscal year 2013 to identify teams repeatedly not in compliance with the monthly requirement . nedctp's mission is to deter and detect the introduction of explosive devices into u.s. transportation systems . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as of february 2016 , nedctp has deployed 787 of the 997 canine teams for which it has funding available in fiscal year 2016 across transportation systems . there are four types of leo canine teams: aviation , mass transit , maritime , and multimodal ; and two types of tsi canine teams: multimodal and psc . table 1 shows the number of canine teams by type for which funding is available , describes their roles and responsibilities , and costs per team to tsa . tsa's start - up costs for leo teams include the costs of training the canine and handler , and providing the handler's agency a stipend . the annual costs to tsa for leo teams reflect the amount of the stipend . tsa's start - up and annual costs for tsi canine teams are greater than those for leo teams , because tsi handlers are tsa employees and therefore the costs include the handlers' pay and benefits , service vehicles , and cell phones , among other things . psc teams come at an increased cost to tsa compared with other tsi teams because of the additional 2 weeks of training and costs associated with providing decoys ( i.e.