we excluded some schools from our regression model . specifically , we excluded schools that met one or more of the following criteria: data were not available in both the crdc and ccd data sets , and therefore we were unable to determine the percentage of students eligible for free or reduced - price lunch in these schools or whether these schools were located in rural , suburban , or urban areas . school was listed as “ungraded” in the crdc because we could not determine if these schools offered grade 6 or above . school only offered pre - school because pre - school disciplinary data were reported separately and differently than k - 12 disciplinary data in the crdc . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix contains maps showing rates of disciplinary actions by school district for each of the six disciplinary actions captured in the department of education's civil rights data collection for school year 2013-14 . funded by department of education ( education ) : national center on safe supportive learning environments: offers information and technical assistance focused on improving student supports and academic enrichment . this includes resources on using positive approaches to discipline , as well as promoting mental health for students and ensuring the safety and effectiveness of physical learning environments . https: / / safesupportivelearning.ed.gov / . national student attendance , engagement , and success center: a center that disseminates evidence - based practices and facilitates communities of practice to help students attend school every day , be engaged in school , and succeed academically , so that they graduate high school prepared for college , career , and civic life . it offers webinars on identifying the root causes of chronic absence , linking school climate and exclusionary discipline to absenteeism , and improving attendance for vulnerable students . http: / / new.every1graduates.org / nsaesc / national technical assistance center for the education of neglected or delinquent children and youth: provides technical assistance to state agencies with title i , part d programs and works to improve education services for children and youth who are neglected , delinquent , or at risk . this includes running the supportive school discipline communities of practice , which brings together education and justice leaders for knowledge - sharing events and offers webinars on discipline initiatives such as restorative practices . https: / / www.neglected - delinquent.org / positive behavioral interventions and supports technical assistance center: funded by education's office of special education programs , this center supports implementation of a multi - tiered approach to social , emotional and behavior support . teachers and staff sometimes have discretion to make case - by - case decisions about whether to discipline , and the form of discipline to impose in response to student behaviors , such as disobedience , defiance , and classroom disruption . studies show that these decisions can result in certain groups of students being more harshly disciplined than others .