cdc has strengthened its own laboratory capacity . for example , it is developing and validating new diagnostic tests as well as creating agent - specific detection protocols . in collaboration with the association of public health laboratories and the department of defense , cdc has started a secure web - based network that allows state , local , and other public health laboratories access to guidelines for analyzing biological agents . the site also allows authenticated users to order critical reagentsneeded in performing laboratory analysis of samples . the agency has also opened a rapid response and advance technology laboratory , which screens samples for the presence of suspicious biological agents and evaluates new technology and protocols for the detection of biological agents . these technology assessments and protocols , as well as reagents and reference samples , are being shared with state and local public health laboratories . one activity cdc has undertaken is the implementation of a national bioterrorism response training plan . this plan focuses on preparing cdc officials to respond to bioterrorism and includes the development of exercises to assess progress in achieving bioterrorism preparedness at the federal , state , and local levels . the agency is also developing a crisis communications / media response curriculum for bioterrorism , as well as core capabilities guidelines to assist states and localities in their efforts to build comprehensive anti - bioterrorism programs . cdc has developed a bioterrorism information web site . this site provides emergency contact information for state and local officials in the event of possible bioterrorism incidents , a list of critical biological and chemical agents , summaries of state and local bioterrorism projects , general information about cdc's bioterrorism initiative , and links to documents on bioterrorism preparedness and response . officials indicated that the cdc laboratory would have been unable to respond to another outbreak , had one occurred at the same time . cdc plans to work with other agencies in hhs to develop guidance to facilitate preparedness planning and associated investments by local - level medical and public health systems . the department has stated that to the extent that the guidance can help foster uniformity across local efforts with respect to preparedness concepts and structural and operational strategies , this would enable government units to work more effectively together than if each local approach was essentially unique . more generally , cdc has found a need to implement a national strategy for public health preparedness for bioterrorism , and to work with federal , state , and local partners to ensure communication and teamwork in response to a potential bioterrorist incident . planning needs to continue for potential naturally occurring epidemics as well . in october 2000 , we reported that federal and state influenza pandemic plans are in various stages of completion and do not completely or consistently address key issues surrounding the purchase , distribution , and administration of vaccines and antiviral drugs . at the time of our report , 10 states either had developed or were developing plans using general guidance from cdc , and 19 more states had plans under development . outstanding issues remained , however , because certain key federal decisions had not been made .