liaison activities . the plan does not provide the details necessary to show how cfsa social workers will be involved in these activities , as required for these activities to be funded from the $500,000 designated by the d.c. appropriations act . for example , the plan lists staff time for preparation and presentation of magistrate judge training and upcoming training for family court personnel as a liaison activity . while family court officials said that this training involved cfsa social workers , the mayor's plan does not clearly state whether social workers will be involved , define the type of training , or describe how these expenditures will support cfsa social worker family court reform activities . on - site coordination of services and information . according to the mayor's plan the family court liaison will coordinate the activities of representatives from cfsa as well as representatives of other district social service agencies at the family court . however , the plan does not describe how the funded activities involve the use of social workers to implement family court reform . furthermore , the mayor's plan provides limited information on issues essential to coordinating services . according to national court associations , an effective approach for establishing and sustaining operational integration among agencies includes ( 1 ) establishing interagency policies for coordinating on - site social services ; ( 2 ) specifying the types of services to be provided by each participating agency ; and ( 3 ) identifying the financial , human capital , computer , and other resources to support coordinated services . the mayor's plan provides limited information on these essential issues . the plan states that agency representatives will be available to the court and that computer support at the court will be provided . however , the plan does not describe planning efforts with the family court on related space and facilities requirements , costs associated with service coordination , the types of services that will be provided , or the number of staff that will be on - site . it does not indicate whether the cfsa staff on - site will include social workers . family court officials said that planning on - site services coordination with district offices is in its early phases and that service representatives from district offices will face challenges in identifying and coordinating social services for children and families served by the family court . border agreement . the mayor plans to use $131,000 of the $500,000 designated in the d.c. appropriations act for border agreement activities , such as negotiating an agreement with surrounding jurisdictions . while a border agreement may benefit district efforts to achieve more timely placement of district children in maryland and virginia , border agreement activities included in the mayor's plan do not specify how cfsa social workers will be involved in the process or how their involvement relates to family court reform . integrating the computer systems of district agencies with those of the family court as well as other aspects of family court reform are complex and will take years to complete .