justice concurred with this recommendation . a second opportunity involves assessing the financial investigative techniques used by an arizona attorney general task force . the task force seized millions of dollars and disrupted alien smuggling operations by following cash transactions flowing through money transmitters that serve as the primary method of payment to those individuals responsible for smuggling aliens . by analyzing money transmitter transaction data , task force investigators identified suspected alien smugglers and those money transmitter businesses that were complicit in laundering alien smuggling proceeds . ice officials stated that a fuller examination of arizona's financial investigative techniques and their potential to be used at the federal level would be useful . an overall assessment of whether and how these techniques may be applied in the context of disrupting alien smuggling could help ensure that ice is not missing opportunities to take additional actions and leverage resources to support the common goal of countering alien smuggling . in our may 2010 report , we recommended that ice conduct an assessment of the arizona attorney general's financial investigations strategy to identify any promising investigative techniques for federal use . ice concurred with our recommendation and stated that the week of april 12 , 2010 , ice participated in the inaugural meeting of the southwest border anti - money laundering alliance , a body consisting of federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies along the southwest border . the main purpose of the meeting was to synchronize enforcement priorities and investigative techniques . however , while these are positive steps toward combating money laundering along the southwest border , it is not clear to what extent these actions will result in ice evaluating the use of the arizona attorney general's financial investigative techniques . oi and cbp have not fully evaluated progress toward achieving alien smuggling - related program objectives . federal standards for internal control call for agencies to establish performance measures and indicators in order to evaluate the effectiveness of their efforts . one of the major objectives of oi's alien smuggling investigations is to seize smugglers' assets , but oi does not have performance measures for asset seizures related to alien smuggling cases . tracking the use of asset seizures in alien smuggling investigations as a performance measure could help oi monitor its progress toward its goal of denying smuggling organizations the profit from criminal acts . thus , in our may 2010 report , we recommended that ice develop performance measures for asset seizures related to alien smuggling investigations . ice concurred with the recommendation and stated that ice is in the process of assessing all of its performance measures and creating a performance plan . in addition , ice operates the mexican interior repatriation program ( mirp ) , which removes aliens apprehended during the hot and dangerous summer months to the interior of mexico to deter them from reentering the united states and to reduce loss of life . however , ice does not know the effectiveness of mirp at disrupting alien smuggling operations or saving lives because ice lacks performance measures for the program . thus , in our may 2010 report , we recommended that ice develop performance measures for mirp .