washington . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . i for a complete list ) . according to dhs officials , the department could not implement all of these initiatives in fiscal year 2012 because of , among other things , resource constraints and organizational or legislative changes that would need to be made to implement some of the initiatives . in identifying which bur initiatives to prioritize for implementation in fiscal year 2012 , dhs leadership considered ( 1 ) “importance,” that is , how soon the initiative needed to be implemented ; ( 2 ) “maturity,” that is , how soon the initiative could be implemented ; and ( 3 ) “priority,” that is , whether the initiative enhanced secretarial or presidential priorities . risk information was not included as an element in any of these three criteria , according to dhs officials , because of differences among the initiatives that made it difficult to compare risks across them , among other things . however , dhs officials stated that there are benefits to considering risk information in resource allocation decisions . consideration of risk information during future implementation efforts could help strengthen dhs's prioritization of mechanisms for implementing the qhsr , including assisting in determinations of which initiatives should be implemented in the short or longer term . in our september 2011 report , we recommended that dhs examine how risk information could be used in prioritizing future qhsr initiatives . dhs concurred and reported that dhs intends to conduct risk analysis specific to the qhsr in advance of the next review and will use the analysis as an input into decision making related to implementing the qhsr . further , in september 2011 , we reported on progress made by dhs in implementing its homeland security missions since 9 / 11 . as part of this work , we identified various themes that affected dhs's implementation efforts . one of these themes was dhs's efforts to strategically manage risk across the department . we reported that dhs made important progress in assessing and analyzing risk across sectors . for example , in january 2009 dhs published its integrated risk management framework , which , among other things , calls for dhs to use risk assessments to inform decision making . in may 2010 , the secretary issued a policy statement on integrated risk management , calling for dhs and its partners to manage risks to the nation . we also reported that dhs had more work to do in using this information to inform planning and resource - allocation decisions . our work shows that dhs has conducted risk assessments across a number of areas , but should strengthen the assessments and risk management process .