conversion . existing and emerging technology innovations , such as those discussed earlier in the report , may be able to address some effects of conversion on water resources , but more research into optimizing current technologies is also needed , according to experts . for example , research into new technologies that further reduce water needs for biorefinery cooling systems would have a significant impact on the overall water use at a biorefinery , according to several experts . congress is considering legislation — the energy and water research integration act — that would require doe's research , development , and demonstration programs to seek to advance energy and energy efficiency technologies that minimize freshwater use , increase water use efficiency , and utilize nontraditional water sources with efforts to improve the quality of that water . it would also require the secretary of energy to create a council to promote and enable , in part , improved energy and water resource data collection . similarly , with regard to conversion facilities for the next generation feedstocks , further research is needed to ensure that the next generation of biorefineries is as water efficient as possible . for example , for the conversion of algae into biofuels , research is needed on how to extract oil from algal cells so as to preserve the water contained in the cell , which would allow some of that water to be recycled . storage and distribution . epa officials noted that additional research related to storage and distribution of biofuels is also needed to help reduce the effects of leaks that can result from the storage of biofuel blends in incompatible tank systems . although epa has some research under way , more is needed into the compatibility of fuel blends containing more than 10 percent ethanol with the existing fueling infrastructure . in addition , research should evaluate advanced conversion technologies that can be used to produce a variety of renewable fuels that can be used in the existing infrastructure . similarly , research is needed into biodiesel distribution and storage , such as assessing the compatibility of blends greater than 5 percent with the existing storage and distribution infrastructure . in addition , experts and officials identified the following needs for better data on local and regional water resources: water availability data . because some local aquifers and surface water bodies are already stressed , many experts called for more and better data on water resources . although usgs reports data on water use every 5 years , the agency acknowledges that it does not have good estimates of water use for biofuel production for irrigation or fuel production , so it is unclear how much water has been or will be actually consumed with increases in cultivation and conversion of biofuel feedstocks . furthermore , some experts and officials told us that even when local water data are available , the data sources are often inconsistent or out of date . for example , the data may capture different information or lack the information necessary for making decisions regarding biofuel production .