some steps have been taken to address these challenges . for example , the army issued an execution order on cors in december 2009 , in which the army chief of staff directed the commanders of deploying units to coordinate with the units they will replace in theater to determine the number of cors they will need to designate prior to deployment . the order states that if the commander is unable to determine specific cor requirements , each deploying brigade must identify and train 80 cor candidates . in addition , the army order directs the army's training and doctrine command to develop training scenarios and include cor contract oversight scenarios in mission rehearsal exercises by march 30 , 2010 . the order also directed the training and doctrine command to ensure that contingency contracting responsibilities are included in appropriate professional military education courses . in addition , a deploying marine expeditionary force has created an operational contracting support cell within the logistics element of its command headquarters . the members of the cell will assist subordinate units with contracting oversight and guidance on policy , and they will act as contracting liaisons to the joint contracting command - iraq / afghanistan and as conduits to the regional contracting commands should any issues arise . the marines were prompted to set up this cell by lessons learned from their deployment to operation iraqi freedom , where problems arose as a result of a lack of expertise and personnel to help oversee and manage contractors . in addition , the marine expeditionary force trained approximately 100 marines as cors prior to its deployment to afghanistan this spring . while not all these personnel have been designated as cors for the upcoming deployment , all could be called upon to serve as cors should the need arise . while we recognize the efforts dod has under way to develop long - term plans intended to address its personnel shortages , many of the problems we have identified in the past continue . in previous reports we have recommended that dod develop strategies to address its oversight problems , and noted that unless dod takes steps to address its current shortages , the department will continue to be at risk with regard to its assurance that contractors are providing their required services in an effective and efficient manner . currently , military commanders and other unit leaders are not required to complete operational contract support training prior to deployment . we have previously reported on the potential issues that can arise when commanders are unaware of their responsibility toward contractors and are unclear about the difference between command authority and contract authority . often their service as cors is an additional duty . they cannot direct the contractor by making commitments or changes that affect price , quality , quantity , delivery , or other terms and conditions of the contract . instead , they act as the eyes and ears of the contracting officer and serve as the liaison between the contractor and the contracting officer .