however , there would be some differences in the details . this phased approach has been supported by both academics and industry . faa plans to use this approach to facilitate further incremental steps toward its goal of seamlessly integrating uas flight into the national airspace . accommodation phase: according to the roadmap , in the accommodation phase , faa will apply special mitigations and procedures to safely facilitate limited uas access to the national airspace system in the near - term . accommodation is to predominate in the near - term with appropriate restrictions and constraints to mitigate any performance shortfalls . uas operations in the national airspace system are considered on a case - by - case basis . during the near - term , r&d is to continue to identify challenges , validate advanced mitigation strategies , and explore opportunities to progress uas integration into the national airspace system . integration phase: the primary objective of the integration phase is establishing performance requirements for uas that would increase access to the nas . during the mid - to far - term , faa is to establish new or revised regulations , policies , procedures , guidance material , training , and understanding of systems and operations to support routine nas operations . faa plans for the integration phase to begin in the near - to mid - term with the implementation of the small uas rule and is to expand the phase further over time ( mid - and far - term ) to consider wider integration of a broader field of uass . evolution phase: in the evolution phase , faa is to work to routinely update all required policy , regulations , procedures , guidance material , technologies , and training to support uas operations in the nas operational environment as it evolves over time . according to the roadmap , it is important that the uas community maintains the understanding that the nas environment is not static and that many improvements are planned for the nas over the next 13 — 15 years . to avoid obsolescence , uas developers are to maintain a dual focus: integration into today's nas while maintaining cognizance of how the nas is evolving . in february 2015 , faa issued a notice for proposed rulemaking for the operations of small uass — those weighing less than 55 pounds — that could , once finalized , allow greater access to the national airspace . to mitigate risk , the proposed rule would limit small uass to daylight - only operations , confined areas of operation , and visual - line - of - sight operations . faas release of this proposed rule for small uas operations started the process of addressing additional requirements of the 2012 act . see table 1 for a summary of the rule's major provisions . faa has also met additional requirements outlined in the 2012 act pertaining to the creation of uas test sites . in december 2013 , faa selected six uas test ranges . according to faa , these sites were chosen based on a number of factors including geography , climate , airspace use , and a proposed research portfolio that was part of the application .