for trucks . epa estimated that approximately $87 million would be needed for an additional 480 tank trucks . for barges . epa estimated that approximately $198 million would be needed for an additional 32 barges ( $45 million ) , and the configuration of barge facilities ( a projected $153 million ) . epa stated that it does not anticipate a substantial fraction of biofuels will be transported via barge over the inland waterway system . in addition , the agency projected that a total of 30 ports will receive significant quantities of imported ethanol from brazil and caribbean basin initiative countries by 2022 . for wholesale terminals . epa estimated that $1.15 billion in investments would be needed , primarily to modify vapor recovery equipment ( at a cost of $1 million for each terminal that does not already handle ethanol ) . other modifications would include the installation of new storage tanks , modification of existing tanks , and modification of tank - truck unloading facilities . epa stated that the united states will face significant challenges in accommodating the projected increases in biofuels production by 2022 , but it concluded that the task would be achievable at the wholesale level . for example , the agency stated that it believed overall freight - rail capacity would not be a limiting factor to the successful implementation of rfs requirements . however , while this task may be achievable , it is likely to be increasingly difficult because of congestion on u.s. transportation networks . we and others have reported that congestion is constraining the capacity and increasing the costs of u.s. rail and highway transportation . for example , we reported in 2008 that neither rail nor highway capacity had kept pace with recent increases in demand , leading to increased costs . we also cited a study by the association of american railroads , which predicted that without system improvements , the expected increases in rail volume by 2035 will cause 30 percent of primary rail corridors to operate above capacity and another 15 percent at capacity . the study stated the resulting congestion might affect the entire country and could shut down the national rail network . in addition , we noted that many of the highways used heavily by trucks to move freight are already congested , and congestion is expected to become a regular occurrence on many intercity highways . finally , we noted that ports are likely to experience greater congestion in the future as more and larger ships compete for limited berths . if overall ethanol production increases enough to fully meet the rfs over the long term , one option to transport it to wholesale markets would be through a dedicated ethanol pipeline . over many decades , the united states has established very efficient networks of pipelines that move large volumes of petroleum - based fuels from production or import centers on the gulf coast and in the northeast to distribution terminals along the coasts . however , the existing networks of petroleum pipelines are not well suited for the transport of billions of gallons of ethanol .