ultralight aircraft . as shown in figure 2 , ultralight aircraft are single - seat aircraft that have an empty weight of about 250 pounds or less . smugglers modify ultralight aircraft to carry drug loads by , for example , attaching large metal baskets . how has dhs addressed smuggling by these methods ? to what extent has dhs assessed the results of its efforts to address smuggling by these methods ? this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you in february 2017 . dhs and the department of defense deemed some of the information in the prior report as for official use only — law enforcement sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information on intelligence assessments , law enforcement operations , and capabilities of technologies used to address subterranean , aerial , and maritime smuggling . although the information in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to address these questions , we focused our review on smuggling across u.s. mainland borders , including coastal borders , and we selected the following smuggling methods: cross - border tunnels , ultralight aircraft , panga boats , recreational maritime vessels , and self - propelled semi - submersible and fully submersible vessels . we selected these smuggling methods to include only those that would occur between ports of entry through means other than overland ( given our focus on subterranean , aerial , and maritime smuggling ) ; have been identified in strategy documents or by senior dhs officials and dhs officials with whom we met as a challenge or risk ; and were of a magnitude that dhs had taken steps to address them . we analyzed dhs policies , procedures , and reports . we also conducted site visits to san diego , el centro , and riverside , california ; nogales and yuma , arizona ; and miami and key west , florida . during these visits , we observed dhs approaches to addressing the selected smuggling methods and interviewed cognizant officials from coast guard ; ice hsi ; and cbp's border patrol and amo about their efforts . we selected these locations based upon a combination of factors , including the past detected use of the selected smuggling methods and the presence of coordinated dhs efforts to counter them in these areas . the information gathered from our site visits is not generalizable to other locations but provides insights into dhs's responses to these incursions and efforts to use risk and performance information to stop future smuggling incidents using these methods . additionally , we interviewed headquarters officials from the coast guard ; cbp's border patrol , amo , and office of acquisition , the office responsible for cbp's acquisition of products and services ; ice hsi ; and dhs's science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , the office responsible for leading research and development efforts across the department , to obtain information and perspectives on their efforts to assess and address threats posed by the selected smuggling methods .