solvents are key components in chemical reactions . they are used to dissolve other substances so reactions can occur , to separate and purify chemicals , and to clean the equipment used in chemical processes , among other uses . solvents constitute a large portion of the total volume of chemicals used in industrial chemical processes . however , many conventional solvents are considered hazardous , both to the environment and to human health . it can be challenging for consumers seeking out more sustainably manufactured products to identify them or verify company claims . stakeholders do not agree on a single definition of sustainable chemistry . in total , we asked 71 representatives of stakeholder organizations how they or their organization defines sustainable chemistry . the most common response we received was that sustainable chemistry includes minimizing the use of non - renewable resources . other concepts that stakeholders commonly associated with sustainable chemistry included minimizing the use of toxic or hazardous chemicals , considering trade - offs between various factors during each phase of the life cycle , minimizing energy and water use , and increasing biodegradability or recyclability . based on a review of the literature and stakeholder interviews , we identified several common themes underlying what sustainable chemistry strives to achieve , including: improve the efficiency with which natural resources — including energy , water , and materials — are used to meet human needs for chemical products while avoiding environmental harm ; reduce or eliminate the use or generation of hazardous substances in the design , manufacture , and use of chemical products ; protect and benefit the economy , people , and the environment using consider all life cycle stages including manufacture , use , and disposal ( see fig . 1 ) when evaluating the environmental impact of a product ; and minimize the use of non - renewable resources . stakeholders such as chemical companies , federal agencies , and others use many different approaches for assessing the sustainability of chemical processes and products . while the varying approaches provide flexibility to meet the priorities of the user , the lack of a standardized approach makes it very difficult for customers , decision makers , and others to compare the sustainability of various products to make informed decisions . as they and others noted , there is a need for new processes that make more efficient use of the resources that are available , reuse products or their components during manufacturing , and account for impacts across the entire life cycle of chemical processes and products . furthermore , they highlight the importance of disseminating environmental and health - related information to help guide the choices of consumers , chemists , workers , downstream users , and investors to facilitate further progress . they also indicated that momentum in this field will require national leadership in order to realize the full potential of sustainable chemistry technologies . chairwoman stevens , ranking member baird , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at 202-512-6412 or personst@gao.gov .