macroeconomic reform plan . in 2001 , egypt received a disbursement of $100 million for developing and approving a macroeconomic reform plan . according to usaid , this activity supported major egyptian reforms in the face of the economic crisis after september 11 , 2001 , that included egypt's slowed growth and loss of revenues . among the areas the plan addressed were egypt's exchange rate , monetary and fiscal policy , and legislation for issues such as ipr , labor and mortgage laws , and banking reform . antimoney - laundering law . in 2002 , egypt received a disbursement of $150 million for passing a law against money laundering . according to usaid , as egypt's economy and financial systems have opened they have become more susceptible to use as conduits for laundering proceeds from criminal activities such as drug trafficking and terrorism . usaid first targeted anti - money - laundering reform in a 2001 mou and formally specified the requirements for passage of a law in june 2002 , the same month egypt received a disbursement for completing the activity . according to usaid documentation , egypt received a large disbursement because the law addressed the concern of the organization for economic cooperation and development's financial action task force that egypt was noncooperative in addressing money - laundering problems . according to usaid documents , the plan was added to the program in december 2001 and was approved by the u.s . ambassador to egypt , the egyptian prime minister , and several of egypt's economic ministers before the disbursement in january 2002 . our review of program activities showed that usaid generally paid the egyptian government once for each activity . however , we identified one instance in which usaid made disbursements twice to egypt for the privatization of three companies . in 1998 , usaid disbursed to the egyptian government $20 million dollars for meeting criteria to privatize 25 companies . egypt's privatization of three of these companies — united poultry production , ramsis agriculture , and the egyptian company for meat and dairy production — were listed in subsequent documents as justification for additional disbursements of $2.4 million in 2000 and $1.2 million in 2001 . in commenting on a draft of this report , usaid officials agreed that these disbursements had occurred . although the cash transfer program provided financial and technical assistance to support egypt's completion of reform - related activities , several factors have limited the program's ability to influence egypt to undertake certain reforms . these factors include the following: financial costs versus benefits of reform - related activities . although the reforms are expected to generate financial benefits by correcting inefficiencies in the economy , financial costs are also associated with the reforms . for example , the authors of a usaid - sponsored study estimated the financial benefit to the egyptian government of privatizing the remaining state - owned companies and banks would be over $17 billion . however , the financial benefits are not guaranteed ; privatized companies may not operate more efficiently or produce additional tax revenues .