personnel shortages result from a variety of reasons . some personnel are not available for training because they are recovering from injuries or illnesses , while others are unavailable because of pending disciplinary actions . in addition , many soldiers have not met individual training requirements . according to the army's 2009 posture statement , the army national guard had 67,623 soldiers who were non - deployable in fiscal year 2008 because of incomplete initial entry training , medical , or other issues . for the same period , the army reserve had 36,974 soldiers who were non - deployable for similar reasons . these personnel shortages can directly impact the level of unit training that a unit is able to achieve prior to mobilization . in addition , equipment and support issues are also a concern early in the training cycle when units are training for their primary missions . in his march 2009 statement before the senate armed services , subcommittee on personnel , the director of the army national guard stated that the lack of equipment availability for training remains an issue . further , the 2008 army reserve posture statement noted that the army reserve was forced to expend significant resources to move equipment between units and training locations to address shortages . units in our sample also experienced equipment challenges during the early stages of the training cycle when they were training for their primary missions . specifically , 12 of the 22 units in our sample faced equipment shortages that impacted their ability to train early in the cycle . furthermore , training support is limited during the early years of the cycle . for example , the army's active component does not provide observers , controllers , and trainers to reserve component units to support their primary mission training , which is conducted early in the cycle . while dod's 12-month mobilization policy has not hindered the army's overall ability to train its reserve component forces and has reduced the length of deployments , it has not fully achieved its intended purpose of reducing stress on the force by providing predictability . according to testimony by the secretary of defense , the intended purpose of dod's mobilization policy was to reduce stress on the force by , in part , improving predictability . while the policy has led to shorter deployments , it has also caused units to mobilize and deploy more frequently , and units are also spending more time away from home in training when not mobilized . the 12-month mobilization policy has significantly reduced the length of deployments for the army's reserve component forces . because units must spend part of their mobilization periods training for their assigned missions , they are actually deployed for only part of the time that they are mobilized . under the previous mobilization policy , reserve component mobilizations were limited to 24 cumulative months and many reserve component units were deploying to iraq or afghanistan for 12 to 15 months . under the current policy , which limits mobilizations to 12 months , deployments are averaging 9 to 10 months . personnel in the first band should expect to be deployed about the same length of time as they are home between deployments .