and an inhibitor . role of tieg1 in foxp3+treg development and tumor progression wayne state university sponsored program administration detroit , mi 48202 although tumor vaccines can induce cd4 helper and cd8 cytotoxic response against tumor antigens , they have been largely ineffective in causing tumor regression in the clinic . this is because the tumor cells acquire many mechanisms to evade the immune surveillance program of the host . foxp3+cd4 +cd25+treg - mediated immune suppression has emerged as one of the crucial tumor immune evasion mechanisms and main obstacle of successful tumor immunotherapy . ( for solid tumors ) or p110 ? ( hematological malignancies ) . to this end we have assembled a team of scientists optimized to achieve this goal . our team's unique reagents for assessing pi3k signaling , coupled with and our expertise in protein chemistry , x - ray crystallography , medicinal chemistry and animal models , position us to effectively develop p110 ? inhibitors over a two - year time period for future clinical trials . our specific goals are to generate cell - based systems and genetic models to determine the role of p110 ? in tumorigenesis driven by pten in different tissue types and to test p110 ? - specific inhibitors , to purify large amounts of active p110 ? for enzyme assays and crystallography and to pursue a chemistry campaign to design and evaluate new scaffolds for p110 ? inhibition and optimize 2 of these scaffolds using both cell and animal models and structural information from a complex of p110 ? most malignant cells including prostate cancer cells secret large amounts of tgf - ¿ and has been shown to convert the effector t cells into tumor antigen specific tregs by inducing foxp3 expression . such tumor induced tregs not only suppress the priming and effector function of anti - tumor effector cells but also form a broad network of self - amplifying immunosuppressive network . therefore , overcoming tumor induced expansion and de novo generation of tregs is critically important for the design of effective immunotherapeutic strategies for successful cancer treatment . we have demonstrated a critical role of tgf - ¿ inducible early gene - 1 ( tieg1 ) in the transcriptional regulation of foxp3 in cd4t cells treated with tgf - ¿ . e3 ligase itch - mediated monoubiquitination is essential for nuclear translocation , and transcriptional activation of tieg1 . however , in transient overexpression systems itch targets tieg1 for both mono and polyubiquitination . our preliminary studies suggest that il - 6 which inhibits tgf - ¿ induced foxp3 expression induces proteasomal degradation of tieg1 possibly through polyubiquitination . tyk2-mediated phosphorylation of tieg1 seems to act as a recognition signal for polyubiquitination of tieg1 . therefore , we hypothesize that itch targets tieg1 differentially for mono and polyubiquitination when the cd4t cells are stimulated with tgf - ¿ or il - 6 and regulates its activation and degradation . despite the growing body of data on the role of foxp3 in treg development and function , how foxp3 transcription is regulated is not clear . we have identified consensus nfat and tieg1 binding sites adjacent to each other on foxp3 promoter .