this is also a new program . our work will likely focus on assessing how dot is developing a program that will increase the chances of viable high - speed rail projects , consistent with recommendations we recently made on the development of high - speed rail . we expect to start this work later this year . federal buildings: the act provides about $5.6 billion for the general services administration ( gsa ) to spend on projects related to its federal buildings , primarily to convert existing buildings to high - performance green buildings . as a part of our ongoing work to report on agencies' implementation of the energy independence and security act of 2007 , which among other things calls for agencies to increase the energy efficiency and the availability of renewable energy in federal buildings , we plan to assess the impact of recovery act funding on gsa's ability to meet the 2007 energy act's high - performance federal building requirements . in addition , in coordination with gsa's office of inspector general , this summer , we plan to review gsa's conversion of existing federal buildings to high - performance green buildings . we will work with this committee as we begin work in these areas and in other areas in which the committee might be interested . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee might have . for further information regarding this statement , please contact katherine siggerud at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement are daniel cain , steven cohen , heather krause , heather macleod , and james ratzenberger . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . a few states had already executed contracts . as of april 1 , the mississippi department of transportation , for example , had signed contracts for 10 projects totaling approximately $77 million . these projects include the expansion of state route 19 in eastern mississippi into a four - lane highway . this project fulfills part of the state's 1987 four - lane highway program which seeks to link every mississippian to a four - lane highway within 30 miles or 30 minutes . over half of these funds are for highway infrastructure investments . ( see table 1 ) . of the $27.5 billion provided for highway and related infrastructure investments , $26.7 billion is provided to the states for restoration , repair , construction , and other activities allowed under fhwa's surface transportation program and for other eligible surface transportation projects , which apportions money to states for construction and preventive maintenance of eligible highways and for other surface transportation projects .