we were unable to determine the amount of tax debt that had been removed . although over $1 billion in unpaid federal taxes owed by medicare part b physicians , health professionals , and suppliers as of september 30 , 2005 , is a significant amount , it understates the full extent of unpaid taxes owed by these or other businesses and individuals . the federal acquisition regulation cites conviction of tax evasion as one of the causes for debarment ; indictment on tax evasion charges is cited as a cause for suspension . consequently , the deliberate failure to remit taxes , in particular payroll taxes , while a felony offense , will likely not result in an individual or business being debarred or suspended unless there is an indictment or conviction of the crime . moreover , while a felony offense , the deliberate failure to remit taxes , in particular payroll taxes , will likely not result in an individual or entity being placed on the medicare exclusion or gsa debarment lists unless the taxpayer is convicted . even if an individual or entity is convicted of tax evasion or other tax - related crime , the individual or business still may not be placed on the medicare exclusion or gsa debarment lists . to be placed on these lists , federal agencies must identify those individuals and businesses and provide them with due process . as part of the due process , the agency must make a determination as to whether the exclusion or debarment is in the government's interest . none of the 40 cases that we investigated , including those involving a conviction for tax - related crimes , are currently on the medicare exclusion or gsa debarment lists . further complicating hhs decision making on the consideration of tax debts for medicare , federal law does not permit irs to disclose taxpayer information , including tax debts , to hhs or medicare contractor officials unless the taxpayer consents . hhs has not established a policy to obtain medicare applicants' consent to obtain tax information from irs to consider in its medicare eligibility decision making process . thus , certain tax debt information can only be discovered from public records if irs files a federal tax lien against the property of a tax debtor or a record of conviction for tax offense is publicly available . consequently , hhs officials and their contractors do not have ready access to information on unpaid tax debts to consider in making decisions on physicians , health professionals and suppliers . further , hhs has not established policy to participate in the irs continuous levy program , thus preventing irs from capturing at least a portion of the medicare payments made to physicians , health professionals , and suppliers that owe tax debts . as stated earlier , federal law allows irs to continuously levy federal vendor payments up to 100 percent until the tax debt is paid . irs has implemented this authority by creating a continuous levy program that utilizes fms's treasury offset program system .