gao - 09-941 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2009 . elderly voters: some improvements in voting accessibility from 2000 to 2004 elections , but gaps in policy and implementation remain . gao - 08-442t . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2008 . such facilities may also be used as polling places . gao - 07-741t . washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2007 . hhs and justice provided no formal comments . hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . eac's comments are reproduced in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the eac , hhs , justice , relevant congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be made available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact barbara d. bovbjerg at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bovbjergb@gao.gov , or william o. jenkins at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . our objectives were to identify the actions taken to facilitate and protect voting for long - term care facility residents at ( 1 ) the state level and ( 2 ) the local level . for both of our objectives , we interviewed officials of the department of justice ( justice ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , national organizations that represent election officials , and multidisciplinary researchers . we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , guidance , and other documentation . we did not analyze state requirements or guidance , but instead relied on states' responses to our survey . in addition , we interviewed officials at the election assistance commission ( eac ) and reviewed eac guidance on facilitating voting in long - term care facilities . we interviewed multidisciplinary researchers in the area of long - term care voting and reviewed relevant literature to identify practices at the state and local level that may facilitate voting in long - term care facilities while ensuring voting integrity . to obtain information on state actions , we administered a web - based survey of election officials in all 50 states , the district of columbia , the commonwealth of puerto rico , and three u.s. territories ( american samoa , guam , and the u.s. virgin islands ) . to obtain information on local actions , we administered a survey of local election officials in 104 local election jurisdictions and conducted site visits to seven localities . we conducted our work from april 2008 through november 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that were relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .