faa met this goal in 2004 . the eight u.s. airlines participating in the code - share safety program have conducted the safety audits of their foreign code - share partners and have monitored the safety of their code - share partners between audits , as specified under the guidelines . through those audits , the u.s. airlines have identified numerous safety issues associated with their foreign partners' operations . how well has faa managed the code - share safety program ? to what extent have u.s. airlines implemented the code - share safety program , and what have been the results of their efforts ? to determine how safety and security are considered in dot's authorization of u.s. airlines' code - share arrangements with foreign airlines , we reviewed the process that dot follows in authorizing code - share arrangements , code - share safety program guidelines , applicable aviation safety standards , and related legal authorities . our review covered safety audit reports on foreign carriers that faa reviewed and u.s. airlines' code - share partnerships with foreign carriers that dot has authorized since february 2000 , when the code - share safety program was established , through the end of fiscal year 2004 . we also examined how faa's assessments of foreign civil aviation authorities are used in the code - share approval process . during our review of the code - share safety program , we found that dod had a similar program designed to ensure the safety of foreign airlines that transport dod personnel . because our objective was to determine how the federal government is providing safety oversight of foreign airlines , we included dod in our review . however , because dod does not play a direct role in the authorization of foreign code - share arrangements , this report focuses on the dot code - share safety program . moreover , because security is a component of assessing airline safety , we determined what the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the department of homeland security agency responsible for aviation security , has done to provide security information to faa and dod for their safety reviews of foreign airlines . because the code - share safety program establishes an audit program , to assess how well faa has managed the program , we reviewed whether the program's design conformed with selected standards identified in government auditing standards . the office of international aviation also obtains advice from the department of justice on potential antitrust issues . according to dot officials , on 270 occasions , from february 2000 through the end of fiscal year 2004 , dot authorized or reauthorized u.s. airlines to establish or maintain code - share arrangements with foreign carriers and did not suspend any arrangements during that time . in addition , because we were evaluating the management of a government program , we examined how faa applied certain management controls in its reviews of the safety audit reports for the code - share safety program using standards for internal control in the federal government . we discussed with faa officials how they conducted the assessments of foreign civil aviation authorities and with tsa officials how they assessed the security of certain foreign carriers and airports .