we disagree . specifically , referral of debts to doj for litigation and top for offset , monitoring of the compromise of debts by fms and its pca contractors , and identification and reporting of uncollectible debt amounts to irs are all critical operational issues . moreover , as discussed in the report , we found several problems related to fms's identification and monitoring of debts held in top for passive collection , which represented over half the debts in fms's $6.6 billion cross - servicing portfolio as of february 28 , 2003 . these issues , when considered in conjunction with issues we have cited in previous reports , such as limited implementation of administrative wage garnishment ( awg ) and lack of independent verification of the accuracy , completeness , and validity of debts reported by agencies as eligible for or excluded from dcia cross - servicing provisions , raise serious concerns about fms's progress in addressing the challenges it faces in implementing the cross - servicing program . we also disagree with fms's assertion that we expanded the scope of our review beyond what we conveyed to treasury at the beginning of the assignment . in our august 2002 letter to the secretary of the treasury and our subsequent entrance conference with fms officials in october 2002 , we stated that our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) actions taken by fms on uncollected nontax debts returned from its pca contractors ; ( 2 ) fms's efforts to ensure that eligible uncollectible nontax debts , which federal agencies rely on fms to report on their behalf to irs as income to the debtors , are promptly identified and accurately reported ; and ( 3 ) actions taken , if any , by fms to ensure that federal agencies are reporting their eligible uncollectible nontax debts to irs as income to the debtors . as stated in our report , our review addressed these objectives . in addition , in performing our work to address these objectives , we identified opportunities for fms to improve collection of nontax debts through cross - servicing and enhance the soundness of certain operational and reporting facets of its cross - servicing program . in meeting our audit responsibilities , we must inform management of any significant issues identified during our work . fms suggests that our report unfairly characterizes fms's efforts to collect debts through offset as “minimal” and that it criticizes fms for collection activities that agencies have not delegated to it . fms stated that top is its most effective collection tool , many agencies rely on top for the bulk of their collections , and significant collection opportunities could be lost if debts were removed from top prematurely . fms stated that since the cost to collect through top is low , it is generally in the best interest of the government to attempt offset for as long as statutorily authorized before terminating collections and discharging the debt . fms said that it is at creditor agencies' discretion to leave debts returned from pca contractors in top for passive collection . we agree that for certain debts , top can be an effective mechanism for collection , especially when used in conjunction with other debt collection activities .