or the census . the results of the matching process , along with data on the racial / ethnic and other characteristics of persons compared , were to provide the basis for a.c.e . to estimate the extent of coverage error in the census and population subgroups and enable the bureau to adjust the final decennial census tabulations accordingly . the matching process needed to be as precise and complete as possible , since a.c.e . collected data on only a sample of the nation's population , and small percentages of matching errors could significantly affect the estimates of under - and overcounts generalized to the entire nation . since the 2000 census , we have issued four other reports on a.c.e. , addressing its cost and implementation as part of our ongoing series on the results of the 2000 census , as well as a report on the lessons learned for planning a more cost - effective census in 2010 . ( see the related gao products section at the end of this report for the assessments issued to date. ) these reports concluded , among other things , that while ( 1 ) the address list the bureau used for the a.c.e . thus the bureau's plans to measure the coverage error for the 2010 census are not based on a full understanding of the relationship between the separate decisions it makes about how to conduct a.c.e . and the census and the resulting performance of its coverage measurement program . this in turn could hamper the bureau's efforts to craft a more successful coverage measurement program for the next national head count . while the bureau produced a vast body of research regarding the census and a.c.e. , including multiple reassessments and revisions of earlier work , the revised estimates are not reliable . the initial a.c.e . estimates of coverage error suggested that while historical patterns of differences in undercounts between demographic groups persisted , the bureau had succeeded in 2000 in reducing the population undercounts of most minorities , and the subsequent revised estimates showed even greater success in reducing population undercounts in the census . however , the large number of limitations described in the bureau's documentation of the methodology used to generate the revised estimates of coverage error suggest that these estimates are less reliable than reported and may not describe the true rate of coverage error . the bureau , however , has not made the full impact of these methodological limitations on the data clear . moreover , the final revised estimates of coverage error for the count of housing units and the count of people , which the bureau expected to be similar if the estimates were reliable , differed , further raising questions about the reliability of the revised estimates . the bureau undertook an extensive review of a.c.e. 's results over a 3-year period . in doing so , the bureau revised its estimates of a.c.e . coverage error twice — first in october 2001 and again in march 2003 . these revisions suggest that the original a.c.e . estimates were unreliable . figure 4 illustrates how each of the revised a.c.e .