succession planning . ssa's most recent succession plan was issued in 2006 , even though the agency has experienced significant changes since that time , including a hiring freeze and greater movement toward online services . the most recent succession plan established a target of evaluating and updating the plan by the end of 2007 . internal control standards state that management should ensure that skill needs are continually assessed and that the organization is able to obtain a workforce with those required skills to achieve organizational goals . our prior work also indicates that leading organizations use succession planning to help prepare for an anticipated loss of leadership . ssa's 2006 succession plan states that without sound succession planning , ssa's loss of leadership would result in a drain on institutional knowledge and expertise at a time when workloads are growing . this loss of knowledge and expertise could result in increasing workloads , backlogs , and improper payments . several ssa officials told us individuals with less experience and training are beginning to assume supervisory roles and some have made poor decisions related to such things as providing reasonable accommodations to employees with disabilities . some officials also told us that inexperienced managers are also less proficient at supervising others , which leads to inefficiencies in managing increasing workloads . forecasting workforce needs . findings from oig reports raise additional concerns about ssa's ability to accurately forecast workload demands and workforce needs . many of its programs are written in cobol , which is one of the oldest computer programming languages and is difficult to modify and update . according to an official , ssa's efforts were motivated by several factors , including an omb directiveagency's ultimate goal of terminating all commercial leasing in the headquarters area ; and , to a lesser degree , reducing current vacancies in headquarters . to make more efficient use of federal office space ; the in addition to these headquarters - focused efforts , ssa is reducing office space in the field as opportunities arise , but our preliminary work shows that it lacks a proactive plan to assess field facilities for potential space reductions . we previously reported that agencies should consider the potential costs and benefits of any widespread efforts to consolidate physical infrastructure before embarking on such an action . to support its rationale for consolidation and assess the potential impact and challenges of consolidation , we suggested that agencies consider issues such as how to fund up - front costs associated with consolidation and the effect on various stakeholders . ssa has ongoing planning efforts , but we have identified two major areas in which these efforts may fall short in addressing the long - term nature of the agency's management challenges: ( 1 ) its planning efforts are short - term and do not adequately address emerging issues , and ( 2 ) it lacks continuity in its strategic planning leadership . need for longer - term efforts to address emerging issues . ssa's planning efforts , from an overall strategic plan to its service delivery plan , typically look no more than 5 years out .