gao - 16-44 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2016 . dod excess property: control breakdowns present significant security risk and continuing waste and inefficiency . gao - 06-943 . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2006 . we also confirmed the definition with leso program officials . for objective one , we reviewed dla and leso program policy and guidance on leso program processes for transferring controlled property , including dla instructions , leso program standard operating procedures , and memorandums of agreement between leso and participating states , which set forth the terms and conditions of transfer , monitoring , training , accountability , and disposal of controlled property obtained through the leso program . in addition , we reviewed executive order 13688 , federal support for local law enforcement equipment acquisition ( jan. 16 , 2015 ) and interviewed members from the permanent federal interagency law enforcement equipment working group regarding additional federal requirements for participating law enforcement agencies to obtain specific types of controlled property . we compared the additional federal requirements in the executive order to dla policy , guidance , and processes to gain an understanding of how dla has incorporated and implemented such requirements . we also reviewed dod policy , including dla instruction 4140.11 , department of defense 1033 program ( december 22 , 2016 ) , and prior issuances , to gain an understanding of policy , responsibility , and procedures regarding the administration , management , oversight and implementation of the department's leso program . we reviewed the leso program standard operating procedures , which outline legislative , policy , and procedural guidance ; program eligibility criteria ; requisitioning procedures ; property accountability ; property transfers and the return process ; program compliance reviews ; annual inventories ; and training ; as well as guidance specific to aircraft , watercraft , tactical vehicles , and weapons . further , we reviewed the memorandums of agreement , between leso and participating leso state coordinators , which outlines the general terms and conditions that each participating state agree to regarding the management , oversight , and implementation of the leso program to participating law enforcement agencies within the state . we analyzed dla electronic freedom of information act library data from calendar years 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 to gain an understanding of the controlled property that was transferred to federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies . additionally , we requested and analyzed data from dla's automated information system on controlled property transferred to federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies . to assess the data , we interviewed relevant dla and other agency officials who have direct knowledge of the leso program about the steps taken to ensure the quality and accuracy of data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our methodology as well as for background and context purposes . we tested the department's internal controls and control activities related to leso program enrollment and application after identifying a case of an unauthorized or ineligible agency gaining access to the leso program and being awarded controlled property early in our review .