does not charge a fee . provides dhs users with ability to order commercially available information technology commodities , solutions , and value - added reseller services through multiple award indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity contracts with vendors in certain small business socioeconomic categories . does not charge a fee . provides dhs users ability to purchase tactical communications commodity products , infrastructure , and services via a multivendor indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity contract vehicle . does not charge a fee . see table 1 . see appendix ii for a description for each of the existing contracts used and the associated fees . almost 60 percent of the contract actions resulting from reverse auctions conducted in fiscal year 2012 across the selected agencies were awarded at the end of the fiscal year , as shown in figure 7 . agency officials told us that the surge of fourth quarter reverse auctions parallels what happens with acquisitions in general at that time of the year and can be due to late release of funds . according to agency officials , reverse auctions , which can take as little as an hour for uncomplicated purchases , can facilitate the timely award of contracts at the end of the year . in prior work , we reported that a contracting officer turned to procedures that facilitated the rapid award of contracts in the fourth quarter . four of the five agencies included in our review used the same service provider , fedbid , to conduct their reverse auctions . agencies pay a variable fee to conduct reverse auctions through fedbid , which is no more than 3 percent of the winning bid . fedbid has a limited role in the acquisition process , since contracting officers are still responsible for making key decisions that affect the auction , such as selecting the winning vendor . for example , contracting officers select the basis for award , which may include award to other than the lowest priced bidder and we found that about a fourth of the 2012 contract actions resulting from reverse auctions were not awarded to the lowest bidder . the army , dhs , doi , and va contracted with a company called fedbid to conduct their reverse auctions during fiscal year 2012 . the agencies used an existing gsa schedule contract to procure fedbid's services , which include an online user interface , data management , and regular reports on reverse auction activity . according to fedbid , its product is a commercially available online procurement service that allows sellers of commercial items to the government to compete against each other in real time and in an interactive environment . fedbid also states that it safeguards each seller's identity and pricing . other companies also conduct reverse auctions , and some officials noted their agencies had undertaken a cost / benefit analysis to determine which company to contract with for this service . agency acquisition officials told us that using a contractor for their reverse auctions reduced some of their administrative duties and allowed senior contracting officers to spend more time on complex acquisitions .