ii ) . moreover , about 40 percent of the students at the air force and naval academies and 27 percent at the military academy evaluated the 4-year class system for developing military officers as very or generally ineffective ( see question 9 , app . ii ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 34 . in the past 4 years , have you participated in the admissions process ? ( percent ) ( percent ) . in addition to the individual named above , gabrielle m. anderson , nancy l. benco , carolyn m. boyce , brian g. hackett , and joseph w. kirschbaum also made key contributions to this report . military education: dod needs to enhance performance goals and measures to improve oversight of the military academies . gao - 03-1000 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2003 . military education: dod needs to align academy preparatory schools' mission statements with overall guidance and establish performance goals . gao - 03-1017 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2003 . dod service academies: problems limit feasibility of graduates directly entering the reserves . gao / nsiad - 97-89 . washington , d.c.: march 24 , 1997 . dod service academies: comparison of honor and conduct adjudicatory processes . gao / nsiad - 95-49 . washington , d.c.: april 25 , 1995 . dod service academies: academic review processes . gao / nsiad - 95-57 . washington , d.c.: april 5 , 1995 . were you prior enlisted before enrolling in the academy ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 44 . did you attend the academy's preparatory school before enrolling in the academy ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 45 . is either of your parents a graduate of a military academy ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 8.6 46 . is either of your parents currently serving in the active services or guard / reserves ? ( percent ) ( percent ) . considering all the students' responsibilities , how would you characterize their academic workload at the academy ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 2 . how much emphasis does the academy place on academics , relative to what you think it should be ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 3 . how would you characterize the level of academic competition among academy students ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 4 . how effective or ineffective is additional instruction available outside the normal class meeting time for students who need it ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 33.1 ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 5 . how would you rate the academic preparedness of students who attended the academy preparatory school relative to their classmates at the academy ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 6 . overall , how effective or ineffective are academy instructors as teachers ? ( percent ) ( percent ) ( percent ) 7. who among the following have ever tried to improperly influence you to modify the grades in any of your academy courses ?