however , these studies have not consistently been completed . although fda's initiatives are positive steps , they are not yet fully implemented and it is too soon to evaluate their effectiveness . because no drug is absolutely safe , fda approves a drug for marketing when the agency judges that its known benefits outweigh its known risks . after a drug is on the market , fda continues to assess its risks and benefits . fda reviews reports of adverse drug reactions ( adverse events ) related to the drug and information from clinical studies about the drug that are conducted by the drug's sponsor . fda also reviews adverse events from studies that follow the use of drugs in ongoing medical care ( observational studies ) that are carried out by the drug's sponsor , fda , or other researchers . if fda has information that a drug on the market may pose a significant health risk to consumers , it weighs the effect of the adverse events against the benefit of the drug to determine what actions , if any , are warranted . the decision - making process for postmarket drug safety is complex , involving input from a variety of fda staff and organizational units and information sources , but the central focus of the process is the iterative interaction between ond and ods . after a drug is on the market , ond staff receive information about safety issues in several ways . first , ond staff receive notification of adverse event reports for drugs to which they are assigned and they review the periodic adverse event reports that are submitted by drug sponsors . second , ond staff review safety information that is submitted to fda when a sponsor seeks approval for a new use or formulation of a drug , and monitor completion of postmarket studies . when consulting with ond on a safety issue , ods staff search for all relevant case reports of adverse events and assess them to determine whether or not the drug caused the adverse event and whether there are any common trends or risk factors . ods management had not effectively overseen postmarket drug safety issues , and as a result , it was unclear how fda could know that important safety concerns had been addressed and resolved in a timely manner . a former ods director told us that the small size of ods's management team presented a challenge for effective oversight of postmarket drug safety issues . because none of these initiatives was fully implemented as of march 2007 , it was too early to evaluate their effectiveness . to make the postmarket safety decision - making process clearer and more effective , we recommended that fda revise and implement its draft policy on major postmarket drug safety decisions . cder has made revisions to the draft policy , but has not yet finalized and implemented it . cder's associate director for safety policy and communication told us that the draft policy provides guidance for making major postmarket safety decisions , including identifying the decision - making officials for safety actions and ensuring that the views of involved fda staff are documented .