they concurred with our recommendations . we also received technical comments on this draft from state , the treasury , usaid , and ustr , which we have incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , state , the treasury , homeland security , commerce , interior , usaid , and ustr . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you and your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4347 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix xi . as mandated by the clean diamond trade act ( cdta ) , this report focused on ( 1 ) describing the institutional framework the u.s. government has created to implement cdta , ( 2 ) examining how the united states has implemented the provisions of cdta domestically and what principal challenges it faces , and ( 3 ) examining how the united states has helped to strengthen the kimberley process certification scheme ( kpcs ) and what principal challenges it faces . to address all of these objectives , we interviewed key officials from multiple u.s. agencies and the u.s. kimberley process authority ( uskpa ) . the agencies we interviewed included: the department of state ( bureau of economic affairs and united states mission to the united nations ) , the department of the treasury ( office of foreign assets control ) , the department of homeland security ( bureau of customs and border protection and bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ) , the department of commerce ( bureau of the census ) , the department of interior ( u.s. geological survey ) , the u.s. agency for international development , and the office of the u.s. trade representative . to address our first objective of describing the institutional framework the u.s. government has used to implement cdta and our second objective of examining how the united states has implemented the provisions of cdta domestically and what principal challenges it faces , we reviewed documents from the u.s. government and uskpa , including relevant laws , regulations , reports , and briefing documents . also , we interviewed representatives and collected documentation from diamond industry organizations and non - governmental groups that have been involved in the implementation of cdta . in addition , we interviewed representatives from private organizations that have been involved in trading rough diamonds to and from the united states . we analyzed census' rough diamond import and export flows in conjunction with data collection improvements to determine the factors contributing to excess exports . these data have limitations , as discussed in the report . we assessed the quality of data the census , the un , and the kpcs used to describe international trade in diamonds , and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .