how am i vulnerable ? step three involves identifying and characterizing vulnerabilities that would allow identified threats to be realized . in other words , what weaknesses can allow a security breach ? for a facility , weaknesses could include vulnerabilities in the physical layout of the building , its security systems , and processes . for example , the lack of a standoff distance between vehicle access and the building itself , which would allow an adversary to detonate a car or truck bomb within a dangerous distance of the building , is an example of a vulnerability in the perimeter security of a building . or , it might be that an antiquated and labor - intensive access control system in combination with an inadequate security staff create weaknesses in security systems and processes that allow entrance to a building . what are my priorities ? in the fourth step , risk must be assessed and priorities determined for protecting assets . risk assessment examines the potential for the loss of or damage to an asset . risk levels are established by assessing the impact of the loss or damage , threats to the asset , and vulnerabilities . for example , the risk of loss of human life due to poor access controls on weekends , when fewer people are working in the building , is lower than on weekdays during standard working hours . the final step is to identify countermeasures to reduce or eliminate risks . in doing so , the advantages and benefits of these countermeasures must also be weighed against their disadvantages and costs . many security technologies were developed in a research environment . however , in a real - world environment , some degree of security must be traded off against operational and safety considerations . extreme security countermeasures cannot be implemented if they could disrupt operations or adversely affect the safety of the occupants of a building . for example , an access control system that uses draconian methods to screen employees at public entrances would be inappropriate except in buildings at the highest risk level because it would cause maximum inconvenience to large numbers of building occupants at peak traffic hours . moreover , an access control system cannot be so rigid that it impedes the safe exit of a building's occupants during emergencies , such as a fire . in all cases , an acceptable balance between security and these competing factors must be reached , which can only be decided by the building's occupants . countermeasures identified through the risk management process support the three integral concepts of a holistic security program: protection , detection , and reaction . protection provides countermeasures such as policies , procedures , and technical controls to defend against attacks on the assets being protected . detection monitors for potential breakdowns in protective mechanisms that could result in security breaches . reaction , which requires human involvement , responds to detected breaches to thwart attacks before damage can be done . because absolute protection is impossible to achieve , a security program that does not also incorporate detection and reaction is incomplete . to be effective , all three concepts must be elements of a cycle that work together continuously .