transfers of expired funds . during the 3-year period following the expiration of appropriations to dod for research , development , test and evaluation ; procurement ; or operation and maintenance , dod may transfer such funds to dawdf to the extent provided in appropriations acts . to date , congress has granted authority for dod to transfer operation and maintenance funds included in the appropriations acts for fiscal years 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 to dawdf . funds transferred to dawdf are available for obligation in the fiscal year for which they are transferred and in the 2 succeeding fiscal years . under current law , dod is required to credit the fund $500 million for a fiscal year , as previously mentioned . however , the law directs that the amount required to be remitted by dod components be reduced by any amounts appropriated for or transferred to dawdf for that fiscal year . collectively , from fiscal years 2008 through 2016 , about $4.5 billion has been deposited into dawdf using various combinations of these processes ( see table 1 ) . from fiscal years 2008 through 2016 , dod obligated about $2.2 billion — or about 60 percent — for recruiting and hiring and about $1.2 billion — 32 percent — for training and development . the remaining $269 million , or 7 percent , was used for retention and recognition . to help support rebuilding the workforce , dod obligated the most funds for recruiting and hiring through fiscal year 2015 ; however , in fiscal year 2016 , dod obligated slightly more for training and development than for recruiting and hiring ( see fig . several organizations within dod play key roles in the management and oversight of dawdf ( see table 2 ) . dod's acquisition workforce management framework includes centralized policy , decentralized execution by the dod components , and joint governance forums . dod established the senior steering board and the workforce management group in 2008 to oversee dawdf activities . the senior acquisition executives for the military departments , dod functional acquisition career field leaders , and heads of major dod agencies were designated as members of the senior steering board , along with representatives from the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) and chief financial officer and the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . this board is expected to meet quarterly and provide strategic oversight of dawdf . the workforce management group includes representatives from the offices on the senior steering board , among others . it is expected to meet bimonthly and oversee dawdf operations and management ( see table 3 ) . in june 2012 , we reported on dod's initial implementation of dawdf ; we found that the ability of dod components to effectively plan for and execute efforts supported by dawdf was hindered by delays in dod's dawdf funding processes and the absence of clear guidance on the availability and use of funds . we also found that hci and comptroller officials had differing views on how best to manage the dawdf funding process . comptroller officials acknowledged that they delayed sending out credit remittance notices and allowed components to delay crediting dawdf funds .