ilcs . the federal reserve and treasury view these institutions as full - service commercial banks and therefore view the risks they pose as similar to those of commercial banks , including credit risk . the fdic concurs in this view and noted that many exempt institutions primarily accept brokered deposits , considered to be riskier than demand deposits because of concerns about liquidity risks.can provide a wide range of banking services and are able to make loans ( including credit card loans ) and investments , like commercial banks . limited - purpose credit card banks . these exempt institutions are generally restricted to credit card lending activities and are not permitted to conduct many banking activities , such as mortgage or commercial lending . they are not permitted to accept demand deposits . the most dominant risks for these banks are compliance , liquidity , reputational , and to some extent credit risk . municipal deposit banks and trust banks . insured institutions are subject to both qualitative and quantitative limits on transactions with affiliates . given the small market share of each type of exempt institution , any actions they might take if the exemptions were removed — including exiting the market altogether in the case of some grandfathered s&ls , ilcs , and limited - purpose credit card banks — would likely have little impact on the overall credit market , at least at the national level . however , exempt institutions could have larger market shares in some regions and smaller market shares in others . to the extent that the credit market is segmented by region , the effects of removing the exemptions would likely be larger in regions where exempt institutions are a larger share of the market and smaller in regions where exempt institutions are a smaller share of the market . while removing the exemptions would likely have a limited impact on the overall credit market , doing so could have a larger impact on segments of the market in which exempt institutions have larger market shares . these shares remain relatively small , however . for example , in 2010 , ilcs accounted for about 1 percent of multifamily , commercial , and farm real estate loans and about 2 percent of non - credit - card consumer loans on the balance sheets of all fdic - insured institutions , but they accounted for less than 1 percent of each of the five other types of loans we analyzed ( construction and land development loans ; residential mortgage loans ; commercial , industrial , and agricultural production loans ; credit card loans ; and leases ) . limited - purpose credit card banks , on the other hand , accounted for about 1 percent of credit card loans , but they accounted for less than 1 percent of construction and land development loans and almost none of any other type of loan . grandfathered s&ls accounted for no leases ; less than 1 percent of commercial , industrial , and agricultural production loans ; and for 2 to 5 percent of each other type of loan .