the nonfiler program . because irs's nonfiler program involved cases managed by several irs divisions , we worked with irs managers to consolidate data from a number of different sources to compile the trend data . in doing this , we obtained data from irs's audit management information system , collection reports prepared through irs's integrated data retrieval system , and supplemental data prepared by irs's nonfiler program office in response to internal irs requirements . the amount of additional tax assessments made by the returns processing program . to develop data on compliance assessments made by returns processing , we obtained a data extract from irs's enforcement revenue information system ( eris ) . that system was designed by irs to accumulate collection data for assessments that result from irs's compliance work . from the eris data extract , we first derived data to indicate the amount of additional tax assessments made by returns processing compliance work , such as identifying returns with a balance due or making assessments to correct errors or omissions identified on the tax returns . to do this , given the manner in which irs accounts for the assessments , we identified the total assessments made by returns processing , other than returns that were filed with full payment or with no errors requiring an irs notice ; identified the amount of payment made on the accounts prior to irs's notifying the taxpayer of the amount due ; and subtracted the prenotification payments from the total assessments . we subtracted the prenotification payments from the total assessments in order to eliminate taxes that were voluntarily reported and paid by taxpayers . the amount of unpaid tax assessments resolved by the five compliance programs . from the eris data , we also derived data to compute the percentage of unpaid tax assessments that were collected by the five compliance programs . we included as collections any payments made by the taxpayers in response to written notices sent to the taxpayers . data were not available to extend the analysis period for collections for fiscal years beyond 2001 . therefore , to ensure comparable collection data on the proportion of fiscal year 1996 and 2001 assessments collected by the assessing compliance program , we limited the collection period to the fiscal year of the assessment . we also interviewed officials from irs's operational divisions responsible for wage earners , small businesses , and large and midsized businesses to obtain an understanding of compliance and collection programs and to discuss reasons for compliance and collection trends . we provided our performance trends and supporting computations to irs staff , who reviewed and commented on our analyses . to determine how these changes have affected taxpayers , we examined two samples of irs data . the first sample from irs's automated masterfile records of unpaid tax accounts provided the data to examine overall changes in the number of accounts with unpaid balances ; changes in the characteristics of delinquent taxpayers , such as the amounts of interest and penalties owed ; and the age of the accounts . in order to examine contacts between taxpayers and the irs and events affecting the timeliness of resolution , we examined a sample of taxpayer collection case files .