these weaknesses require immediate attention . ensuring that weaknesses affecting cbp's computing resources are promptly mitigated and that controls are effective to protect us - visit information require senior management support and leadership , disciplined processes , effective coordination between cbp and other government organizations , and consistent oversight . until dhs and cbp act to mitigate the weaknesses in cbp systems supporting the us - visit program and cbp effectively and fully implements its information security program , limited assurance exists that sensitive information will be sufficiently safeguarded against unauthorized disclosure , modification , and destruction , and that the us - visit program will achieve its goals . to help the department effectively and fully implement information security program activities for cbp systems supporting the us - visit program , we are recommending that the secretary of homeland security direct the commissioner , u.s. customs and border protection to 1. fully characterize risks in risk assessments for systems supporting us - 2. update the interconnection security agreements in the tecs security 3. enhance the procedures and documentation for testing and evaluating the effectiveness of security controls ; 4. ensure remedial action plans address all significant security vulnerabilities , accurately report status of remedial actions , and identify necessary resources for completing actions ; 5. fully develop and implement policies and tools for the timely detection and handling of security incidents ; and 6. update and complete privacy documents for systems supporting the us - visit program . in a separate report designated limited official use only , we are making 54 detailed recommendations to the secretary of homeland security to strengthen information security controls over cbp systems supporting the us - visit program . we received written comments on a draft of our report from dhs' director of the departmental gao / oig liaison office ( these are reprinted in app . the director stated that cbp concurs with our six recommendations and that it has already taken a number of steps toward mitigating many of our findings . the director also stated that the department has directed cbp to complete remediation activities to address each of the recommendations . as we agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies of this report to the secretary of the department of homeland security ; the commissioner of customs and border protection ; the director of the united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology program ; the dhs inspector general ; and other interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or keith a. rhodes at ( 202 ) 512-6412 . we can also be reached by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov or rhodesk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .