fleet management . federal agencies determine when to replace or dispose of vehicles based on federal vehicle replacement standards and their mission and program needs . gsa has established minimum standards that call for agencies to retain agency - owned vehicles for at least a requisite number of years or miles . vehicle maintenance . federal agencies should develop a maintenance program for their vehicles to ensure that they meet federal and state safety and emissions standards and manufacturer warranty requirements and are operated and inspected as recommended by the manufacturer and required by local conditions . for agencies that lease vehicles from gsa , gsa fleet develops their vehicle maintenance program . for example , an agency should keep a sedan or station wagon for at least 3 years or 60,000 miles , whichever occurs first . it may keep the vehicle beyond the minimum years and miles if the vehicle can be operated without excessive maintenance or substantial reduction in resale value . conversely , it may replace a vehicle that has not yet met the threshold if the vehicle needs body or mechanical repairs that exceed the fair market value of the vehicle . according to u.s . fish and wildlife service officials , the bureau removed 451 vehicles from its vehicle fleet from fiscal years 2007 to 2010 . in addition to fleet downsizing efforts , two agencies expect current cost - savings measures will play a role in reducing the number of vehicles in the future . both air force and interior anticipate decreasing their fleet size and realizing immediate cost savings by returning gsa - leased vehicles . for example , although the air force has returned some vehicles back to gsa , thus decreasing the air force's fleet size , the agency continues to implement further reductions to its gsa - leased fleet in order to meet a $10-million cut in vehicle - leasing funds in the agency's planned 2013 defense budget . similarly , in a department - wide campaign to cut waste , interior's national park service plans to return approximately 300 gsa - leased vehicles and save approximately $3.4 million in fleet - related costs . according to a gsa official , agencies that need to cut fleet - related costs often realize immediate cash savings by turning in their gsa leased vehicles . improved fleet data management also may have helped the air force decrease fleet size by identifying and cutting unnecessary vehicles , according to air force fleet managers . as part of its effort to establish a property management information system , the air force needed to aggregate and validate vehicle operations data to produce an accurate , agencywide view of its worldwide fleet , which required conducting a full inventory of its 90,000 tactical and non - tactical vehicles around the world . according to air force officials , this process helped the air force identify and remove unnecessary vehicles from its fleet , as described previously in this report . similar to our findings related to the overall federal fleets , we found instances where fleet changes in agencies' subordinate bureaus' fleets did not coincide with the direction of fleet changes at the overall department level .