( see app . i for a more detailed description of the scope and methodology of our review. ) you also asked us to provide information on the availability and cost of mercury control technologies , and we surveyed mercury technology vendors , power companies , and federal and other researchers on these issues . subsequent to this report , which we plan to issue before the agency promulgates a final rule , we will provide information on mercury control technologies in a separate product . we performed our work between may 2004 and february 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . mercury enters the environment through natural and man - made sources , including volcanoes , chemical manufacturing , and coal combustion , and poses ecological threats when it enters water bodies , where small aquatic organisms convert it into its highly toxic form — methylmercury . this form of mercury may then migrate up the food chain as predator species consume the smaller organisms . through a process known as bio - accumulation , predator species may develop high mercury concentrations in their tissue as they take in more mercury than they can metabolize or excrete . fish contaminated with methylmercury may pose health threats to those that rely on fish as part of their diet . according to epa , mercury harms fetuses and can cause neurological disorders in children , including poor performance on behavioral tests , such as those measuring attention , motor and language skills , and visual - spatial abilities ( such as drawing ) . in addition , populations that consume larger amounts of fish than the general population — including subsistence fishers , as well as certain native americans and southeast asian americans — may face higher risk of exposure to contaminated fish , according to epa . the food and drug administration ( fda ) and epa recommend that expectant mothers , young children , and those nursing children avoid eating swordfish , king mackerel , shark , and tilefish and limit consumption of other potentially contaminated fish , such as tuna . these agencies also recommend checking local advisories for recreationally caught freshwater and saltwater fish . according to epa , 45 states issued mercury advisories in 2003 ( the most recent data available ) . because mercury released to the atmosphere can circulate for long periods of time and be transported thousands of miles before it gets deposited , it is difficult to link mercury accumulation in the food chain with sources of mercury emissions . epa estimates that about half of the mercury deposited in the united states is emitted by sources within this country . in 1999 , the most recent year for which data were available , epa estimated that man - made sources within the united states emitted about 115 tons of mercury . of these emissions , the agency estimates that about 48 tons , 42 percent of the total , came from coal - fired power plants .