threat . according to the nipp , risk assessments should estimate an intentional threat as the likelihood that an adversary would attempt a given attack method against a target , and for other hazards , threat is generally estimated as the likelihood that a hazard will manifest itself . to complete the nre , dhs issued data calls and held a workshop on the overall likelihood of gps disruptions . nonetheless , the nre overall does not conform to the nipp because the nre neither uses its threat assessment to inform its threat - likelihood rankings , nor considers all relevant threats . in a separate classified annex , the nre considers the threat likelihood of a range of gps disruptions , which follows nipp guidance to consider terrorist capability and intent . however , dhs officials told us that this threat information was not used for the nre . dhs officials stated that the dhs office of intelligence and analysis had not provided a draft of the threat annex in time for the may 6 , 2011 , scenario likelihood workshop , so the annex could not inform the ranking of the scenario likelihoods . the nipp also requires an all - hazards approach for risk assessment . dhs officials told us that their selection of gps disruption scenarios was based on discussions with subject matter experts . however , it is unclear how the threats for the risk scenarios were selected . for instance , while the nre cites the threat of spectrum encroachment , which involves the potential for interference from new communication services near gps frequencies , and considers alternative futures scenarios based in part on how potential spectrum encroachment is managed , it is not clear why the risk scenarios did not include the risk of interference to gps receivers from operations in other frequency bands . dhs officials told us that while the spectrum encroachment issue was relevant and a topic of discussion with subject matter experts during the nre's development , it was outside the scope of what the nre sought to assess because it stems from policy making rather than a threat from potential adversaries . vulnerability . the vulnerability assessment in the nre does not meet the criteria in the nipp because it does not identify vulnerabilities specific to the sector nor the gps dependencies of the sectors' key systems . instead , the nre assessed general vulnerabilities that did not consider specific sectors or the key systems used by those sectors . without such a sector - specific assessment , the nre does not adequately identify critical infrastructure systems' vulnerabilities and critical dependencies , nor develop estimates of the likelihood that an attack or hazard could cause harm . the nre states that dhs was constrained in conducting unique vulnerability assessments for each of the four sectors because of limited data and key uncertainties . the nre acknowledges that this constraint is a limitation of the report and that a likelihood workshop was used to estimate a combined threat and vulnerability assessment . consequence . the nipp states that at a minimum , consequences should focus on the two most fundamental components — human consequences and the most relevant direct economic consequences .