we incorporated their comments where appropriate . with the exception of our limited review of access controls at the california national guard , we did not review the general or application controls associated with the electronic data processing of army travel card transactions . we conducted our audit work from december 2001 through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , and we performed our investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . following this testimony , we plan to issue a report , which will include recommendations to dod and the army for improving internal controls over travel card activity . tables 6 and 7 show the grade , rank ( where relevant ) , and the associated basic pay rates for 2001 for the army's military and civilian personnel , respectively . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or kutzg@gao.gov or john j. ryan at ( 202 ) 512-9587 or ryanj@gao.gov . we used as our primary criteria applicable laws and regulations , including the travel and transportation reform act of 1998 ( public law 105-264 ) , the general services administration's ( gsa ) federal travel regulation , and the department of defense financial management regulations , volume 9 , travel policies and procedures . we also used as criteria our standards for internal control in federal government ; and our guide to evaluating and testing controls over sensitive payments . to assess the management control environment , we applied the fundamental concepts and standards in the gao internal control standards to the practices followed by management in the six areas reviewed . to assess the magnitude and impact of delinquent and charged - off accounts , we compared the army's delinquency and charge - off rates to other dod services and the other executive branch agencies in the federal government . we also analyzed the trends in the delinquency and charge - off data from fiscal year 2000 through the first half of fiscal year 2002 . we also used data mining to identify army individually billed travel card transactions for audit . our data mining procedures covered the universe of individually billed army travel card activity during fiscal year 2001 and identified transactions that we believed were potentially fraudulent or abusive . however , our work was not designed to identify , and we did not determine , the extent of any potentially fraudulent or abusive activity related to the travel cards . to assess the overall control environment for the travel card program at the department of the army , we obtained an understanding of the travel process , including travel card management and oversight , by interviewing officials from the office of the undersecretary of defense comptroller , department of the army ; defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) ; bank of america ; and gsa , and reviewing applicable policies and procedures and program guidance they provided . we visited four army units to “walk through” the travel process including the management of travel card usage and delinquency .