( see app . ii for more details on this analysis. ) to identify the advantages and disadvantages of the current and alternative approaches to regulating person - to - person lending , we reviewed previously proposed legislation and discussed other regulatory options with relevant federal and state officials , executives and representatives from person - to - person lending companies , researchers , and consumer advocacy organizations listed earlier . while other options may exist for a consolidated regulatory approach including assigning responsibility to a different federal regulator , such as sec or one of the federal banking regulators , we focused on two options most frequently identified by the entities we interviewed and that were considered in legislation . first , we considered the current regulatory structure . second , we focused on the possibility for a consolidated regulatory approach under cfpb because it is assuming a role in supervising nondepository lenders and because the version of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) passed by the house of representatives included a provision that would have exempted person - to - person lending from federal securities regulatory requirements and vested primary jurisdiction for regulating person - to - person lending platforms and their lending activities in the new consumer financial protection agency , now known as cfpb . the provision would have created an exemption from federal securities requirements for person - to - person lending in section 3 ( a ) of the securities act of 1933 ( 15 u.s.c . § 77c ( a ) ) and would instead have given cfpb the authority to prescribe regulations or issue orders pertaining to person - to - person lending , including disclosure requirements with respect to the sale of loans , or notes representing an interest in loans , to individuals . however , the provision was not included in the senate or enacted versions of the dodd - frank act . we assessed the advantages and disadvantages of these two primary options we identified using our previously developed framework for evaluating proposals for financial regulatory reform , which consists of nine elements that are key to developing a successful financial regulatory system . we contacted 20 of the entities we interviewed to obtain their views on the importance of the elements of this framework and received 11 responses , from cfpb representatives , fdic , sec , one state securities regulator , the two major u.s. for - profit platforms and the bank that they work with to disburse loans , three researchers , and one consumer advocacy organization . on the basis of their ratings and the information we obtained through our interviews and other research , we chose to focus our discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the two regulatory options for person - to - person lending on three of the nine elements from our framework — consistent consumer and investor protection , regulatory flexibility and adaptability , and efficiency and effectiveness . we conducted this performance audit from august 2010 to july 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .