bioenergy technologies office . in fiscal years 2013 through 2015 , this office obligated approximately $397.5 million for in - house and external r&d related to advanced biofuels . the office conducts its own basic and applied r&d at federal laboratories including the national renewable energy laboratory in golden , colorado , and partners with industry and universities . the office focuses on developing and transforming renewable biomass into commercially viable high - performance biofuels , bioproducts , and biopower . the office spent much of the past decade focusing r&d on cellulosic ethanol , but after meeting key goals to reduce production costs , the office shifted its focus to drop - in fuels in 2012 . for example , the bioenergy technologies office funded a project by the nonprofit gas technology institute to develop a process for converting a broad range of feedstocks — residue from wood harvesting and manufacturing , algae , and corn stover — into drop - in fuels . according to doe officials , the process resulted in fuels that meet technical specifications for gasoline and diesel while achieving a 90-percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions relative to fossil fuels . officials told us the technology was licensed in june 2015 to a company that plans to build a demonstration plant . arpa - e . in fiscal years 2013 through 2015 , doe's advanced research projects agency - energy obligated approximately $57.9 million for external r&d related to advanced biofuels . arpa - e awards funds for applied research to outside organizations , such as private companies and academic institutions . the agency seeks to fund high - impact energy technologies that are too early for private - sector investment . more than 87 percent of arpa - e's advanced biofuel r&d projects are funded as part of the plants engineered to replace oil ( petro ) program and the transportation energy resources from renewable agriculture ( terra ) program . for example , the agency is investing in seven regional public / private consortia developing supply chains for biofuels and biobased products . one consortium , led by washington state university , successfully developed a series of processes to take logging residues from weyerhaeuser — a forest products company — and convert them to alternative jet fuel . doe's and usda's obligations to support advanced biofuels r&d included funds they contributed to the biomass research and development initiative , which funds r&d projects through funding opportunity announcements . specifically , in fiscal years 2013 through 2015 , usda obligated $5.29 million to biomass research and development initiative projects through its national institute of food and agriculture , and doe obligated $3 million to these projects through its bioenergy technologies office . the initiative's 2015 funding opportunity announcement called for applicants in the technical topic areas of feedstock development , including harvest and storage ; biofuels and bioproducts development , including for chemicals that can potentially increase the economic viability of large - scale fuel production in a biorefinery ; and biofuels and bioproducts development analysis , focusing on analytical tools to better evaluate bioproducts .