we are making three recommendations . in order to prevent the government from accepting additional undue risks and expense on asds , the secretary of defense should: establish acceptable cost , schedule , and performance criteria , based on fully defined scopes of work , and assess the boat's ability to meet these criteria at the phase 1 and phase 2 critical systems reviews and at the management reviews . if , by the time of the program decision in mid - 2008 , asds does not meet acceptable cost , schedule , or performance criteria , we recommend that the secretary of defense discontinue the effort and not proceed with further tests . ensure that , if the review results meet acceptable cost , schedule , and performance criteria , the design changes resulting from the phase 1 critical systems review essential for demonstrating asds reliability and maintainability be incorporated in sufficient time to be tested under operational conditions prior to the planned mid - 2008 decision on how to best meet special operations forces' requirements . require the navy to include provisions in the asds contracting strategy chosen when the existing boa expires that ( 1 ) appropriately balance risk between the government and the contractor through the contract types selected , ( 2 ) incentivize the contractor's performance and promote accountability for achieving desired outcomes by properly structuring the award and incentive fees , and ( 3 ) provide the kind of management and oversight of the program necessary to hold the contractor accountable for performance . dod partially concurred with our first two recommendations that it establish acceptable cost , schedule , and performance criteria for asds - 1 ; assess the boat's ability to meet these criteria ; and test design changes . dod concurred with our third recommendation on the navy's contracting strategy to balance risk between the government and contractor ; properly structure award and incentive fees to incentivize contractor performance and promote accountability ; and provide necessary management and oversight to hold the contractor accountable . dod's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . in partially concurring with our first recommendation , dod commented that under its new asds management plan , program decisions will be made through management reviews using specified evaluation criteria and not solely at the completion of the critical systems reviews . the navy provided a copy of its march 6 , 2007 management plan for asds - 1 improvement . this plan represents a positive step in establishing a structured strategy for the asds - 1 improvement program , including defining management oversight — roles , responsibilities , and authorities — and providing specific criteria to guide the program's continuation or termination decisions . however , the criteria may not go far enough . specifically , the criteria may not be sufficient for making an informed program decision — the scope of the proposed asds's critical systems upgrades may not be fully defined and realistic cost and schedule estimates may not be developed before the asds improvement effort is approved to proceed . further , the management plan does not address the phase 2 critical systems review decision .