ii . mobile passport control ( mpc ) program that allows eligible travelers to use a self - service kiosk to scan their passport , take a photograph , and answer a series of questions to verify biographic and flight information during the cbp inspections process . the kiosks issue a receipt to travelers , who bring their receipts and their passports to a cbp officer to finalize their inspection . program in which travelers can use an application on their mobile device to populate and submit their passport information , customs questions , and upload a self - photo prior to entering the fis area . travelers scan their mobile device with a cbp officer to complete the inspections process at passport control . new process at federal inspection service ( fis ) areas in new terminals that allows travelers to claim their checked baggage before completing passport control , eliminating the exit control point . none of the 17 busiest u.s. international airports have implemented baggage first yet . pilot program that modifies the cbp exit control checkpoint in the fis area . after being inspected at passport control and retrieving their baggage , travelers can leave the fis area unless stopped by a cbp officer monitoring the baggage claim area . designated lanes at passport control for diplomats and foreign dignitaries to expedite the cbp inspections process . these lanes were first established during the model ports program . process that expedites the movement of international travelers that are either en - route to a foreign destination at an airport that has the international to international baggage program or that have no checked baggage to claim . these travelers use an expedited lane at passport control and a separate exit out of the fis , allowing them to bypass baggage claim and the exit control point . television monitors that display signs and multimedia that detail what travelers can expect when they arrive in the fis area and welcome travelers to the united states , among other messages . cbp initially installed the television monitors at the 20 model ports program airports in 2006 and 2007 . since then , cbp and airport stakeholders have continued to provide television monitors . professionalism service manager ( psm ) program focuses on professionalism standards and customer service within cbp and with the public and external stakeholders at each u.s. international airport . each u.s. international airport has at least one psm that promotes awareness of cbp's mission and manages and responds to compliments , complaints , and other feedback at the airport . process by which travelers queue in serpentine lines and are directed to the next available booth or kiosk by a queue manager , rather than individually selecting a parallel line to complete the cbp inspections process . reimbursable services program fee agreements subject to certain criteria , cbp is authorized to enter into reimbursable service agreements to cover costs , including overtime , associated with customs , immigration inspection - related , border security , and agricultural processing services at ports of entry . program that facilitates the processing of travelers with closely scheduled connecting flights . participating airlines identify and direct travelers to specially designated booths at passport control to reduce the number of missed connections .