services co . discounted vision services can include a free annual eye exam , discounts on glasses and lenses at select providers , or lasik vision correction . designated providers offer a free annual hearing exam , plus discounts on hearing aids . designated providers offer up to four round - trips ( eight one - way ) to approved covered medical services . services offered at a discount under this category can include nutritional counseling or gym memberships . within the current mhs . senate report 112-173 , which accompanied the senate committee on armed services' version of the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 , mandated that gao conduct a comprehensive review of dod's health care contracts , and identify opportunities for potential savings and efficiencies . in this report , we examine ( 1 ) the role of the usfhp within the mhs , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the usfhp affects dod's health care costs . we did not assess the department's compliance with the program's requirements . groups to obtain their perspective about the usfhp . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . appendix i: past and current us family health plan ( usfhp ) designated providers 2014 martin's point health care brighton marine health center st. vincents catholic medical centers johns hopkins medical services co . total number of usfhp enrollees 41,752 ( of which 8,602 are 65+ ) massachusetts , rhode island , and northern connecticut 14,288 ( of which 5,497 are 65+ ) maine , new hampshire , vermont , upstate and western new york , and the northern tier of pennsylvania 41,991 ( of which 12,573 are 65+ ) southeast texas and southwest louisiana 11,803 ( of which 6,596 are 65+ ) puget sound area of washington state 13,062 ( of which 7,354 are 65+ ) new jersey , new york city , southern new york , western connecticut , and southeastern pennsylvania 11,164 ( of which 3,575 are 65+ ) . this designated provider offers enrollees a $500 discount on any procedure including anti - aging procedures , such as face lifts and rhinoplasty and a 15 percent discount on all injectables including botox . enrollees receive an unspecified discount for all in vitro fertilization and intrauterine insemination procedures . in addition to the contact named above , bonnie anderson , assistant director ; kaitlin coffey ; christine davis ; sylvia jones ; drew long ; samantha poppe ; james rebbe ; and william t. woods made key contributions to this report . we did not assess the quality of the care or benefits offered by either the usfhp designated providers or the mcscs . to examine the extent to which the usfhp affects dod's health care costs , we obtained and reviewed usfhp cost information , including the costs of the designated provider contracts and other dod contracts related to the administration of the program . to better understand the requirements related to the usfhp's costs , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , including laws pertaining to the usfhp and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) .