grade . officials told us in september 2018 that preliminary evidence suggested the model could help close the literacy gap for the target population . in addition , officials told us they intended to disseminate the final results to stakeholders to help inform their decision - making about the approach . to do so , education officials developed a communication plan to share this evidence via the oela website , its facebook account , the national clearinghouse for english language acquisition ( see sidebar ) , and a listserv of more than 10,000 recipients , among other means . as of september 2019 , this study had not been completed . therefore education has not implemented its communication plan . results - oriented accountability for grants . one of the four strategies for this cap goal focuses on the achievement of grant program goals and objectives . in october 2019 , omb staff told us that the strategy aims to hold grant recipients accountable for promising performance practices that support the achievement of those goals and objectives while streamlining compliance requirements for those grant programs that demonstrate results . according to the september 2019 quarterly update for this goal , initial efforts for this strategy involved developing performance management processes to help grant - making entities improve their ability to monitor , and ultimately improve , the performance of grantees . , they did not focus broadly across different sources of evidence or did not cover the entire agency ) . in addition to the above contact , benjamin t. licht ( assistant director ) , daniel webb ( analyst - in - charge ) , amanda prichard , kelly turner , and brian wanlass made significant contributions to this report . valerie caracelli , jacqueline chapin , ann czapiewski , steven putansu , and andrew j. stephens also made key contributions . in june and july 2019 , omb released its initial guidance on implementing the evidence act . among other things , this guidance provides direction to agencies on developing evidence - building plans , also known as learning agendas ( see text box below ) . according to omb , these plans will serve as the driving force for other evidence - building activities required by the evidence act . prior to the enactment of the foundations for evidence - based policymaking act ( evidence act ) , both the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the commission on evidence - based policymaking highlighted and recommended the use of learning agendas by federal agencies to strengthen and coordinate their evidence - building activities . according to omb's guidance for implementing the evidence act , a learning agenda is to define and prioritize relevant questions and identify strategies for building evidence to answer them . a federal agency developing a learning agenda should involve key leaders and stakeholders to help ( 1 ) meet their evidence needs for decision - making , and ( 2 ) coordinate evidence - building activities across an agency . omb's guidance stated that the evidence act emphasizes the need for collaboration and coordination of agency staff and activities to achieve successful implementation . the guidance provides time frames for a phased approach to implement several evidence act requirements .