heightened scrutiny . according to hhs - oig officials , heightened scrutiny is reserved for situations in which the agency determined that an agreement was warranted but the entity was uncooperative . in such situations , hhs - oig considers what other unilateral monitoring steps it can take to impose greater scrutiny . for example , according to hhs - oig guidance , the agency has audited , evaluated , or investigated entities after fraud settlements when the entity would not enter into an agreement with hhs - oig and it has made referrals to the centers for medicare & medicaid services for claims reviews . reserve exclusion authority . for certain entities , hhs - oig may reserve its exclusion authority and take “no further action,” meaning that hhs - oig will not exclude the entity at that time and will not require the entity to enter into an agreement . release of exclusion authority . in certain circumstances , hhs - oig will release its exclusion authority without imposing additional requirements . specifically , hhs - oig may do this in situations in which the entity has self - disclosed the fraudulent conduct to hhs - oig or has agreed to integrity obligations with a state or the doj that hhs - oig has determined are sufficient . in situations in which hhs - oig is evaluating whether to exercise its permissive exclusion authority , doj is often separately negotiating a settlement of the civil and / or criminal case against the entity on behalf of the federal government . typically , such settlements resolve allegations that the entity is liable under the false claims act for submitting false claims to federal health care programs . according to both hhs - oig and doj officials , if there is a related doj civil or criminal case and hhs - oig officials are also negotiating an agreement with the entity in lieu of exclusion , the doj and hhs - oig negotiations often occur at the same time or “on a parallel track.” however , according to these officials , while hhs - oig and doj officials share information as needed , each engage in separate negotiations with the entity . according to hhs - oig officials , there are also situations in which hhs - oig enters into an agreement when there is not a related doj legal settlement . the office of counsel to the inspector general within hhs - oig is responsible for negotiating agreements and for monitoring them once they take effect . all agreements include provisions that identify the enforcement actions hhs - oig can take when it finds that an entity has not complied with the terms of its agreement . these enforcement provisions outline the monetary penalties , referred to in the agreements as stipulated penalties , which hhs - oig will demand if it identifies that the entity has failed to comply with certain agreement terms . the enforcement provisions also outline what constitutes a material breach of the agreement and indicate that exclusion can result if the entity is found to have materially breached its agreement .