we disagree . we classified payments as questionable if they were not supported by sufficient documentation to enable an objective third party to determine if the payment was a valid use of government funds . we found each of these 23 payments totaling $15.2 million to be inadequately supported at the time the payment was made . as stated in the report , these payments were made without basic support such as standard contract modification or other agreements signed by the contractors and hud , indication of the timing , quantity , and nature of the goods and services provided , and identification of the specific properties covered by the payments . in january 2004 , several months after our initial request for supporting documentation for these payments and after our fieldwork was completed , hud headquarters officials advised us that fully executed contact modification agreements existed at the time each of these payments was made . these officials acknowledged that the agreements and underlying detail support by property were not in the payment files but that the reviewing , approving , and certifying officials reviewed all documents in order to verify the accuracy of the charges . however , we found no evidence of this during our site visits . in fact not one hud reviewing , approving , or certifying official indicated to us that they went beyond the documentation contained with the payment request to ascertain the propriety of the payments we reviewed . also , in january 2004 , hud headquarters officials forwarded us signed copies of some , but not all of the contract modifications . that fact that the signed contract modifications may have existed at the time payments were made is peripheral to one of our core points that — hud reviewing , approving , and certifying officials have available and consider at the time they review and approve the payment sufficient supporting documentation to determine that a payment is a valid use of government funds . it is clear from our review that this did not occur in the case of these $15.2 million payments for contract change orders . in addition , the existence of the contract modifications does not negate our other core point . without specific documentation , which hud did not provide , indicating such things as ( 1 ) the properties the charges relate to , ( 2 ) the time period the charges were incurred , ( 3 ) an explanation of what goods or services were provided , and ( 4 ) that hud owned the properties at the time the goods or services were provided , we could not determine the validity of these payments . therefore , they remain questionable . hud raised similar issues with regard to each of the other 8 categories of payments totaling $1,113,266 that we classified as questionable . we address these other issues in our more detailed comments in appendix ii , where we reaffirm our position that all of these payments are questionable . regarding the potentially fraudulent payments , hud stated , and we agree , that the department is obligated by government contracting procedures to work with a sub - performing contractor to improve performance , rather than move to immediate termination .