gao - 16-34 . washington , d.c.: october 29 , 2015 . this scenario adjusts both benefit and withholding amounts . charging interest: this scenario increases the remaining balance at the beginning of year by 1 percent in the 0 percent cola scenario , and an interest rate equal to the rate of inflation in the other scenarios . we chose the 1 percent interest rate in the no inflation scenario because it is the rate of interest the us government is allowed to charge in calendar year 2016 on delinquent debts . combined scenarios: we report the results of a few policy options in combination . it is important to note that our combination of interest and cola effectively undo the effects of inflation on both monthly repayment amounts and on total debt owed . we assessed the reliability of the data we used by checking for extreme and implausible values and by comparing the totals in them to published sources and found them to be sufficiently reliable for our use . in estimating scheduled repayments for the above scenarios , we made a number of decisions and assumptions about overpayments and withholdings in the custom file provided by ssa . the data provided by ssa listed all overpayments that ssa is either actively trying to collect or has conditionally written off , referred to treasury , and will collect if the beneficiary becomes eligible for disability or retirement benefits . these data lists both a claimant — the person whose disability creates eligibility for di benefits — and a beneficiary — who may be the claimant , the claimant's spouse , or a dependent of the claimant . ssa officials told us that the agency can seek repayment from the claimant , beneficiary , or anyone else receiving benefits on the claimant's earnings record . we aggregated this overpayment level data to the beneficiary level , taking the maximum withholding amount per beneficiary if the beneficiary's account showed more than one overpayment , and adding together withholding in rare instances when one person benefited from overpayments to multiple claimants . if a beneficiary had withholding on any one of the overpayments on his or her record , we treated all overpayments on the account as subject to recovery through withholding . this methodology can misstate repayment times in situations where , for example , a beneficiary had overpayments both on their own disability claim and their parent's disability claim , and both parties are involved in repaying the beneficiary's overpayments . we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to provide additional insight on how ssa documents and determines how much beneficiaries can repay on overpayment debts , we reviewed a non - representative sample of 16 overpayment cases . we selected cases to reflect a range of amounts based on the amount of the original overpayment and the percentage of beneficiaries' monthly benefits withheld to repay debts . we then selected a random sample of these subsets of cases for review . to examine ssa's use of civil monetary penalties and administrative sanctions , we examined available data from ssa and ssa's office of the inspector general ( oig ) , and reviewed recent ssa evaluations of its sanctions procedures .