the department agreed with our recommendation . we also reported in june 2005 that challenges associated with major public health it initiatives still need to be overcome to strengthen the it that supports the public health infrastructure . federal agencies face many challenges in their efforts to improve the public health infrastructure , including ( 1 ) the integration of current initiatives into a national health it strategy and federal architecture to reduce the risk of duplicative efforts , ( 2 ) development and adoption of consistent standards to encourage interoperability , ( 3 ) coordination of initiatives with state and local agencies to improve the public health infrastructure , and ( 4 ) overcoming federal it management weaknesses to improve progress on it initiatives . to address these challenges , we recommended that hhs align federal public health initiatives with the national health it strategy and federal health architecture , coordinate with state and local public health agencies , and continue federal actions to encourage the development and adoption of data standards . last september , we testified about the importance of defining and implementing data and communication standards to speed the adoption of interoperable it in the health care industry . hurricane katrina highlighted the need for interoperable electronic health records as thousands of people were separated from their health care providers and their paper medical records were lost . as we have noted , standards are critical to enabling this interoperability . although federal leadership has been established to accelerate the use of it in health care , we testified that several actions were still needed to position hhs to further define and implement relevant standards . otherwise , the health care industry will continue to be plagued with incompatible systems that are incapable of exchanging medical information that is critical to delivering care and responding to public health emergencies . in march 2006 , we testified before this subcommittee on hhs's continued efforts to move forward with its mission to guide the nationwide implementation of interoperable health it in the public and private health care sectors . we identified several steps taken by the department , such as the establishment of the organizational structure and management team for the office of the national coordinator for health it under the office of the secretary and the formation of a public - private advisory body — the american health information community — to advise hhs on achieving interoperability for health information exchange . the community , which is co - chaired by the secretary of hhs and the former national coordinator for health it , identified four breakthrough areas — consumer empowerment , chronic care , biosurveillance , and electronic health records — and formed workgroups intended to make recommendations for actions in these areas that will produce tangible results within a one - year period . subsequently , in may 2006 the workgroups presented 28 recommendations to the american health information community that address standards , privacy and security , and data - sharing issues .