nasa had no comments . dot agreed to consider the recommendations and provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , faa , nasa , and interested congressional committees . the report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in response to your request , this report provides information on the status of the department of transportation's federal aviation administration's ( faa ) and national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) efforts to incorporate human factors issues into the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . in particular , we sought to identify the extent to which ( 1 ) faa's and nasa's human factors research and development ( r&d ) is coordinated , and ( 2 ) faa's and nasa's human factors r&d supports nextgen . in determining the extent to which faa's and nasa's human factors r&d is coordinated , we obtained and analyzed information provided by faa and nasa officials on mechanisms in place to align human factors r&d efforts . we asked faa and nasa officials to describe the mechanisms that are in place to coordinate the agency's human factors r&d . we assessed the information faa and nasa officials provided us regarding their coordination mechanisms by comparing those efforts with recommendations issued by the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) — an interagency organization responsible for planning nextgen . in 2008 , jpdo issued a cross - agency gap analysis that found faa and nasa lacked a cross - agency plan for identifying and addressing priority nextgen human factors issues . we also assessed faa's and nasa's coordination efforts by summarizing the views of nine external aviation human factors experts who reviewed and assessed faa's and nasa's coordination mechanisms . see our discussion below for more detail regarding the nine aviation human factors experts . assessing safety risks . calculating the safety risks of an error occurring in relation to the amount of time a controller spends on a task . in addition , faa has assigned human factors experts to several offices involved in the development of new systems and in the oversight of aircraft operation and maintenance in order to ensure that human factors issues are addressed . faa has established chief systems engineers to focus on agencywide , cross - cutting technical and operational issues pertaining to nextgen . because of the scope of nextgen , faa contracted with volpe to provide a chief system engineer for human factors to identify and help the agency better ensure that human factors issues are integrated into the development of nextgen aviation systems .