donations . the park service is authorized by law to receive and use cash donations and in - kind donations from individuals , nonprofit organizations , and corporations . examples of in - kind donations include artifacts or services provided by nonprofit partner groups on behalf of the park service . the park service is also authorized to develop agreements with nonprofit partner groups , known as friends groups and cooperating associations . in general , friends groups engage in fundraising efforts on behalf of individual parks units , while cooperating associations provide interpretive services for visitors and manage retail operations at parks and share a portion of their proceeds from these operations with park units . the park service also has a volunteer program authorized by the volunteers in the parks act of 1969 . volunteers help with a variety of tasks at park units , including doing maintenance work and providing interpretive services to visitors . this effort uses social media and disseminates marketing materials online and in park units . the park service has partnered on this campaign with certain major donors , which each made at least $500,000 in contributions to the foundation to support the campaign . figure 7 shows examples of posters developed for the campaign to be displayed in park units and also used in online and print advertising . the park service also has allocated about $49 million in funds appropriated by congress for the centennial anniversary . congress has also appropriated funds to be used for matching grants . specifically , congress appropriated $25 million in 2008 , $15 million in 2010 , and $10 million in fiscal year 2015 to match philanthropic donations dollar - for - dollar to fund projects in park units . to be considered , proposed projects are to benefit one or more park service areas and have matching donations of at least 50 percent of project costs , according to the park service . agency officials have prioritized projects with higher rates of matching donations , and considered the timeliness of donations , readiness of projects , and whether proposed projects address centennial and service - wide goals , such as high - priority deferred maintenance . examples include rehabilitating the underground franklin court museum at independence national historical park and reconstructing roads , parking , walks , signs , and pedestrian areas to meet park road standards , accessibility standards , and historical context at roosevelt arch in yellowstone national park . since 2014 , the park service has also been revising its policies related to philanthropy to help increase donations . specifically , the park service has been revising director's order 21 — the park service's main policy governing donations and fundraising . some nonprofit partners told us that this guidance lengthened the donations process in the past by requiring significant park service review . park service documentation suggests that , when approved , the revised director's order 21 will likely shift greater authority to regional directors and superintendents to accept donations and approve fundraising agreements . for example , current policy allows regional directors to approve donations less than $1 million .