program implementation . staff from most of the hfas and servicers with whom we spoke , as well as treasury staff and other stakeholders , told us that implementation of the hhf program was challenging . specific implementation challenges mentioned by hfas included creating an in - house information system to manage hhf data ; managing refinancing requests from homeowners who have been awarded hhf funds ( to help ensure the hfa's place as a lien - holder ) ; and sharing information with servicers . while treasury helped to develop a system to facilitate the sharing of loan - level information for the hhf program , one hfa and some servicers noted that the system has not always worked smoothly . additionally , treasury staff told us that a challenge hfas are currently facing is the wind - down of the hhf program . they stated that hfas must determine how they should advertise to the public , internal staff , and external partners that programs are closing ; when they should stop accepting applications ; and what resources are available for activities related to program closeout . according to academic research and two stakeholders ( an advocacy group and a housing counseling agency ) , the accessibility of an hfa's program can affect program participation . through its on - site monitoring efforts , treasury has identified issues that participating hfas must address for their hhf programs . during on - site reviews in 2016 and 2017 , treasury staff assessed selected hfas' efforts in one or more treasury - identified areas . as previously noted , treasury's policy at the time of our review was to conduct on - site reviews of each participating hfa at least once every 2 years . in 2016 treasury conducted on - site monitoring visits for 14 hfas and identified issues that the hfas needed to address to improve their hhf programs . eight hfas were implementing active blight elimination programs as of december 2017 , as shown in table 5 . the number of blighted properties demolished by individual hfas ranged from 0 to 13,925 . a 2014 study of ohio's hhf program found that the design of the program hampered accessibility and therefore program participation . the program was designed to require registrants ( those who started the application process ) to continue the application process by working with a housing counseling agency . the study found that registrants who lived within 5 miles of their assigned housing counseling agency submitted a complete application almost 32 percent of the time , while those who lived over 50 miles away submitted a complete application about 18 percent of the time . similarly , a representative for an organization that advocates on behalf of low - income homeowners noted that the design of one state hhf program requires applicants to meet with specific housing counseling agencies to complete the application process . however , the housing counseling agencies to which applicants are assigned may not be nearby . the representative stated that in some cases , homeowners are assigned to a housing counseling agency that is located 3 or 4 hours away from where the homeowners live .