each year , u.s . dhs acquisition management directive 102-01 establishes that a major acquisition program's decision authority is responsible for reviewing and approving the movement of the program through four phases of the acquisition life cycle at a series of five acquisition decision events . these acquisition decision events , which can be more than 1 year apart , provide the acquisition decision authority an opportunity to assess whether a major program is ready to proceed through the life cycle phases . following are the four phases of the acquisition life cycle , as established in dhs acquisition policy: 1 . need: department officials identify that there is a need , consistent with dhs's strategic plan , justifying an investment in a new capability and the establishment of an acquisition program to produce that capability . this phase concludes with the acquisition decision authority granting the acquisition program approval to proceed at acquisition decision event 1 . analyze / select: a designated program manager reviews alternative approaches to meeting the need and recommends a best option to the acquisition decision authority . this phase concludes with the acquisition decision authority granting the acquisition program approval to proceed at acquisition decision event 2a . obtain: the program manager develops , tests , and evaluates the selected option . the acquisition decision authority may review the acquisition program multiple times before granting the acquisition program approval to proceed with particular acquisition activities . acquisition decision event 2b focuses on the cost , schedule , and performance parameters for each of the program's projects . the program may also proceed through acquisition decision event 2c , which focuses on low rate initial production . the phase concludes with the acquisition decision authority granting the program approval to proceed at acquisition decision event 3 . produce / deploy / support: dhs delivers the new capability to its operators , and maintains the capability until it is retired . this phase includes sustainment , which begins when a capability has been fielded for operational use ; sustainment involves the supportability of fielded systems through disposal , including maintenance . figure 2 depicts the acquisition life cycle established in the directive . two important aspect of the acquisition decision events are the review and approval of key acquisition documents critical to establishing the need for a major program , its operational requirements , an acquisition baseline , and testing and support plans . table 5 describes the key acquisition documents requiring department - level approval before a program can move to the next acquisition phase . figure 3 depicts the acquisition life cycle and associated program documentation requirements . we have previously reported on the management and development of the uscis transformation program . in july 2007 , we evaluated the transformation program strategic and expenditure plans to determine the extent to which these plans had prepared uscis to carry out its program . we reported that the agency's plans partially or fully addressed most key practices but more attention was needed in certain areas such as performance measurement and it management . we also reported that the plans provided some information on costs and revenues , but that uscis had not finalized its acquisition strategy and , therefore , cost estimates were uncertain .