ssa agreed with our recommendation . the agency stated that it will continue to seek improvements in its existing remote identity proofing process . ssa also stated that , in addition to a roadmap it developed in fiscal year 2019 to update its knowledge - based verification process to a more secure multi - factor authentication technology , it will take steps to ensure compliance with nist standards for remote identity proofing . ssa's comments are reprinted in appendix v. usps agreed with our recommendation . the agency stated that it will be developing a roadmap to implement additional identity - proofing tools and techniques through 2020 . comments from usps are reprinted in appendix vi . va agreed with our recommendation . the department stated that it will develop a specific plan with time frames and milestones to eliminate knowledge - based verification from the aspects of the remote identity proofing process that it controls . further , in its response , va requested that gao direct a recommendation to the department of defense ( dod ) to discontinue ds logon and consider using login.gov instead . however , we are not issuing any recommendations to dod because our scope of work did not include auditing dod's remote identity proofing processes . nevertheless , we have adjusted our recommendations to cms , ssa , usps , and va to clarify that login.gov is one option for identity proofing that they should consider when developing their plans to discontinue the use of knowledge - based verification . va's comments are reprinted in appendix vii . one agency did not concur with our recommendation . specifically , hhs raised several issues related to our findings . the agency stated that it uses a risk - based approach to designing systems controls and that a unilateral prohibition on the use of knowledge - based verification without alternatives is not a feasible solution . we agree with this comment and strongly support a risk - based approach to designing security controls , as required by fisma . however , we believe that alternatives to knowledge - based verification exist that should be assessed and incorporated as appropriate . similarly , hhs noted that for other applications across the department , it has considered factors such as consumer user experience , cost , and operational feasibility in addition to nist guidelines . we agree that many factors need to be considered in assessing what method or methods of identity proofing are most appropriate for any given application but believe it is important for agencies to develop plans for addressing those factors that also eliminate the use of risky techniques , such as knowledge - based verification , that could have a negative impact on consumers and agencies . in response to our specific recommendation to cms , hhs stated that it does not believe that suitable alternative methods exist that would work for cms' population of users , such as those in the rural community , due to distance or individuals without cell phones . however , we continue to believe that cms should develop a plan to discontinue the use of knowledge - based verification .