air . construction and mining activities during the development of oil shale resources can temporarily degrade air quality in local areas . there can also be long - term regional increases in air pollutants from oil shale processing and the generation of additional electricity to power oil shale development operations . pollutants , such as dust , nitrogen oxides , and sulfur dioxide , can contribute to the formation of regional haze that can affect adjacent wilderness areas , national parks , and national monuments , which can have very strict air quality standards . environmental impacts could also be compounded by the impacts of coal mining , construction , and extensive oil and gas development in the area , and air quality appears to be particularly susceptible to the cumulative effect of these development impacts . according to some environmental experts that we spoke to for our 2010 report , air quality impacts may be the limiting factor for the development of a large oil shale industry in the future . wildlife . oil shale operations are likely to clear large surface areas of topsoil and vegetation , and as a result , some wildlife habitat will be lost . important species likely to be negatively impacted from loss of wildlife habitat include mule deer , elk , sage grouse , and raptors . noise from oil shale operations , access roads , transmission lines , and pipelines can further disturb wildlife and fragment their habitat . wildlife is also particularly susceptible to the cumulative effects of nearby industry development . in addition , the withdrawal of large quantities of surface water for oil shale operations could negatively impact aquatic life downstream of the oil shale development . socioeconomic impacts . large - scale oil shale development offers certain socioeconomic benefits outlined earlier , but it also poses some socioeconomic challenges . oil shale development can bring a sizeable influx of workers , who along with their families , put additional stress on local infrastructure such as roads , housing , municipal water systems , and schools . as noted in our 2010 report , development from expansion of extractive industries , such as oil shale or oil and gas , has typically followed a “boom and bust” cycle , making planning for growth difficult for local governments . furthermore , development of a future oil shale industry would have the potential to replace traditional rural uses by the industrial development of the landscape , and tourism that relies on natural resources , such as hunting , fishing , and wildlife viewing , could be negatively impacted . our 2010 report noted that current federal research efforts on the impacts of oil shale development do not provide sufficient data for future monitoring and that there is a greater need for collaboration among key stakeholders to address water resources and research issues related to oil shale development . as noted earlier , the federal government is in a unique position to influence the development of oil shale because 72 percent of the oil shale within the green river formation lies beneath federal lands managed by blm .