program . program was first included in bureau program documents in november 1998 and funded for fiscal years 2000 through 2002 with proposed funding through december 31 , 2002 . its predecessor , integrated coverage measurement ( i.c.m .

 ) , began in may 1995 and was funded by the bureau for fiscal years 1996 through 1999 . the bureau obligated about $207 million to both programs from fiscal years 1996 through 2001 , which was about 3 percent of the $6.5 billion total estimated cost of the 2000 census . however , neither program was used to adjust the 2000 census population count . concerned about the amount of money the bureau spent on both programs as well as what was received in return for its investment , you and former vice chairman dan miller asked us to examine ( 1 ) the bureau's objectives for the i.c.m. programs and the extent to which those objectives were met , ( 2 ) the cost of consultants and technical studies , and ( 3 ) ways to track the costs of coverage measurement activities in future censuses . this report responds to that request . in october 2002 , we issued a report that provides additional information on the cost of the i.c.m. programs and related costs in its financial management system . second , although $182,000 of fiscal year 1996 obligated contractor costs were identifiable in the bureau's financial management system as an i.c.m . special test , the bureau did not consider these costs as part of the i.c.m. programs . instead , these costs were considered general research and development . however , because the bureau separately identified these costs as i.c.m . program contractor costs , we have included the $182,000 as part of the i.c.m. program contractor costs in this report . finally , we were unable to identify the i.c.m. portions of costs that were part of other programs . for example , in late fiscal year 2000 and after , the bureau did not separate a.c.e . evaluations from its other 2000 census evaluations in its financial management systems . bureau officials stated that the contracts for evaluations included overall 2000 census and a.c.e . evaluations , and did not have a separate code identifying a.c.e . costs . during the 2000 census , the bureau , its auditors , and gao , found extensive weaknesses in the bureau's financial management system , the components of which include hardware , software , and associated personnel . the weaknesses included difficulties in providing reliable and timely financial information to manage current government operations and preparing financial statements and other reports . together , they affected the completeness , accuracy , and timeliness of data needed for informed management decisions and effective oversight . in light of these weaknesses , the bureau's ability to track future costs of coverage measurement activities will largely depend on three factors . first , a sound financial management system is critical . as discussed in our december 2001 report , the bureau's core financial management system , cams , had persistent internal control weaknesses in fiscal year 2000 . in its latest financial report , the bureau indicated that these weaknesses have continued through fiscal year 2001 .