 measuring performance . the agencies have not developed performance metrics to gauge progress in achieving stated goals related to physical protection visits . specifically , doe , nrc , and state have not performed an analysis to determine whether the stated interagency goal of visiting countries containing u.s. category i nuclear material within 5 years has been met . in addition , although doe has stated u.s. physical protection teams revisit sites whenever there is an indication that security does not meet iaea security guidelines , doe has not quantified its efforts in a meaningful way . in response to our questions about metrics , doe officials stated that there is no u.s. law regarding the frequency of visits or revisits and that the agency's internal goals are not requirements . these officials told us that doe , nrc , and state recognize that the “number one goal” is to ensure the physical security of u.s. nuclear material abroad . doe officials stated that the best measure of the u.s. physical protection visits' effectiveness is that there has not been a theft of u.s. nuclear material from a foreign facility since the 1970s , when two leu fuel rods were stolen from a certain country . however , officials reported to us that , in 1990 , the facility was determined to be well below iaea security guidelines . - obligated” material . as the technology to design and create nuclear weapons has spread , one of the most serious threats facing the united states and other countries is the possibility that a nation or terrorist organization could steal weapon - usable nuclear materials from poorly secured stockpiles in various locations around the world . in april 2009 , president obama made securing all vulnerable nuclear material worldwide within the next 4 years a key u.s. nonproliferation goal , and the department of energy ( doe ) has stated that doing so will require greater security cooperation with key countries ; pursuing new partnerships to secure nuclear material ; and strengthening nuclear security standards , practices , and international safeguards . securing nuclear material worldwide is a priority for doe , through its national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , which , as one of its core mission areas , aims to keep dangerous nuclear materials out of the hands of terrorists by securing nuclear weapons and nuclear materials at their source and by improving security practices around the world . in particular , two key doe nnsa offices work with u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement partners to strengthen nuclear security practices and identify and secure vulnerable nuclear materials . first , doe's office of nonproliferation and international security works with countries to ensure that provisions in the agreements are met by , among other things , providing physical protection training , assessment , and guidance on a bilateral basis , and leading u.s. interagency physical protection visits to countries with u.s. nuclear material . any changes will be included in these updated documents . doe and u.s. agencies' activities for prioritizing and coordinating u.s. interagency physical protection visits and measuring performance do not meet our best practices for agency performance or doe's standards for internal control .