attorneys will prosecute them . this could lead to improved reporting of interstate cigarette sales , thereby helping to prevent the loss of state cigarette tax revenues . transferring primary investigative jurisdiction is also appropriate at this time because of the fbi's new challenges and priorities related to the threat of terrorism and the fbi's increased counterterrorism efforts . to improve the federal government's efforts in enforcing the jenkins act and promoting compliance with the act by internet cigarette vendors , which may lead to increased state tax revenues from cigarette sales , our report suggested that the congress should consider providing atf with primary jurisdiction to investigate violations of the jenkins act ( 15 u.s.c . in view of the fact that atf was recently transferred from the treasury department to doj , it may now be possible for the attorney general to administratively transfer primary jenkins act enforcement authority from the fbi to atf without involving the congress in the matter . we believe that this possibility deserves further investigation on the part of doj . no further action has been taken . another investigation , carried out in 1999 , involved a native american tribe selling cigarettes on the internet directly to consumers and other tribes . the tribe was not paying state tobacco excise taxes or notifying states of cigarette sales to other than wholesalers , as required by the jenkins act . atf referred the case to the state of arizona , where it was resolved with no criminal charges filed by obtaining the tribe's agreement to comply with jenkins act requirements . a third atf investigation of an internet vendor for cigarette smuggling and jenkins act violations was ongoing at the time of our work . atf officials said that because atf does not have primary jenkins act jurisdiction , it has not committed resources to investigating violations of the act . however , the officials said strong consideration should be given to transferring primary jurisdiction for investigating jenkins act violations from the fbi to atf . according to atf , it is responsible for , and has committed resources to , regulating the distribution of tobacco products and investigating trafficking in contraband tobacco products . a change in jenkins act jurisdiction would give atf comprehensive authority at the federal level to assist states in preventing the interstate distribution of cigarettes resulting in lost state cigarette taxes since atf already has investigative authority over the ccta , according to the officials . the officials also told us atf has special agents and inspectors that obtain specialized training in enforcing tax and criminal laws related to tobacco products , and , with primary jurisdiction , atf would have the investigative authority and would use resources to specifically conduct investigations to enforce the jenkins act , which should result in greater enforcement of the act than in the past . officials in nine states that provided us information all expressed concern about internet cigarette vendors' noncompliance with the jenkins act and the resulting loss of state tax revenues . for example , california officials estimated that the state lost approximately $13 million in tax revenue from may 1999 through september 2001 , due to internet cigarette vendors' noncompliance with the jenkins act .