none . instructs the secretary of energy to establish a research and development program to develop alternatives to sealed sources that reduce safety , environmental , or proliferation risks to workers using the sources or the public . directs the secretary of energy to conduct a survey of industrial applications of large radioactive sources . of the total number of staff reported in question #3 , how many ftes do you have in the following categories ? how many of your technical staff ( including inspectors and license reviewers ) are professionally certified ( e.g . certified health physicists , nuclear medicine technologists , etc. ) how many staff were employed in your state in the following categories on january 1 , 1998 ? please describe any coordination efforts undertaken by your state with other state and / or federal agencies regarding the transportation of radioactive material . what are the strengths of the current regulations on transporting radioactive materials ? what are the weaknesses of the current regulations on transporting radioactive materials ? please describe specific efforts that have been initiated or considered by your state since september 11 , 2001 , to better safeguard radiological sources . in your opinion , should post - september 11 security measures be developed and enforced by the nrc under the common defense and security authority given it by the atomic energy act or by the agreement states under their health and safety authority ? ( n=34 ) states = 82.4% ; nrc = 5.9% ; both = 11.8% 53 . does your state have sufficient resources to support these new efforts or are additional resources needed ? ( n=35 ) yes = 34.3% ; no = 65.7% changes needed at the federal level 54 . in your opinion , what are the 3 most significant changes ( in rank order ) that could be made at the federal level to improve the regulation of radioactive material to protect public health and safety ? in your opinion , what are the 3 most significant changes ( in rank order ) that could be made at the federal level to improve the security of radioactive material ? in your opinion , what are the 3 most significant changes ( in rank order ) that could be made at the federal level to improve the transportation of radioactive material ? please use the space below to list any additional information about issues related to radioactive sources or concerns raised in this survey . thank you for your assistance in our survey . e - mail: ruedelp@gao.gov abandoned ? how effective are federal and state controls over radiological sources ?