do the business of government . the work of the government is increasingly performed by the private sector under contract . dod's spending on goods and services has grown significantly since fiscal year 2000 , and all indications are the trend will continue . dod's weapon systems acquisition and contract management processes have been on gao's high - risk list for more than a decade . gao designated the management of interagency contracting a governmentwide high - risk issue in january 2005 ; dod is the largest user of interagency contracting vehicles . workforce: gao analysis of opm data of 14 acquisition - related job series . following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , increased security requirements and deployment of active duty and reserve personnel resulted in dod having fewer military personnel to protect domestic installations . the u.s. army awarded contracts worth nearly $733 million to acquire contract guards at 57 installations . the air force historically bought space launch vehicles , such as the delta and titan rockets , as products ; under the evolved expendable launch vehicle program , the air force purchases launch services using contractor - owned launch vehicles . projected program cost is $28 billion . defining requirements , establishing expected outcomes , and assessing contractor performance is often more complicated compared with contracting for supplies and equipment . changes to the scope and cost of the work . use of task order contracts and time - and - materials contracts provides dod flexibility to add work to contracts once needs are defined but may pose additional management and oversight risks . dod may authorize contractors to begin work before reaching agreement on terms and conditions , including scope of work , specifications , and price , under agreements termed letter contracts or undefinitized contract actions . dod obligated nearly $6.5 billion under letter contracts in fiscal year 2004 . allows dod to initiate work quickly to meet urgent operational needs , but contract incentives to control costs are likely to be less effective . this enables the government to rely on competitive market forces to obtain needed goods and services at fair and reasonable prices . use of other than full and open competition must be justified in writing and must cite specific statutory authority . 46 of 57 installations resulted in the army paying 25 percent more for its sole - source contracts than for those it previously awarded competitively . february 2005 review of sole - source awacs spare parts found that dod did not obtain or evaluate appropriate pricing information , such as sales data for items asserted to be commercial , or adequately consider analyses conducted by the defense contract audit agency or defense contract management agency . in the absence of adequate price competition , the truth - in - negotiations act enables dod to obtain certified cost and pricing data for negotiated contracts exceeding $550,000 that are not for commercial items . gao reviewed 20 contract actions valued at $4.4 billion in which dod waived the requirement for cost and pricing data . dod lacked guidance to help contracting officers determine whether a waiver should be granted , what constitutes acceptable data and analyses , or the need for assistance .