declining competition . some dod and defense research center officials believe that the consolidation and contraction of the defense industry and resulting decline in competition and contraction among vendors and suppliers , make it harder to wring savings from eoq buys . for example , an osd official stated that because the f - 22a was originally designed well over a decade ago , it is now experiencing diminishing manufacturing sources on many components as well as parts and equipment obsolescence . similarly , a defense research center official believes that diminishing manufacturing sources negatively impacted the multiyear savings potential for the f - 22a . dod does not perform post contract assessments of completed multiyear contracts to validate actual results and determine cost effectiveness of its investments . some prior studies , including gao work , provide some limited , but inconclusive insights into multiyear results and benefits . osd and the military services do not maintain adequate , comprehensive records on historical and current multiyear contracts that could facilitate better tracking and provide perspective for future multiyear efforts . dod does not have a formal process for assessing the cost and performance of completed multiyear contracts . according to dod officials , once a program is approved for multiyear , they do not track subsequent performance nor validate actual results against expectations established in the budget justification submissions . also , they do not have an official method to capture and share lessons learned with other programs considering multiyear contracts that could improve prospects for successful outcomes . however , we did find that individual program offices may make efforts to ascertain benefits and learn lessons that can be applied to future multiyear submissions , but it appears that these efforts are isolated . based on prior multiyear experiences , f / a - 18e / f super hornet program officials decided to require cost and pricing data to better inform cost estimates for their next multiyear application . also , they based expected savings on cost reduction initiatives rather than eoq buys because they believed these initiatives had a better return on investment . similarly , the results of our case studies discussed earlier demonstrate that assessing actual results can glean valuable information about contract costs and performance that can be used to improve future multiyear outcomes . some attempts to assess historical multiyear performance have been made , but validating actual savings is elusive . according to dod and defense research center officials as well as the studies they conducted , calculating the actual cost savings from the use of a multiyear contract and comparing results to original expectations is very problematic for several reasons: ( 1 ) multiyear cost and other program data is unavailable ; ( 2 ) lack of comparable data on costs of annual contracts ; and ( 3 ) original assumptions change from the justification package , such as design modifications and variations in buy quantities , labor , and material rates . recent studies by two defense research centers attempted to gain a historical perspective on actual multiyear savings achieved for past contracts in order to provide context as to the relative level of expected savings for the f - 22a multiyear proposal .