medicaid . individuals may enroll in medicaid coverage at any point in time during the year , with their coverage effective as of the date of application , reported eligibility change , or earlier . individuals enrolled in medicaid are generally required to report any changes — such as changes to income or household composition — that may affect their medicaid eligibility . outside of self - reported changes , eligibility for medicaid must generally be redetermined every 12 months . when individuals are determined ineligible for medicaid , states are required to send them notification that their coverage will be terminating at least 10 days prior to their medicaid termination date . in addition , states may opt to extend medicaid coverage through the end of the month if it would otherwise be terminated earlier in the month . exchange coverage . individuals' options for enrollment in exchange coverage are generally restricted to an annual open enrollment period that starts near the end of the calendar year , unless they experience a change that qualifies them for a special enrollment period . exchange coverage is generally prospective , meaning that individuals must select an exchange plan by a certain date in order to have coverage effective the following month . if individuals choose to end their exchange coverage , they must generally provide advance notice at least 14 days before the requested termination date . as with medicaid , individuals enrolled in subsidized exchange coverage are required to report any changes that may affect their eligibility . eligibility for subsidized exchange coverage is redetermined during open enrollment and any time an individual reports a change , regardless of when coverage began during the year . if individuals are determined ineligible for continued subsidized exchange coverage , such subsidies must be terminated or they may be held liable for repayment of the aptc as part of the reconciliation process with irs . the coordination of federal payments for individuals transitioning between medicaid and subsidized exchange coverage is addressed through medicaid's third party liability rule and irs's reconciliation process for the aptc . specifically: third party liability in medicaid . where individuals are enrolled in medicaid along with another form of coverage , medicaid operates as the payer of last resort . this means that the other source of coverage must pay to the extent of its liability before medicaid pays , referred to as third party liability . for example , for individuals enrolled in both medicaid and exchange coverage for some period of time , the issuer of exchange coverage is required to pay to the extent of its liability before medicaid does . reconciliation of the aptc with the irs . individuals enrolled in exchange coverage and receiving the aptc must file federal income tax returns with the irs to reconcile the amount of the premium tax credit allowed with the amount received in advance , and may be liable to pay back any excess credits received during the taxable year . for individuals transitioning from exchange coverage to medicaid during the year , this reconciliation could include repayment of aptc received after an individual was determined eligible for medicaid . this is primarily due to differences in the effective dates of coverage .