pub . in this report , we refer to title i , part a of nclba as “title i.” other parts of title i ( parts b through i ) generally are targeted at specific populations or purposes and are commonly referred to by their program names , such as education of migratory children . years , and about 4,500 of these schools had not made ayp for 4 or more years . under nclba , when a title i school does not make ayp for 4 years , the school enters corrective action , and the district must take a statutorily prescribed action to improve the school , such as replacing selected teaching staff . if the school fails to make ayp for 6 years , the district is required to restructure the school by changing how the school is governed . we matched data on these schools with additional data in education's common core of data ( ccd ) , conducted descriptive analyses of selected characteristics , and compared them to all other title i schools . states reported these data to education through the consolidated state performance report process , which collects annual information from states on esea programs . we also administered two web - based surveys sent to 470 principals in a nationwide sample of schools in corrective action and restructuring during the 2005-2006 school year . we administered the surveys between january and march 2007 and received a combined response rate of about 70 percent . percentage estimates from the surveys have margins of error of plus or minus 8 percentage points using a 95 percent confidence interval , unless otherwise noted . while we did not fully validate specific information that school officials reported in our survey , we took several steps , including corroborating evidence of some schools' improvement status , to ensure that the information provided by school officials was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted site visits to 5 states ( california , illinois , maryland , new york , and pennsylvania ) and 10 school districts with schools in corrective action , restructuring , or both , as well as 20 schools in those districts . the states , districts , and schools selected for site visits not only provided variation across such characteristics as geographic location and district size , but also generally resembled all schools in corrective action and restructuring in terms of students' racial , ethnic , and economic characteristics . together , schools in these 5 states accounted for over 59 percent of schools in corrective action and restructuring nationally in the 2005-2006 school year . we also interviewed state officials from several states ( idaho , south dakota , texas , and virginia ) that had few schools in correction action or restructuring to obtain information on how their state educational agencies are working with districts on school improvement issues . we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and agency guidance and interviewed education officials to obtain information about how they monitor and provide assistance to states and districts . we also interviewed officials in some of education's comprehensive and regional assistance centers .