gao - 13-683 . as we reported in july 2013 , dhs has not yet fulfilled the 2004 statutory requirement to implement a biometric exit capability , but has planning efforts under way to report to congress in time for the fiscal year 2016 budget cycle on the costs and benefits of such a capability at airports and seaports . development and implementation of a biometric exit capability has been a long - standing challenge for dhs . since 2004 , we have issued a number of reports on dhs's efforts to implement a biometric entry and exit system . for example , in february and august 2007 , we found that dhs had not adequately defined and justified its proposed expenditures for exit pilots and demonstration projects and that it had not developed a complete schedule for biometric exit implementation . further , in september 2008 , we reported that dhs was unlikely to meet its timeline for implementing an air exit system with biometric indicators , such as fingerprints , by july 1 , 2009 , because of several unresolved issues , such as opposition to the department's published plan by the airline industry . in 2009 , dhs conducted pilot programs for biometric air exit capabilities in airport scenarios , and in august 2010 we found that there were limitations with the pilot programs — for example , the pilot programs did not operationally test about 30 percent of the air exit requirements identified in the evaluation plan for the pilot programs — that hindered dhs's ability to inform decision making for a long - term air exit solution and pointed to the need for additional sources of information on air exit's operational impacts . in an october 2010 memo , dhs identified three primary reasons why it has been unable to determine how and when to implement a biometric exit capability at airports: ( 1 ) the methods of collecting biometric data could disrupt the flow of travelers through airport terminals ; ( 2 ) air carriers and airport authorities had not allowed dhs to examine mechanisms through which dhs could incorporate biometric data collection into passenger processing at the departure gate ; and ( 3 ) challenges existed in capturing biometric data at the point of departure , including determining what personnel should be responsible for the capture of biometric information at airports . in july 2013 , we reported that , according to dhs officials , the challenges dhs identified in october 2010 continue to affect the department's ability to implement a biometric air exit system . with regard to an exit capability at land ports of entry , in 2006 , we reported that according to dhs officials , for various reasons , a biometric exit capability could not be implemented without incurring a major impact on land facilities . for example , at the time of our 2006 report , dhs officials stated that implementing a biometric exit system at land ports of entry would require new infrastructure and would produce major traffic congestion because travelers would have to stop their vehicles upon exit to be processed .