, the cost of mobility ) . in contrast to the previous “cost per new rider” measure , the tsub measure gives equal weight to both new and existing transit system riders by measuring not only the benefits to people who change transportation modes ( eg , highways to transit ) but also benefits to existing transit riders and highway users . figure 2 illustrates the new starts evaluation and ratings process , including the changes made to the process for fiscal year 2004 . there are currently 52 projects in the pipeline . figure 1 illustrates the overall planning and project development process for new starts projects . to determine whether a project should receive federal funds , fta's new starts evaluation process assigns ratings based on a variety of financial and project justification criteria and then assigns an overall rating . these criteria are identified in tea - 21 and reflect a broad range of benefits and effects of the proposed projects , such as capital and operating finance plans , mobility improvements , and cost - effectiveness . fta assigns proposed projects a rating of high , medium - high , medium , low - medium , or low for each criterion . the individual criterion ratings are combined into the summary financial and project justification ratings . on the basis of these two summary ratings , fta develops the overall project rating using the following decision rules: highly recommended requires at least a medium - high for both the financial and project justification summary ratings . recommended requires at least a medium for both the financial and project justification summary ratings . not recommended is assigned to projects not rated at least medium for both the financial and project justification summary ratings . not rated indicates that fta has serious concerns about the information submitted for the mobility improvements and cost - effectiveness criteria because the underlying assumptions used by the project sponsor may have inaccurately represented the benefits of the project . not available is the rating given to projects that did not submit complete data to fta for evaluation for the fiscal year 2004 cycle . although many projects receive an overall rating of “recommended” or “highly recommended,” only a few are proposed for ffgas in a given fiscal year . the 4-mile , two - station commuter rail extension under the east river will contribute to the overall growth of the nation's largest commuter rail system . the projected capital cost of the project is $5.3 billion . mta is requesting $2.6 billion ( 49 percent ) in new starts funding . lirr has 162,000 daily riders , and this project will allow them to access the east side of new york by connecting lirr with grand central station . fta officials believe that the project will reduce travel time for many riders . the central puget sound regional transit authority ( sound transit ) is proposing a 24-mile central link light rail transit line from central seattle toward , but not connecting to , the seattle - tacoma airport . the total capital cost for the project is estimated at $2.5 billion . sound transit is expected to seek $500 million ( 20 percent ) in new starts funding .