we have reflected this guidance in the final report . john p. hutton , ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , timothy dinapoli , assistant director ; johana r. ayers ; shea bader ; noah bleicher ; john c. bumgarner ; morgan delaney ramaker ; kathryn m. edelman ; walker fullerton ; katherine hamer ; art james , jr. ; justin m. jaynes ; julia kennon ; anne mcdonough - hughes ; christopher j. mulkins ; jason pogacnik ; thomas p. twambly ; and gwyneth b. woolwine made key contributions to this report . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2009 through april 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . contracts and grants are two instruments the government may use to achieve its missions , with their selection principally governed by the nature of the activity . usaid contractors also awarded grants on behalf of usaid in afghanistan , but usaid officials told us that the afghanistan mission does not track grants awarded by contractors . as illustrated in tables 1 through 4 , contractors in our case studies performed a wide variety of services in support of dod , state , and usaid's administration and oversight of other contracts and grants collectively worth billions of dollars . contract and grant administration functions performed by contractors included on - site monitoring of contractor activities , contracting office support , program office support on contract - related matters , and awarding or administering grants . in addition to the far , usaid also has specific agency policy that addresses organizational conflicts of interest for certain contractors , including contractors that evaluate usaid program activities or other contractors . the policy requires that an organizational conflict of interest clause be included in the evaluation contract that precludes the contractor from providing certain related services within 18 months of usaid receiving an evaluation report from the contractor unless a waiver is authorized ; restricts the use of information obtained from other parties during the course of the contract ; and requires nondisclosure agreements with other contractors to protect proprietary data . this clause was not , however , incorporated in any of the three usaid contracts we reviewed that included the evaluation of program activities or contractors . in one of these contracts , the statement of work notes that the contractor may be precluded from performing work under the current task order or from award of other contracts if usaid determines the contractor has a conflict of interest , and that the contractor shall protect proprietary information . this statement is not , however , specific as to when those circumstances occur , nor does it specifically restrict the contractor's use of information obtained from other parties during the course of the contract in future proposals .