dod concurred with our recommendation . in 2007 , omb issued government - wide guidance highlighting preferred practices for incentive contracting and directing agencies to review and update their acquisition policies . in 2009 , the far was revised to implement legislative provisions and omb's guidance on the appropriate use of incentive contracts . these changes addressed some of the issues that we identified in 2005 and 2009 relative to the use of award fees . we did not make new recommendations in these areas . most recently , in a march 2017 report on selected fpi contracts awarded by the navy for new ship construction , we found the navy often structured the contracts such that it absorbed more cost risk than dod's regulation suggests , indicating it may not achieve the expected benefits of using the fpi contract type . for example , we found that 8 of 11 ships delivered under the contracts reviewed experienced cost growth . we recommended that dod conduct a portfolio - wide assessment of the navy's use of additional incentives on fpi contracts across shipbuilding programs . the far now prohibits rollover of unearned award fees from one evaluation period requires award fees to be linked to cost , schedule , and technical performance acquisition objectives ; restricts payment of award fees in instances of unsatisfactory contractor performance ; and requires agencies to collect relevant data on incentive and award fee payments and evaluate the effectiveness of these contract types in achieving desired outcomes . since 2010 , dod has taken steps to improve its use of incentive contracts — often beyond what is required by the far — by revising the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) , instituting its better buying power initiative , and developing new guidance and training courses . in particular , dod has emphasized the use of objective incentives through fpi and cpif contracts rather than award fees whenever possible , in part to better motivate contractors to control costs . these efforts are reflected in dod's reported use of incentive contracts since 2010 , which indicate a substantial growth in obligations for incentive fee contracts and a corresponding decrease in obligations for award fee contracts . dod made changes to the dfars and its accompanying procedures , guidance , and information in recent years intended to support appropriate use of incentive contracts . for example , dod made the following updates to the dfars in 2011: directed contracting officers to utilize objective criteria — associated with incentive fee contracts — to the maximum extent possible for measuring contract performance . dod noted concerns that award fee contracts have a limited ability to motivate contractors to control costs , and that there had been instances in which award fee payments were not consistent with outcomes . directed contracting officers to give particular consideration to fpi contracts , especially for acquisitions moving from development to production or in contracts for which previous ffp contract costs had varied by more than 4 percent from negotiated costs .