iii. ) regarding the second measure , collaborative actions , fda set a target of completing 25 such actions for all of oip for fiscal year 2016 , according to fda officials . the outcomes of this measure have been tracked internally by oip since fiscal year 2014 , when the measure was first implemented . oip officials told us they use specific criteria to determine whether an activity qualifies as a collaborative action . for example , activities qualify only if they include collaboration with an external stakeholder or u.s. government agency other than fda . similarly , inspections conducted by foreign office investigators are excluded ( as these are tracked separately ) unless a foreign regulatory counterpart participates in the inspection with fda staff . in addition , activities are excluded if no tangible deliverable or result was identified . fda reported exceeding its goal of 25 collaborative actions in fiscal year 2015 by 2 , for a total of 27 collaborative actions . we identified shortcomings with using the collaborative action measure to assess the foreign offices' performances . first , the measure and its target are not unique to the foreign offices . according to fda officials , this measure applies to all of oip's offices — both foreign and domestic . when asked about its decision to expand this target to all of oip , rather than specifically focusing on the foreign offices , officials said that they prefer to adopt a holistic approach to assessing oip's contributions . however , in adopting this approach , the measure does not reflect the unique contributions of the foreign offices as they are not distinguished from those made by oip as a whole . second , the target of 25 collaborative actions for all oip does not necessarily target actions that are specific to drug safety - related efforts . fda officials said the efforts could be focused on any commodity regulated by fda , such as food and medical devices , meaning that the target could potentially be met without performing a single activity related to enhancing drug safety . third , the measure is not expressed in terms of an end outcome . end outcomes are the results of programs and activities compared to their intended purpose . in this case , fda's collaborative action measure is not expressed in terms of the foreign offices' purpose of enhancing drug safety . furthermore , fda officials — those in the foreign offices who engage in collaborative actions and those at fda headquarters — acknowledge that it can be difficult to link the results of a foreign office's actions to enhanced drug safety . beyond the shortcomings of the collaborative action measure , fda could not readily cite the overall effectiveness of the offices' contributions , and it has not completed a thorough assessment of their accomplishments , despite the implementation of the two performance measures within the last six years . standards for internal control in the federal government call for agencies to have control activities that are designed appropriately to ( 1 ) conduct top - level reviews of actual performance , ( 2 ) review activities at the activity level , and ( 3 ) review performance measures and indicators .