( app . iv contains information on minimum and maximum pay ranges and average salary for mission critical occupations for selected federal agencies. ) pbgc has taken some steps in recent years to improve its human capital planning and practices . these steps have included drafting planning documents , such as components of a human capital plan like a succession management directive . however , as of march 2008 , the corporation had no formal , comprehensive human capital plan integrating all necessary components to prepare for future challenges , nor had it systematically collected and analyzed its workforce data to identify such challenges . in addition to limited planning and data , pbgc had not fully explored all available compensation options under its statutory authority even though corporation executives stated that pbgc's compensation structure may hinder it from attracting and retaining key staff . pbgc has taken steps to improve its human capital planning and practices . these steps have included drafting planning documents , such as components of a human capital plan like a succession management directive . in addition , pbgc has included key human capital goals in its annual report . this report highlights pbgc's initiatives for the management of human capital , such as ensuring employees have the skills and competencies needed to support its mission and establishing a performance - based culture within the corporation . pbgc has made some progress toward these goals . for instance , pbgc recently hired a new director of human resources and a new human capital specialist with expertise in human capital and succession planning . also , in an effort to establish a performance - based culture , pbgc linked employees' performance expectations to corporate goals and objectives in 2007 . specifically , key pbgc human capital officials , including the chief management officer , are to be evaluated based on their progress toward developing strategic human capital plans and policies . in addition , the human capital office is developing new human capital policies and practices , including increasing management's involvement in order to produce better results . toward that end , a pbgc official stated that the human capital office is planning to adjust the process of writing position descriptions so that the human capital specialist and the department manager can discuss the position's responsibilities and duties and create job announcements more collaboratively . furthermore , pbgc's human capital office has developed and implemented various recruitment strategies in recent years , such as an outreach program to colleges and universities and recruitment through federal internship and fellowship programs . pbgc human capital officials stated that certain recruitment strategies are being reassessed , with the goal of increasing their effectiveness . despite these actions , the corporation lacks a formal , comprehensive human capital strategy , articulated in a formal human capital plan that includes human capital policies , programs , and practices . in our previous work we have identified critical success factors that agencies should use to manage their workforces strategically . the critical success factors are interrelated and mutually reinforcing so that no human capital issue can be compartmentalized and addressed in isolation ( see app . iii ) .