goals . gao - 06-788 . washington , d.c.: july 2006 . afghanistan reconstruction: despite some progress , deteriorating security and other obstacles continue to threaten achievement of u.s . goals . gao - 05-742 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2005 . afghanistan reconstruction: deteriorating security and limited resources have impeded progress ; improvements in u.s. strategy needed . due to significant congressional interest in this issue , we conducted a review of the cerp in afghanistan under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct evaluations on his own initiative and examined the following questions: to what extent ( 1 ) does dod have the capacity to manage and oversee the cerp in afghanistan and ( 2 ) has dod established mechanisms to coordinate its cerp projects with usaid ? to address these objectives , we identified and analyzed cerp guidance issued by dod , cjtf - 101 , and combined joint task force - 82 ( cjtf - 82 ) . we reviewed the guidance to determine if it established roles and responsibilities , as well as staffing and training requirements , for personnel assigned to manage and oversee cerp in afghanistan . we interviewed officials from the offices of the undersecretary of defense ( comptroller ) , the assistant secretary of the army ( financial management and comptroller ) , and usaid in washington , d.c. we traveled to afghanistan and spoke with officials at cjtf - 101 , brigade , and prt levels , as well as officials from usaid and the army corps of engineers . while in afghanistan , we examined program documents to identify the nature and extent of the workload related to managing and executing the cerp and the training curriculum provided to familiarize personnel with the cerp . we also interviewed personnel at all levels to obtain their perspective on their ability to execute their assigned workload and sufficiency of training they received prior to deployment and upon arrival in afghanistan . additionally , we interviewed officials from cjtf - 101 and cjtf - 82 who had recently returned from afghanistan to obtain the same type of information . we reviewed and analyzed the reported cerp obligations in the quarterly reports to congress for fiscal year 2004 to fiscal year 2008 and interviewed officials about the data . we determined that the data are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2008 to april 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government accounting standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . afghanistan is a unique country with different development , security , and infrastructure issues and needs than iraq . as a result , cerp efforts in afghanistan are frequently focused on development and construction whereas in iraq the focus of cerp is reconstruction of neglected or damaged infrastructure .