i and app . ii for more information on our regression model and results. ) beneficiaries from counties with higher levels of vertical consolidation were not sicker , on average , than beneficiaries from counties with lower levels of consolidation . specifically , beneficiaries from counties with higher levels of vertical consolidation tended to have either similar or slightly lower median risk scores , death rates , rates of end - stage renal disease , and rates of disability compared to those from counties with lower levels of consolidation ( see table 2 ) . further , counties with higher levels of consolidation had a lower percentage of beneficiaries dually eligible for medicaid , who tend to be sicker and have higher medicare spending than medicare beneficiaries who are not dually eligible for medicaid . this suggests that areas with higher e / m office visit utilization in hopds are not composed of sicker than average beneficiaries . as we previously stated , the extent of vertical consolidation grew from 2007 through 2013 . coinciding with that growth , we found that e / m office visits were performed more frequently in the higher paid hopd setting in counties with higher levels of vertical consolidation . such excess payments are inconsistent with medicare's role as an efficient purchaser of health care services . according to cms , the agency does not have the statutory authority to equalize total payment rates between hopds and physician offices . further , cms lacks the authority to return the associated savings to the medicare program . therefore , absent legislative intervention , the medicare program will likely pay more than necessary for e / m office visits . from 2007 through 2013 , the number of vertically consolidated physicians nearly doubled , with faster growth in more recent years . regardless of what has driven hospitals and physicians to vertically consolidate , paying substantially more for the same service when performed in an hopd rather than a physician office provides an incentive to shift services that were once performed in physician offices to hopds after consolidation has occurred . our findings suggest that providers responded to this financial incentive: e / m office visits were more frequently performed in hopds in counties with higher levels of vertical consolidation . we found this association in both our analysis of e / m office visit utilization in counties with varying levels of vertical consolidation and in our regression analyses . further , our analysis of 2013 health status data suggests that beneficiaries from counties with higher levels of vertical consolidation , where we found more e / m office visits performed in hopds , were not sicker , on average , than beneficiaries who lived in counties with lower levels of consolidation , where we found fewer e / m office visits performed in hopds . while vertical consolidation has potential benefits , we found that the rise in vertical consolidation exacerbates a financial vulnerability in medicare's payment policy: medicare pays different rates for the same service , depending on where the service is performed . although medicare aims to be an efficient purchaser of health care services , cms has stated that the agency currently lacks the authority to equalize payment rates between settings .