tools . dod has taken steps to measure the frequency with which documentation for investigations and adjudications meets federal standards . dod developed two tracking tools — the rapid assessment of incomplete security evaluations ( raise ) and the review of adjudication documentation accuracy and rationales ( radar ) — to assess the quality of investigative and adjudication documentation . these tracking tools are embedded capabilities in dod's clearance adjudication tracking system ( cats ) , which is used by all non - intelligence dod central adjudication facilities . although these are positive steps , it is too early to assess the effectiveness of these tools as they have not yet been fully deployed . the raise tracking tool will document the instances of missing case information or unresolved case issues for records of investigation provided by opm . in july 2010 , dod issued guidance requiring that each dod central adjudication facility that utilizes the clearance adjudication tracking system use the raise tracking tool on all incomplete national security investigations and on random samples of other clearance cases accounting for 7 percent of their respective single scope background investigations and 14 percent of both their periodic reinvestigations and national agency check with local agency check and credit check investigations . the results are to be reported to the dni who , as security executive agent of the performance accountability council , will arbitrate disagreements between opm and dod and clarify policy questions . dod deployed the raise tracking tool to four central adjudication facilities between july and october 2010 and plans to complete deployment to the remaining central adjudication facilities by the beginning of calendar year 2011 . the radar tracking tool will enable dod to independently evaluate the quality of adjudicative decisions against the adjudicative standards . the usd ( i ) has directed dod central adjudication facilities to provide adjudication case records to the defense personnel research center for analysis . the usd ( i ) plans to use results of the radar tracking tool assessments to monitor central adjudication facilities' compliance with documentation policies , communicate performance to the central adjudication facilities , identify potential weaknesses and training needs , increase compliance , and establish trend data . dod has completed a pilot program for the use of the radar tracking tool and has begun its implementation for the army , defense industrial security clearance office , and navy central adjudication facilities in september 2010 . further , implementation is scheduled for the air force and washington headquarters services by november 2010 . beyond these steps , dod has participated in the development and tracking of quality metrics through the performance accountability council . on march 17 , 2010 , the leaders of the reform effort — the omb , opm , dni , and dod — along with gao , briefed this subcommittee's chairman and ranking member on the status of security clearance reform efforts . subsequent to this briefing , this subcommittee requested that the joint reform team and gao engage in an effort to develop metrics to measure the quality of security clearance investigations and adjudications in order to address gao's concerns about quality .