iii ) . of the 16 airports dominated by a single airline , 14 were dominated by legacy airlines . at 9 of these airports , the second largest airline carried less than 10 percent of passenger traffic , while at the other 5 airports a low - cost airline carried 10 percent or more of passenger traffic . airlines seek mergers and acquisitions as a means to increase profitability and long - term financial viability , but must weigh those potential benefits against the operational and regulatory costs and challenges posed by combinations . a merger's or acquisition's potential to increase short - term profitability and long - term financial viability stems from both anticipated cost reductions and increased revenues . cost reductions may be achieved through merger - generated operating efficiencies — for example , through the elimination of duplicative operations . cost savings may also flow from adjusting or reducing the combined airline's capacity and adjusting its mix of aircraft . airlines may also seek mergers and acquisitions as a means to increase their revenues through increased fares in some markets — stemming from capacity reductions and increased market share in existing markets — and an expanded network , which creates more market pairs both domestically and internationally . nonetheless , increased fares in these markets may be temporary because other airlines could enter the affected markets and drive fares back down . mergers and acquisitions also present several potential challenges to airline partners , including labor and other integration issues — which may not only delay ( or even preclude ) consolidation , but also offset intended gains . doj antitrust review is another potential challenge , and one that we discuss in greater detail in the next section . a merger or acquisition may produce cost savings by enabling an airline to reduce or eliminate duplicative operating costs . based on past mergers and acquisitions and experts we consulted , a range of potential cost reductions can result , such as the elimination of duplicative service , labor , and operations — including inefficient ( or redundant ) hubs or routes — and operational efficiencies from the integration of computer systems , and similar airline fleets . other cost savings may stem from facility consolidation , procurement savings , and working capital and balance sheet restructuring , such as renegotiating aircraft leases . according to us airways officials and analyst reports , for example , the merger of america west and us airways generated $750 million in cost savings through the integration of information technology , combined overhead operations , and facilities closings . airlines may also pursue mergers or acquisitions to more efficiently manage capacity — both to reduce operating costs and to generate revenue — in their networks . a number of experts we spoke with stated that given recent economic pressures , particularly increased fuel costs , one motive for mergers and acquisitions is the opportunity to lower costs by reducing redundant capacity . experts have said that industry mergers and acquisitions could lay the foundation for more rational capacity reductions in highly competitive domestic markets and could help mitigate the impact of economic cycles on airline cash flow .