, navy commands ) . we also reported that don had not , among other things , economically justified its ongoing and planned investment in the naval tactical command support system ( ntcss ) and had not invested in ntcss within the context of a well - defined dod or don enterprise architecture . in addition , we reported that don had not effectively performed key measurement , reporting , budgeting , and oversight activities and had not adequately conducted requirements management and testing activities . we concluded that , without this information , don could not determine whether ntcss , as defined , and as being developed , is the right solution to meet its strategic business and technological needs . accordingly , we recommended that the department develop the analytical basis to determine if continued investment in ntcss represents prudent use of limited resources and to strengthen management of the program , conditional upon a decision to proceed with further investment in the program . the department largely agreed with our recommendations . in addition , we reported that the army had not defined and developed its transportation coordinators' automated information for movements system ii ( tc - aims ii ) — a joint services system with the goal of helping to manage the movement of forces and equipment within the united states and abroad — in the context of a dod enterprise architecture . in addition , we reported that the army had not economically justified the program on the basis of reliable estimates of life cycle costs and benefits and had not effectively implemented risk management . as a result , we concluded that the army did not know if its investment in tc - aims ii , as planned , was warranted or represented a prudent use of limited dod resources . accordingly , we recommended that the department , among other things , develop the analytical basis needed to determine if continued investment in tc - aims ii represents prudent use of limited defense resources . in response , the department agreed with our recommendations and has since reduced the program's scope by canceling future investments . furthermore , in 2005 , we reported that don had invested approximately $1 billion in the four previously cited erp pilots without marked improvement in its day - to - day operations . more specifically , we reported that the program office had not implemented an evm system . we also identified significant challenges and risks as the project moved forward , such as developing and implementing system interfaces , converting data from legacy systems into the erp system , meeting its estimated completion date of 2011 at an estimated cost of $800 million , and achieving alignment with dod's bea . to address these areas , we made recommendations that dod improve oversight of navy erp , including developing quantitative metrics to evaluate the program . dod generally agreed with our recommendations . dod it - related acquisition policies and guidance , along with other relevant guidance , provide an acquisition management control framework within which to manage business system programs like navy erp .