iv ) . we obtained oral comments from representatives of the american college of physicians ( acp ) and the american medical association ( ama ) . cms stated that our recommendation was very timely and that it fits into efforts the agency is pursuing to improve the quality and efficiency of care paid for by medicare . cms also found our focus on the need for risk adjustment in measuring physician resource use to be particularly helpful . cms noted that its current measurement efforts involve evaluation of “episode grouper” technology , which examines claims data for a given episode of care , and called it a promising approach . we do not disagree , but we also believe that approaches involving the measurement of total patient expenditures are equally promising . cms said that the agency would incur significant recurring costs to develop reports on physician resource use , disseminate them to physicians nationwide , and evaluate the impact of the program . while our report notes that cms is familiar with key methodological tools needed to conduct such an effort , we agree that any such undertaking would need to be adequately funded . cms was silent on a strategy for using profiling results beyond physician education . beneficiaries included in our analysis had at least one office visit with a generalist physician in one of the selected metropolitan areas . using dxcg software , we examined the diagnosis codes on survivors' 2003 hospital inpatient , outpatient , and physician claims and generated a separate health risk score for each beneficiary . the risk scores reflect the level of a beneficiary's relative health status , and in our analysis , ranged from .01 ( very healthy ) to 30.84 ( extremely ill ) . next , using their risk scores , we assigned survivors into 1 of 31 discrete risk categories . the categories were ordered in terms of health status from very healthy ( category 1 ) to extremely ill ( category 31 ) . finally , we calculated each survivor's total 2003 medicare costs from all types of providers ( hospital inpatient , outpatient , physician , durable medical equipment , skilled nursing facility , home health , and hospice ) . we included costs from all medicare claims submitted on survivors' behalf , including claims from locations outside the selected metropolitan areas . within each risk category , we ranked survivors by their total costs . survivors who ranked in the top 20 percent of their assigned risk category were designated as overly expensive . figure 2 and figure 3 show the range of costs in the 31 risk categories for survivors in our sample . the methodology we used to identify decedents who were overly expensive was identical to that used for survivors , with one exception . before ranking decedents by their total costs , we further divided them within each risk category by the number of months they were enrolled in medicare ffs during 2003 . this was necessary because decedents varied in the number of months they incurred health care costs . for example , decedents who died in october had up to 10 months to incur costs while those who died in january had 1 month or less to incur costs .