contract award . we focused on cost and price analyses , cost accounting system reviews and pre - award audits , and cost accounting standards ( cas ) statement reviews . we selected these elements because they were identified by the nsf - oig as deficiencies in the past and are essential to determining that the contractor has the ability to complete the contract cost requirements . contract monitoring . we focused on the development of monitoring or surveillance plans , monitoring activities , and incurred cost audits . these activities were previously identified by the nsf - oig as deficiencies and are key to determining if the contractor is performing as expected and within allowable costs . to determine key practices in each of these areas , we relied on prior reports and findings from the gao , nsf - oig , and other agencies . below is the list of gao reports we relied on: gao , standards for internal control in the federal government , gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 ( washington , d.c.: november 1999 ) ; gao , contract management: trends and challenges in acquiring services , gao - 01-753t ( washington , d.c. may 22 , 2001 ) ; gao , defense contracting: improved insight and controls needed over dod's time - and - materials contracts , gao - 07-273 ( washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 ) ; gao , contract management: extent of federal spending under cost - reimbursement contracts unclear and key controls not always used , gao - 09-921 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 30 , 2009 ) ; and gao , acquisition planning: opportunities to build strong foundations for better services contracts , gao - 11-672 ( washington , d.c.: aug. 9 , 2011 ) . we also reviewed internal nsf guidance and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) for additional key practices . to determine the extent to which nsf's contracting practices incorporate key practices and address prior nsf - oig recommendations , we reviewed a nongeneralizable sample of 11 contracts and orders with funding obligations over $3 million in fiscal year 2011 , the latest year for which data were available when we began our work . we used a risk - based approach to select our sample to ensure it included nsf acquisitions with the highest obligation dollar amount . the schedule risk from these delays could lead to higher overall costs . further , officials from two program offices told us that they would benefit from knowing an expected time range to complete early planning activities . for example , in the absence of guidance on the time needed to complete early planning activities , program and contracting officials responsible for nsf's largest contract told us they had difficulty convincing their colleagues of the appropriate time to initiate contract planning . they added that this acquisition required a number of changes before a follow - on contract could be awarded — some based on updates to the far and some based on internal decisions , including the use of a different source selection strategy . market research is a key element in the acquisition planning phase that provides insight into available sources for the acquisition and may provide information on estimated costs .