( see fig . attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder medications 9 . sexual function disorder medications 10 . smoking cessation medications 11 . we excluded all inpatient and laboratory services from our analysis . in addition , because our analysis was limited to medicaid service utilization data , our results do not reflect the use of behavioral health services not paid for by medicaid , such as state - or grant - funded services . to more fully examine service utilization patterns among expansion enrollees , we also examined evaluation and management services — more general medical visits with a physician or other medical provider — because some individuals may have received behavioral health treatment during these visits , including services provided by a psychiatrist . we limited our analysis of evaluation and management services to those visits recorded with a primary diagnosis of a behavioral health condition . however , because of the uncertainty of the extent to which behavioral health treatment was provided as part of evaluation and management services , we do not count them as behavioral health services , or include them in our overall definition of behavioral health treatment . we also examined outpatient emergency room visits — for any condition , not just a behavioral health condition — among expansion enrollees with and without a behavioral health diagnosis . emergency room visits were of interest , because prior research has suggested that individuals who have a behavioral health condition may access emergency care more frequently than those without such conditions . to examine behavioral health prescription drug use , we examined medicaid data for prescription drugs provided to expansion enrollees in 2014 . we defined behavioral health prescription drugs as food and drug administration ( fda ) - approved drugs used , on - or off - label , to treat adults with behavioral health conditions in the united states as of 2014 . to identify these drugs , we worked with a contractor , quintilesims , who developed a list of behavioral health drugs based on information on how drugs are classified by therapeutic use , survey data on prescribing patterns , and expert clinical opinion . we categorized the list of drugs into 12 categories , such as antidepressants , based on our prior work and consultation with quintilesims . see appendix i for the list of behavioral health prescription drugs we included in our analysis . we conducted interviews with officials from our selected states to discuss behavioral health benefits for medicaid expansion enrollees ; how enrollment , service utilization , and prescription drug data were recorded in msis ; officials' perspectives on the results of our analysis ; and whether medicaid expansion affected the availability of behavioral health treatment for expansion enrollees , relative to what was available for low - income , uninsured adults prior to the first year of expansion in 2014 . we also interviewed a physician group specializing in addiction medicine and consulted with clinical experts from quintilesims for additional perspectives on our results .