yet , other hospitals paying higher wages cannot be reclassified . the gpcis are calculated from a variety of data sources . the work gpci is based on a sample of median hourly earnings of workers in six professional categories . physician earnings are not used because some physicians derive much of their income from medicare payments , and an index based on physician earnings would be affected by medicare's existing geographic adjustments . the work gpci is a weighted average of the median earnings of these professions in the area and their median earnings nationwide . if the work gpci was based solely on the median earnings in each area , physician payments would likely increase in large metropolitan areas and decrease in rural areas . the practice expense gpci is based on wage data for various classes of workers , office rent estimates , and other information . the malpractice insurance gpci is based on average premiums for personal liability insurance . concerns have been raised that the current geographic adjustments for physician fees do not appropriately reflect the underlying geographic variation in physicians' costs and that , as a result , beneficiary access to services may be impaired in certain areas . unfortunately , information on physicians' willingness to see medicare patients is dated — although it does not indicate access problems . data from the 1990s show that virtually all physicians were treating medicare beneficiaries and , if they were accepting new patients , accepted those covered by medicare . a 1999 survey conducted by the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) from that year found that 93 percent of physicians who had been accepting new patients were continuing to do so . it is unclear whether the situation has deteriorated since 1999 . medpac is updating its survey , and the new results may shed light on this issue . however , medpac's survey results may not be able to identify access problems if they occur only in certain areas . as i said in my testimony before this subcommittee in february , it is important to identify beneficiary access problems quickly and take appropriate action when warranted . rrcs and schs do not have to meet the proximity requirement to reclassify . rrcs are also exempt from the requirement that their wages be higher than those of the average wages in their original market . of the 756 hospitals that paid wages high enough to qualify for reclassification , only 310 , or 41 percent , were reclassified in fiscal year 2001 . more than one - quarter of these higher - wage hospitals were in large towns , and 73 percent of them were reclassified . higher - wage hospitals in large towns are likelier to be reclassified than other higher - wage hospitals because many are rrcs , which are exempt from the reclassification proximity criterion . in contrast to the nearly three - quarters of large town higher - wage hospitals that reclassified in fiscal year 2001 , about half of higher - wage hospitals in small towns and rural areas were reclassified . almost 39 percent of the reclassified higher - wage small town and rural hospitals were exempt from the proximity criterion because they were rrcs or schs .