see figure 6 below . transcom officials stated that to maximize efficiency , dod requires aircraft conducting channel route missions — whether they are military or commercial — to be completely full of cargo before takeoff . according to transcom officials , the policy restricting commercial carriers from transporting partial loads over channel routes provides dod with a tool to maximize the amount of cargo transported in a single mission over a channel route . cargo previously transported by commercial carriers in partial loads is now consolidated at aerial ports of embarkation . transcom officials reported that historically , commercial carriers transporting partial loads had been conducting a large portion of dod's airlift business . these commercial airlift missions involved transporting cargo to and from locations that were also being serviced by military aircraft conducting channel missions . dod was not maximizing the efficiency of its channel route missions and minimizing costs , because aircraft were not filled to capacity . to reduce the redundancy of transporting cargo using both modes of delivery , dod began restricting commercial carriers from conducting partial plane load missions over channel routes , and it now generally requires commercial aircraft conducting channel missions to be full of cargo before takeoff . according to transcom officials , the policy ultimately played a role in increasing the efficiency of dod's air cargo movements over channel routes . according to a rand report issued in 2003 that analyzed the costs associated with transporting cargo over channel routes using commercial airlift versus military airlift , dod would decrease airlift cost if it reduced the amount of cargo transported by commercial carriers conducing partial plane load missions , and shifted that cargo to be transported in a full plane load aircraft . taking this step would be less expensive than allowing military aircraft to conduct partial plane load missions over channel routes . in addition , dod's policy allows it to offer more training opportunities for its aircrews during periods of low demand for airlift . rather than relying on other types of missions — such as contingency missions — to accomplish training , amc prefers to schedule flying hours for training on channel route missions , which are regularly scheduled , planned in advance , consistent , and predictable . channel route missions are used to maintain and upgrade pilots' flying skills and , as part of the training , can include transporting cargo from specific military locations within the united states — such as mcguire air force base in new jersey — to overseas military bases located in countries like germany or kuwait . these missions are conducted on a regularly scheduled basis and include dod cargo , so they provide commanders with reassurance that they will receive planned amounts of sustainment cargo within a designated time frame . transcom officials told us that in the late 1990's and early 2000's commercial aircraft had been conducting a large portion of dod's airlift business , but the overall demand for dod airlift was relatively low ; as a result the military began experiencing a shortage of flying hours to use for training . many of the airlift missions flown by commercial carriers involved transporting cargo that could have been transported by military aircraft .