according to the u.s . global change research program's 2018 national climate assessment , warmer and drier conditions have led to a greater incidence of large forest fires ( fires with an area greater than 386 square miles ) in the western united states and alaska , a trend expected to continue as climate warms and the fire season gets longer . despite these trends and projections , fema does not plan to comprehensively assess operations to determine whether and how policies and procedures might need to change to better respond to changing operational conditions . according to fema officials , they had not considered conducting this kind of review , because they believe their existing mechanisms — specifically after - action reporting , the continuous improvement process , and program specific mechanisms such as the public assistance change control tool — will allow them to incorporate relevant lessons into policies and procedures . according to fema officials , after a major disaster , fema's standard practice is to identify areas for improvement and develop lessons learned that can improve fema planning and policy and support national preparedness by preparing an after - action report which is required by fema policy . fema has a continuous improvement program which serves as the overarching process by which it identifies and responds to operational lessons learned identified in after - action reporting . according to fema officials , fema headquarters reviews all completed after - action reports to identify any areas for improvement that may need to be addressed through changes in policies and procedures . although the continuous improvement process and its reliance on after - action reporting offers the opportunity to incorporate discrete lessons learned into select policies and procedures , there are some limitations in its ability to offer a comprehensive assessment of its internal controls in light of the strong potential that wildfire disasters will continue to increase . by its nature , after - action reporting captures select issues at a specific time and in a specific place , but it is not a dedicated effort to assess how various policies and procedures may need to be changed to better respond to changing operational conditions . for example , in our discussions with fire - affected jurisdictions , we noted that some programmatic or policy challenges were specific to or made more difficult by the nature of wildfires , such as the complexities of debris removal and difficult housing missions . a comprehensive review of internal controls , such as policies , procedures , and training , may shed light on aspects of fema's operations — well tested over the years in hurricane and flood situations — that could be adapted for greater responsiveness to the wildfire environment , helping to ensure attention to a broad range of issues in addition to those that might be noticed in a specific time and place through after - action reporting . in light of the potential for high - impact wildfires to become more frequent , a dedicated effort to comprehensively assess operations could help fema better ensure that its management controls — such as policies , procedures , and training — are as well designed as possible to respond to the unique challenges .