moreover , capital investment . at the time of their injury , 43 percent of feca beneficiaries in 2010 were employed by usps . feca provides benefits to federal workers who sustained injuries or illnesses while performing federal duties and benefits are not taxed or subject to age restrictions . various proposals to modify feca benefit levels have been advanced . at the request of congress , we have provided information to assist them in making decisions about the feca program . in summary , to improve its financial situation , usps needs to reduce its expenses to close its gap between revenue and expenses , repay its outstanding debt , continue funding its retirement obligations , and increase capital for investment , such as replacing its aging vehicle fleet . in addition , as noted in prior reports , congressional action is needed to ( 1 ) modify usps's retiree health benefit payments in a fiscally responsible manner ; ( 2 ) facilitate usps's ability to align costs with revenues based on changing workload and mail use ; and ( 3 ) require that any binding arbitration resulting from collective bargaining takes usps's financial condition into account . as we have continued to underscore , congress and usps need to reach agreement on a comprehensive package of actions to improve usps's financial viability . in previous reports , we have provided strategies and options , to both reduce costs and enhance revenues , that congress could consider to better align usps costs with revenues and address constraints and legal restrictions that limit usps's ability to reduce costs and improve efficiency ; we have also reported on implications for addressing usps's benefit liabilities . if congress does not act soon , usps could be forced to take more drastic actions that could have disruptive , negative effects on its employees , customers , and the availability of reliable and affordable postal services . until 1950 , residential deliveries were made twice a day in most cities . currently , while most customers receive 6-day delivery , some customers receive 5-day or even 3-day - a - week delivery , including businesses that are not open 6 days a week ; resort or seasonal areas not open year - round ; and areas not easily accessible , some of which require the use of boats , airplanes , or trucks . we appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss the status of u.s . postal service's ( usps ) financial condition and actions needed to address usps's financial challenges . we added usps's financial condition to our high risk list in 2009 , and usps continues to face a serious financial crisis as its mail volume declines . usps has not generated sufficient revenue to cover its expenses and financial obligations . while usps must continue its efforts to align costs with revenues , congressional action is needed to facilitate necessary changes and help usps begin to transition to financial sustainability . this testimony discusses ( 1 ) usps's financial condition , ( 2 ) usps's initiatives to reduce costs and increase revenues , and ( 3 ) actions needed to improve usps's financial situation .