gao - 07-986 . washington , d.c.: august 31 , 2007 . medicare part d low - income subsidy: additional efforts would help social security improve outreach and measure program effects . gao - 07-555 . washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2007 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2006 . medicare: communications to beneficiaries on the prescription drug benefit could be improved . gao - 06-654 . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2006 . social security administration: medicare part d subsidies . gao - 06- 344r . washington , d.c.: january 13 , 2006 . ssa field office staff will call individuals who do not respond . this initiative will begin in june 2008. using a new special pamphlet , designed with a mailer insert that is placed at pharmacies , hospitals , and medical practices , to enable medicare beneficiaries to request a low - income subsidy application without calling or visiting ssa . recent staffing reductions in field offices may have left ssa with limited resources to assist individuals with the subsidy and conduct local outreach efforts . with staffing reductions , much of ssa's work is focused on its core workload , which includes processing applications for social security benefits and for social security numbers . between 2005 and 2007 , field office staffing declined by 7.1 percent . we recently testified that this staffing reduction may have increased customer waiting time in field offices . further , during the course of our recent study , several staff reported that they often did not have adequate time to spend with customers to explain information . although ssa hired 2,200 new field office staff to assist with the implementation of medicare part d , these staff are now focused on the full range of field office workloads and are therefore not available to specifically serve the needs of individuals seeking assistance with the low - income subsidy . individuals responding to mathematica's 2007 study stated that the availability of local ssa staff to help low - income subsidy applicants is important because ssa staff may provide more personalized assistance than staff in ssa's teleservice centers , which operate the agency's toll - free telephone service . however , many of the study respondents reported long lines at crowded ssa field offices or difficulty getting through on local field office telephone lines . mathematica reported that several respondents reported that ssa field offices were overwhelmed by people seeking services other than the low - income subsidy . in our may 2008 testimony on ssa field offices , we also reported that staffing reductions have adversely affected field offices' ability to serve customers . in particular , we reported that between 2002 and 2006 , the average waiting time for field office service increased by 40 percent from 15 minutes to 21 minutes , and in fiscal year 2007 , more than 3 million customers waited for over an hour to be served , according to ssa data . we also reported that ssa's 2007 field office caller survey found that 51 percent of customer calls to 48 randomly selected field offices went unanswered . reaching the millions of people who are forgoing the government's help in paying for their prescription drug benefit remains a significant challenge .