iii ) . to address the third objective , we reviewed literature to identify and construct area - level characteristics that could drive the use of physician services . we then compared potentially overserved and other areas based on these characteristics . specifically , we examined demographic characteristics and the capacity to provide health care services . we also compared beneficiary satisfaction with their health care in the two groups of areas , as measured by a beneficiary survey , and the types of physician services provided in the two types of areas . to make these comparisons , we obtained the most recent available data on demographic and health care utilization capacity characteristics from the area resource file ( arf ) , a national county - level health resource information database produced by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) of the department of health and human services ; population and income data from the u.s. census bureau ; data on beneficiary experiences from the 2008 cahps survey ; and utilization data from medicare physician claims from april 2008 . we also analyzed and compared utilization of specific types of physician services in potentially overserved and other areas ( see app . iv for more information ) . we took several steps to measure the reliability of data used in this report . for the cahps and medicare claims data , we reviewed the documentation for both data sets , examined the accuracy and completeness of the data , and interviewed experts to ensure that we were using the data appropriately . the utilization information in claims data is generally considered reliable , as the data are used by the medicare program to determine payment to health care providers and are closely monitored by cms and medicare carriers . we also examined the reliability of the u.s. census bureau and arf data by reviewing documentation and checking for obvious errors in the data sets . we found all four data sources sufficiently reliable for this report . we conducted this performance audit from may 2008 through august 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 1992 , the medicare program has used a resource - based fee schedule to pay for physician services in the traditional ffs medicare program . the physician fee schedule includes three components: the relative value for the service , a geographic adjustment , and a conversion factor . the relative value for a service compares the resources involved in performing one service with those of other services . there are more than 7,000 physician services in the fee schedule and each one is assigned a relative value . the geographic adjustment was designed to ensure that fees appropriately reflect the geographic variation in costs associated with operating a medical practice . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .