issued a national handbook for radiation incidents in 2008 . this handbook provides scientific information , including checklists for planning in advance of an incident , fact sheets on decontamination approaches , and advice on how to select and combine management of these approaches . conducted a full - scale rdd recovery exercise in 2008 . this exercise , involving several hundred participants , provided a unique opportunity to examine and test the recovery planning process within the urgency of a compressed time frame . the lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the united kingdom's recovery strategy . issued updated nuclear recovery plan guidance in 2009 . this guidance provides direction on recovery from events involving a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor , as well as the malicious use of radiological or nuclear materials . among other things , it requires that all high - risk cities in the united kingdom prepare recovery plans for such incidents . the others stressed the need for shared responsibilities with the federal government . despite the anticipated reliance by city and state governments on the federal government for analysis and cleanup activities following an rdd or ind incident , fema has not developed a national disaster recovery strategy or related plans to guide involvement of federal agencies in these recovery activities , as directed by federal law and executive guidance . to date , much federal attention has been given to developing a response framework , with less attention to recovery . we expect to issue our final report on this topic in november 2009 . to address these objectives , we examined pertinent federal law , presidential directives , and other executive guidance ; interviewed cognizant officials from dhs , doe , epa , fema , nrc , and national laboratories ; and conducted a survey of emergency management officials in 13 cities considered to be at high - or medium - risk of such attacks , officials in these cities' states , and similar officials in all federal fema and epa regional offices . we also reviewed information on the number and type of rdd and ind response and recovery exercises that have been conducted in the last 5 years . finally , we visited the united kingdom to review its preparedness to recover from rdd and ind incidents at the suggestion of epa officials and because it has addressed a fairly recent radiological release incident in a large urban area . in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001 , there is heightened concern that terrorists may try to smuggle nuclear or radiological materials into the united states . these materials could be used to produce either an ind or an rdd . an ind is a crude nuclear bomb made with highly enriched uranium or plutonium . nonproliferation experts estimate that a successful ind could have a yield in the 10 to 20 kiloton range ( the equivalent to 10,000 to 20,000 tons of tnt ) .