dhs has fully addressed both of these recommendations . specifically , dhs implemented an updated top - screen in october 2016 and now collects data from facilities and calculates the distance of concern itself , rather than relying on the facilities' calculation . in response to our second recommendation , in november 2016 , dhs officials stated they completed an assessment of all top - screens that reported threshold quantities of toxic release chemicals of interest and identified 158 facilities with the potential to cause the greatest harm . as of may 2017 , according to iscd officials , 156 of the 158 facilities submitted updated top - screens and 145 of the 156 top - screens had undergone a quality assurance review process . dhs has also taken actions to better assess regulated facilities' risks in order to place the facilities into the appropriate risk tier . in april 2013 , we reported that dhs's risk assessment approach did not consider all of the elements of threat , vulnerability , and consequence associated with a terrorist attack involving certain chemicals . our work showed that dhs's risk assessment was based primarily on consequences from human casualties , but did not consider economic consequences , as called for by the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) and the cfats regulation . we also found that ( 1 ) dhs's approach was not consistent with the nipp because it treated every facility as equally vulnerable to a terrorist attack regardless of location or on - site security and ( 2 ) dhs was not using threat data for 90 percent of the tiered facilities — those tiered for the risk of theft or diversion — and using 5-year - old threat data for the remaining 10 percent of those facilities that were tiered for the risks of release or sabotage . we recommended that dhs enhance its risk assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk and conduct a peer review after doing so . dhs agreed with our recommendations and has made progress towards addressing them . specifically , with regard to our recommendation that dhs enhance its risk assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk , dhs worked with sandia national laboratories to develop a model to estimate the economic consequences of a chemical attack . additional details on the scope and methodology are available in our published reports . in addition , this statement contains updates as of june 2018 from dhs on actions it has taken to address the recommendations made in our prior reports . dhs has made a number of programmatic changes to cfats in recent years that may also impact its progress in addressing our open recommendations ; these changes are included as part of our ongoing review of the program . in may 2014 , we found that more than 1,300 facilities had reported having ammonium nitrate to dhs . however , based on our review of state data and records , there were more facilities with ammonium nitrate holdings than those that had reported to dhs under the cfats program . thus , we concluded that some facilities that were required to report may have failed to do so .