we have previously reported on strategic sourcing . for example , we found in september 2012 that the agencies we reviewed — dod , dhs , and the departments of veterans affairs and energy — leveraged only a fraction of their buying power through strategic sourcing and achieved limited savings . dod and the department of veterans affairs evaluate the best ways to strategically source their highest spending categories . these agencies agreed with the recommendation and have since told us that they are analyzing spending data . however , they had not completed this analysis as of august 2013 . both agencies agreed with the recommendation and have since told us they are working to develop goals and metrics . however , the agencies had not completed their efforts as of august 2013 . appendix i contains additional information on our scope and methodology . as agreed with your offices , unless you publically announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the director of omb ; the secretaries of dod , dhs , hud , and the interior ; the administrators of gsa , nasa , and sba ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff acknowledgements are provided in appendix viii . our objectives for this report were to discuss ( 1 ) the ways in which the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) have considered small businesses in their strategic sourcing guidance and gsa and selected agencies have considered small businesses in their strategic sourcing initiatives and ( 2 ) the extent to which data and performance measures are available on the inclusion of small businesses in government - wide and selected agencies' internal strategic sourcing initiatives . small businesses include those unconditionally owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals ( small disadvantaged businesses ) . to describe the ways in which omb , gsa , and selected agencies have considered various categories of small businesses in their strategic sourcing guidance and efforts , we reviewed omb and gsa guidance on strategic sourcing . these documents included omb memorandums and gsa's concept of operations for government - wide strategic sourcing efforts . we also reviewed documentation on three ongoing government - wide strategic sourcing initiatives managed by gsa ( domestic delivery services , office supplies , and print management ) to determine steps taken in addition , we reviewed documentation on to consider small businesses.three proposed initiatives managed by gsa ( janitorial and sanitation supplies ; maintenance , repair , and operations ; and print management functional areas iii and iv ) .