dhs concurred with the two recommendations . as of april 2018 , dhs has not demonstrated that it has implemented these recommendations . in february 2018 , we reported that dhs had taken actions to identify , categorize , and assign employment codes to its cybersecurity positions , as required by the homeland security cybersecurity workforce assessment act of 2014 . however , its actions had not been timely and complete . for example , dhs had not met statutorily defined deadlines for completing actions to identify and assign codes to cybersecurity positions or ensured that its procedures to identify , categorize , and code its cybersecurity positions addressed vacant positions , as required by the act . the department also had not ( 1 ) identified the individual within each dhs component agency who was responsible for leading and overseeing the identification and coding of the component's cybersecurity positions or ( 2 ) reviewed the components' procedures for consistency with departmental guidance . in addition , dhs had not yet completed its efforts to identify all of the department's cybersecurity positions and accurately assign codes to all filled and vacant cybersecurity positions . gao , cybersecurity: federal efforts are under way that may address workforce challenges , gao - 17-533t ( washington , d.c.: apr . gao , information security: dhs needs to continue to advance initiatives to protect federal systems , gao - 17-518t ( washington , d.c.: mar . gao , high - risk series: progress on many high - risk areas , while substantial efforts needed on others , gao - 17-317 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 15 , 2017 ) . gao , cybersecurity: actions needed to strengthen u.s . capabilities , gao - 17-440t ( washington , d.c.: feb. 14 , 2017 ) . gao , cybersecurity: dhs's national integration center generally performs required functions but needs to evaluate its activities more completely , gao - 17-163 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 1 , 2017 ) . gao , information security: dhs needs to enhance capabilities , improve planning , and support greater adoption of its national cybersecurity protection system , gao - 16-294 ( washington , d.c.: jan. 28 , 2016 ) . gao , critical infrastructure protection: measures needed to assess agencies' promotion of the cybersecurity framework , gao - 16-152 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 17 , 2015 ) . gao , critical infrastructure protection: sector - specific agencies need to better measure cybersecurity progress , gao - 16-79 ( washington , d.c.: nov. 19 , 2015 ) . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . it also had not established metrics and methods by which to evaluate its performance against the principles . we also identified several impediments to nccic performing its cybersecurity functions more efficiently .