we observe that h.r . 2749 contains a provision that may allow the secretary of health and human services , in consultation with the commissioner of cbp , to specify the unique numerical identifier system to be used , taking into account compatibility with cbp's automated systems . such actions would help prevent high - risk foods from entering u.s. commerce . when we issued our report in september 2009 , we reported that cbp's computer system did not notify fda's or fsis's systems when imported food shipments arrive at u.s. ports , which increases the risk that potentially unsafe food may enter u.s. commerce , particularly at truck ports . if fda chooses to examine a shipment as part of its admissibility review , the agency notifies both cbp and the importer through its computer system , oasis . however , once the shipment arrives at the port and clears cbp's inspection process , the importer is not required to wait at the port for fda to conduct its examination . instead , the importer may choose to transport the shipment to the consignee's warehouse or other facility within the united states . the importer might choose to do so because , for example , cbp and fda do not have the same hours of operation at some ports , and fda's port office may be closed when the shipment arrives . in such cases , as a condition of the bond with cbp , the importer agrees to hold the shipment intact and not distribute any portion of it into u.s. commerce until fda has examined it . cbp and fda officials told us that , occasionally , an importer will transport the shipment to the consignee's warehouse without first notifying fda . if this occurs , fda will not quickly know that the shipment has arrived and been transported to a u.s. warehouse because cbp's computer system does not notify fda's oasis computer system when the shipment arrives at the port . instead , from the perspective of an fda reviewer using oasis , it will appear as if the shipment's arrival is still pending . fda port officials told us that it could be 2 or 3 days before fda reviewers become suspicious and contact cbp to inquire about the shipment's arrival status . by this time , an unscrupulous importer could have distributed the shipment's contents into u.s. commerce without fda's approval . as we reported , if cbp communicated time - of - arrival information directly to oasis , then fda would be able to quickly identify shipments that are transported into the united states without agency notification and arrange to examine them before they are distributed to u.s. markets . since our report was issued in september 2009 , cbp told us that it had modified its software to notify fda of a shipment's time of arrival . however , we have not reviewed the effectiveness of these modifications . we are still waiting to see whether cbp has an agreement with fsis regarding time of arrival modifications .