we have made these changes where appropriate . the service provides training to its employees who process remittances . does the service provide training to its employees who process remittances ? the service considers the specific policies and procedures for securing and transferring its remittances from postal retail facilities to banks as law enforcement sensitive information . therefore , these policies and procedures are not described or discussed in detail in this report . similarly , for the same reason , our specific observations and information that the united states postal inspection service included in its reports we reviewed relating to instances where service policies and procedures were not followed are described only in general terms in this report . traditionally , the service's local post offices deposited their daily remittances of coin , cash , and checks in accounts with local banks . before 1997 , according to the service's assistant treasurer for banking , the thousands of individual retail postal units deposited their daily remittances in some 9,300 bank accounts with 5,500 banks across the country . in 1997 , to help reduce banking costs and improve funds availability , the postal service implemented consolidated banking — a service - wide process whereby the daily remittances from the service's retail postal facilities are consolidated and transferred by armed bank couriers to a relatively few commercial banks for deposit . the postal inspection service , one of the nation's oldest law enforcement agencies , is the postal service's law enforcement arm . with a force of about 1,400 uniformed postal police officers ( ppos ) , over 1,900 postal inspectors , and five forensic crime laboratories , the postal inspection service is responsible for ensuring the safety and security of postal employees , facilities , and assets . ppos provide security at postal facilities where the postal inspection service has determined that risk and vulnerability demonstrate a need for this level of security . postal inspectors help enforce and investigate infractions of over 200 federal laws applicable to crimes that adversely affect or involve fraudulent use of the u.s. mail . matters investigated include criminal incidents , such as mail theft , robberies , burglaries , and embezzlement ; and the criminal use of the mail for money laundering , fraud , child exploitation , and the movement of illegal drugs . the postal inspection service periodically performs reviews of remittance - processing procedures at selected individual postal facilities or at a cross section of facilities within a postal district . these reviews are security reviews focused primarily on compliance with the applicable policies and procedures to help prevent instances of mishandling and losses . results of these reviews are reported to the appropriate postal district manager , and districtwide review results are reported to the appropriate postal area manager . according to the postal inspection service , although its reports apprise postal officials of its findings and recommend corrective action ( s ) , district and area managers are not required to implement these recommendations . to meet our objectives , we obtained and reviewed service policies and procedures for controlling and securing remittances and for requiring background checks and training for employees who work with remittances .