hypothesis not tested . original strategy ( davis - bacon ) : ofpp planned to test this hypothesis by gathering data on the time it takes to submit reporting data through the central reporting portal and outside of the portal , with self - reported data from contractors . according to ofpp , data were not collected due to a lack of participation in the davis - bacon portion of pilot . revised strategy ( hfc ) : this hypothesis could not be tested through hfc reporting because it was a reporting requirement without an existing reporting method through which to compare reporting burden . we did this by verifying the statements against supporting information . we determined that the pilot data we reviewed were reliable for the purposes of our work by reviewing the data , tracing them back to underlying agency source documents , and interviewing relevant agency staff . we also interviewed offm staff and hhs officials on how the grants portion of the pilot was executed . to assess the extent to which the procurement portion of the pilot demonstrated changes in reporting burden , we reviewed omb's plans and compared them to actions omb took to execute the pilot . as the agency designated by omb to execute the grants portion of the section 5 pilot , hhs developed and analyzed six “test models” to determine if adopting the proposed changes would contribute to the pilot program's objectives of reducing reporting burden and duplication . these test models examined a variety of grant reporting issues that hhs had identified as presenting challenges . all but one of the test models , the common data element repository ( cder ) library 2 , based their findings on data collected from grantees . the text box below provides high - level summaries of each of the six models . additional details on the approach followed for each model , as well as reported results , can be found in appendix ii . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of our report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) the section 5 pilot met the statutory requirements of the act , ( 2 ) the grants portion of the section 5 pilot demonstrated changes in federal award recipients' reporting burden , and ( 3 ) the procurement portion of the section 5 pilot demonstrated changes in federal award recipients' reporting burden . to assess the extent to which the pilot met statutory requirements we reviewed section 5 of the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 , as amended by the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 , to determine the legal requirements set forth in the act pertaining to establishing , designing , and executing the section 5 pilot . we compared these requirements to documents from the office of management and budget ( omb ) and designated agencies .