acilities that were in poor condition . ( see fig . ( see fig . good ( 9 districts ) good ( 27 districts ) fair ( 10 districts ) fair ( 32 districts ) according to new mexico's data , most indian impact aid and other school districts had building systems that were in good to fair condition . the school districts' structural systems were in the best shape overall — 95 percent of the indian impact aid and about 87 percent of the other school districts had structural systems that were in good condition . new mexico's data showed that at least one - half of the indian impact aid school districts had electrical systems that were in good condition , while at least one - half of both types of school districts had building and fire code systems that were in good condition . although about one - half of the indian impact aid and other school districts had site utility systems that were in good condition , this was also the building category with the highest proportion of districts that were in the poor condition category . for the remaining two building systems , new mexico's data indicated that about one - quarter of the indian impact aid and other school districts had mechanical and plumbing systems that were in good condition and one - third of the indian impact aid and one - quarter of the other school districts had interior systems that were in good condition . washington's data were based on evaluations from 118 of 295 school districts , including 9 of 29 indian impact aid school districts and 109 of 266 other school districts . as we have previously discussed , washington does not categorize school districts in terms of their condition , but one consultant has associated the building scores with different levels of condition . for our analysis , we used this consultant's scoring table to categorize the school districts' facilities as being in good , fair , or poor condition . what is known about how school facilities affect student outcomes ? we use the term “indian impact aid” to refer to those school districts that qualify to receive impact aid basic support funding because they meet the minimum eligibility criteria , namely they have at least 400 students in average daily attendance who are federally connected , in this case who reside on indian lands , or such students comprise at least 3 percent of the total number of students in the district . 27 percent of all students residing on indian lands . in addition , we visited 2 school districts in each of the 4 states to obtain school district officials' perspectives on factors that affect facility maintenance and to observe their facilities . to determine what is known about how the condition of school facilities affects student outcomes , we conducted a literature search for studies that quantitatively analyzed relationships between school facility variables and a variety of student outcomes , such as student achievement test scores and student attendance rates . we selected a set of 24 studies — those in peer - reviewed journals and others that our methodologists regarded as sufficiently rigorous — and systematically reviewed these studies . ( see app .