cancer is the illness reported in more than half of the cases . diseases affecting the lungs accounted for an additional 14 percent of cases . specifically , chronic beryllium disease is reported in 1 percent of cases , and beryllium sensitivity , which may develop into chronic beryllium disease , is reported in an additional 5 percent . about 7 percent of cases reported asbestosis , and less than 1 percent claimed silicosis . systems limitations prevent energy officials from aggregating certain information important for program management . for example , the case management system does not collect information on the reasons that claimants had been declared ineligible or whether claimants have appealed decisions . systematic tracking of the reasons for ineligibility would make it possible to identify other cases affected by appeal decisions that result in policy changes . while energy officials report that during the major systems changes that occurred in july 2003 , fields were added to the system to track appeals information , no information is yet available regarding ineligibility decisions . in addition , basic demographic data such as age and gender of claimants are not available . this finding reflects the number of cases for which contractors and their insurers are likely to not contest a workers' compensation claim , rather than the number of cases that will ultimately be paid . the contractors considered to be willing payers are those that have an order from , or agreement with , energy to not contest claims . however , there are likely to be many claimants who will not have a willing payer in certain states , such as ohio and iowa . for all claimants , additional factors such as state workers' compensation provisions or contractors' uncertainty on how to compute the benefit may affect whether or how much compensation is paid . a majority of cases in nine states will potentially have a willing payer of workers' compensation benefits , assuming that for all cases there has been a positive physician panel determination and the claimant can demonstrate a loss from the worker's illness that has not previously been compensated . specifically , based on our analysis of workers' compensation programs and the different types of workers' compensation coverage used by the major contractors , it appears that approximately 86 percent of these cases will potentially have a willing payer — that is , contractors and their insurers who will not contest the claims for benefits . it was necessary to assume that all cases filed would receive a positive determination by a physician panel because sufficient data are not available to project the outcomes of the physician panel process . more specifically , there are indications that the few cases that have received determinations from physician panels may not be representative of all cases filed , and sufficient details on workers' medical conditions were not available to enable us to independently judge the potential outcomes . in addition , we assumed that all workers experienced a loss that was not previously compensated because sufficient data were not available to enable us to make more detailed projections on this issue .