forces korea . department of defense inspector general . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 1998 . army's and marine corps' quantitative requirements for blocks i and ii stinger missiles . department of defense inspector general . washington , d.c.: june 25 , 1996 . ii. ) in 1997 , as one step toward addressing these concerns , the department of defense issued instruction 3000.4 , which sets forth policies , roles and responsibilities , time frames , and procedures to guide the services as they develop their munitions requirements . this instruction is referred to as the capabilities - based munitions requirements process and is the responsibility of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . the instruction describes a multi - phased analytical process that begins when the under secretary of defense for policy develops — in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the military services , and the combatant commands — policy for the defense planning guidance . the defense intelligence agency uses the defense planning guidance and its accompanying scenarios , as well as other intelligence information , to develop a threat assessment . this assessment contains estimates and facts about the potential threats that the united states and allied forces could expect to meet in war scenarios . the combatant commanders ( who are responsible for the theaters of war scenarios ) , in coordination with the joint chiefs of staff , use the threat assessment to allocate each service a share of the identified targets by phases of the war . the services then develop their combat requirements using battle simulation models and scenarios to determine the number and mix of munitions needed to meet the combatant commanders' specific objectives . despite the department's efforts to standardize the process and generate consistent requirements , many questions have continued to be raised about the accuracy or reliability of the munitions requirements determination process . in april 2001 , we reported continuing problems with the capabilities - based munitions requirements determination process because the department ( 1 ) had yet to complete a database providing detailed descriptions of the types of targets on large enemy installations that would likely be encountered , based on warfighting scenarios ; ( 2 ) had not set a time frame for completing its munitions effectiveness database ; and ( 3 ) was debating whether to include greater specificity in its warfighting scenarios and to rate the warfighting scenarios by the probability of their occurrence . these process components significantly affect the numbers and types of munitions needed to meet the warfighting combatant command's objectives . the department acknowledged these weaknesses and recognized that inaccurate requirements can negatively affect munitions planning , programming , and budget decisions , as well as assessments of the size and composition of the industrial production base . in responding to our report's recommendations , the department has taken a number of actions to correct the problems we identified .