some agencies do not reimburse ssa at all . for example , va is not required to provide reimbursement by statute , while opm provides federal retirement data to ssa that is critical to its mission , and the agencies have agreed that the expenses involved in the exchanges are reciprocal . however , ssa officials were unable to point to any reciprocity study supporting this decision . for other agencies , some of these differences in projected reimbursement amounts cannot fully be explained by the frequency with which the agencies expect to receive the data . for example , as noted in table 1 , cms expected to receive updates to the full death file weekly from ssa and cms officials told us the agency expected to reimburse ssa $9,900 in fiscal year 2013 . rrb similarly expected to pay $9,000 , despite expecting to receive the file less frequently — monthly , rather than weekly . at the same time , irs expected to receive weekly updates to the full file plus the full file annually in fiscal year 2013 , and pbgc expected to receive the file with the same frequency for fiscal year 2014 . however , irs expected to pay more than $87,000 , while pbgc's expected reimbursement amount was $70,000 . while the reimbursement amounts for agencies are sometimes included in the inter - agency agreements governing how ssa provides its full death file , the agreements lack information on how these amounts were determined . according to ssa officials , these agreements specify the permissible purpose for using the death data and limitations on sharing the data within the agency . however , according to officials we spoke with at several agencies that receive the full death file , ssa staff did not provide an explanation for reimbursement amounts . appendix i describes our scope and methodology in more detail . we conducted this performance audit from november 2012 through november 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ssa's primary mission is to pay benefits under its old - age , survivors , and disability insurance and supplemental security income programs , in accordance with titles ii and xvi of the social security act of 1935 ( the act ) , as amended . ( ssn ) — a unique identifier assigned to each person through a process known as “enumeration” — as a way of tracking individuals' work activities and the benefits paid to retired workers and eligible family members . in order to properly administer payments , ssa also tracks death information of ssn - holders . in addition , ssa issues the social security number ssa issues ssns and uses them to administer its programs , including tracking u.s. workers' earnings in order to determine the types and amounts of benefits individuals may be eligible for .