enactment of new authorities . from 1995 to 2015 , 329 new authorities for spending authority and permanent appropriations were enacted . for example , the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 granted the department of the treasury ( treasury ) the authority to purchase any obligations and other securities issued by government - sponsored enterprises , such as fannie mae . according to the act , treasury was authorized to use this authority until december 31 , 2009 , with certain actions permitted after that date . omb staff said that monetary credits are used infrequently government - wide , and that agencies are not required to record this type of authority separately in the budget . when we asked , no other agencies reported having monetary credits or bartering authority . the text box below provides examples of accounts that are authorized to use monetary credits or bartering . we have provided a final inventory dataset — which includes the agency accounts and related budget information , statutory references , enactment years , and sequestration designation — online as a supplement to this report . this is a broader category than just monetary credits . omb staff said that agencies are not required to report monetary credits elsewhere . therefore , we are unable to identify agencies' use of monetary credits in max data . the table below summarizes the line numbers we analyzed while building our inventory of accounts by authority type . to avoid double counting , we did not include lines that represent totals . for example , line 6300 was not in our scope for fiscal years 1995 through 1998 because it represented total appropriations . however , line 6300 is in our scope for years when it represented reappropriations , which is a form of permanent appropriations that would be included in our scope . for offsetting collections , we included line numbers labeled in max as discretionary or mandatory . although discretionary spending generally refers to outlays from budget authority that is provided in and controlled by appropriations acts — which would not be spending authority and permanent appropriations — omb staff said this distinction does not always apply in max data . this is partly because , prior to fiscal year 1999 , the program and financing schedule did not distinguish between mandatory and discretionary offsetting collections . although distinct line numbers for mandatory and discretionary collections were added , the designation in max is not always correct , according to omb staff . for fiscal years 1995 through 1998 , lines 6800 to 6885 could represent discretionary or mandatory offsetting collections . starting with fiscal year 1999 , omb reported discretionary and mandatory collections separately in the program and financing schedule . discretionary collections were reported on lines 6800 to 6885 , and mandatory collections on lines 6900 to 6985 . in later years , the numbers changed but the distinction between the two remained . examples of different accounts with and uses of offsetting collections department of transportation ( dot ) , motor carrier safety operations and programs .