va concurred with our recommendations . to describe the use of and spending for va long - term care , we reviewed va data on the utilization of and obligations for long - term care for fiscal years 2014 through 2018 and projections of utilization and expenditures developed by va's enrollee health care projection model ( ehcpm ) for fiscal years 2017 through 2037 . to discuss the challenges va faces in meeting veterans' demand for long - term care , we reviewed relevant va documents and interviewed va officials about va's capacity to provide long - term care , including officials from va's geriatrics and extended care office ( gec ) which oversees the long - term care programs , and officials from the office of policy and planning . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . the work on which this statement is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . va provides or pays for long - term care — ranging from assistance with dressing and bathing to clinical care for spinal injuries or dementia — through three institutional and 11 noninstitutional programs . ( see fig . 1 for a list of va's institutional and noninstitutional long - term care programs and app . i for brief descriptions of these programs. ) va's long - term care programs serve over 500,000 veterans with a wide range of characteristics and needs . further , certain community nursing homes , adult day health care , and hospice and respite care programs have specially trained staff to serve veterans with dementia , and the spinal cord injury and disability home care program and certain va community living centers are equipped to serve veterans needing ventilator care . all veterans enrolled in the va health care system are eligible for va's basic medical benefits package , which includes coverage for certain institutional and noninstitutional long - term care services . a veteran's eligibility for fully or partially covered nursing home care is determined by the veteran's priority for care , which is generally based on the veteran's service - connected disability status . decisions about which long - term care programs may be the best fit are made at the va medical center ( vamc ) level between va providers , veterans , and their families . as we reported in february 2020 , va data shows that utilization of and spending for va long - term care programs generally increased from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . specifically , the number of veterans receiving care in va's long - term care programs increased 14 percent from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 , from 464,071 to 530,327 veterans , while spending grew 33 percent from $6.8 billion to $9.1 billion . further , we found that va projects utilization and expenditures for long - term care to increase for most of the programs included in va's ehcpm from fiscal years 2017 through 2037 .