government. ) the quality of existing country level data varies due to limited availability , reliability , and comparability . table 3 summarizes the main limitations of trafficking data , identified in our review of literature on human trafficking . the availability of data is limited by several factors . trafficking victims are a hidden population because trafficking is a clandestine activity , similar to illegal migration and labor exploitation . this limits the amount of data available on victims and makes it difficult to estimate the number of unreported victims . trafficking victims are often in a precarious position and may be unwilling or unable to report to , or seek help from , relevant authorities . moreover , hhs reported that victims live daily with inhumane treatment , physical and mental abuse , and threats to themselves or their families back home . victims of human trafficking may fear or distrust the government and police because they are afraid of being deported or because they come from countries where law enforcement is corrupt and feared . in such circumstances , reporting to the police or seeking help elsewhere requires courage and knowledge of local conditions , which the victims simply might not have . in addition , some governments give low priority to human trafficking violations and do not systematically collect data on victims . in most countries where trafficking data are gathered , women and children are seen as victims of trafficking , and men are predominantly seen as migrant workers , reflecting a gender bias in existing information . ( see app . ii for additional information about the different methodologies , analytical assumptions , data validation , and data sources used by the international organizations and the u.s . men are also perceived as victims of labor exploitation that may not be seen as a crime but rather as an issue for trade unions and labor regulators . thus , data collection and applied research often miss the broader dimensions of trafficking for labor exploitation . for example , the demand for cheap labor , domestic service , slavery , and child labor have not been sufficiently investigated as factors affecting the scale of human trafficking . the reliability of existing data is also questionable . in developing countries , which are usually countries of origin , capacity for data collection and analysis is often inadequate . in countries of destination , human trafficking convictions are often based on victim testimony . moreover , estimates of trafficking are extrapolated from samples of reported cases , which are not random . therefore , it is difficult to determine how representative those cases are of the general population of all human trafficking victims and what biases have been introduced . data quality is further constrained by limited data comparability . countries and organizations define trafficking differently . a practice that is considered trafficking in one country may be considered culturally and historically acceptable in another country . for example , in west african countries , people , in particular children , commonly move within and across borders in search of work and are placed in homes as domestic servants or on farms and plantations as laborers .