we therefore excluded these loans from our analysis . from these data , we selected four lenders with the highest loan volume and default rates . three of these four lenders are preferred lenders , which mean they have delegated authority to make lending decisions on behalf of sba . we also reviewed 88 sba loan packages for these four lenders in order to examine characteristics of individual loans , such as the extent to which the franchisees' projected first - year revenues differed from actual first - year revenues , as well as to assess the accuracy of certain data fields in the sba franchise loan data . these loan packages included all loan packages for these lenders during this time period . we assessed the reliability of the sba loan data by comparing it to information in loan files for the four lenders and interviewing knowledgeable agency officials . we found discrepancies between data in sba's loan database and information in the loan files we reviewed , as discussed later in this report , but we determined that the sba loan data were sufficiently reliable for reviewing loans to franchisees . we analyzed revenue data that we obtained from the franchise organization to calculate actual first - year revenue of franchisees , when possible . we compared these calculations with the projected revenues in sba loan applications for select franchisees . we also calculated average revenues for a broader population of franchisees , and compared it to average revenues reported in the franchise organization's disclosure documents . we identified several issues with the accuracy and completeness of the franchise organization's revenue data , including missing , duplicate , and nonsequential revenue data . for purposes of data reliability , we excluded these businesses from our calculations . however , after assessing the reliability of the revenue data , we determined that they were sufficiently reliable for purposes of our analysis . we also interviewed sba officials about their activities related to oversight of the four lenders to the franchise organization , efforts to track and monitor loan agents , and assistance provided to potential franchisees during the loan application process . in addition , we examined sba's policies and procedures for overseeing lenders in the 7 ( a ) program . we also reviewed reports by sba's office of inspector general ( oig ) and other related documents . to conduct our investigative work , we reviewed an allegation that a loan agent intentionally exaggerated first - year revenue projections on sba loan applications in order to ensure that potential franchisees would qualify for sba - guaranteed loans . we interviewed the owner of the franchise organization , the loan agent who was the subject of the allegation , her employer , eight former franchisees that were referred to us during the course of the investigation , and a bank officer who reviewed loans related to the allegation . to better understand the franchisees' experience with the 7 ( a ) program , we interviewed 14 additional franchisees of the select franchise organization . we selected these franchisees on the basis of a range of factors , including whether they used a loan agent , geographic dispersion , and performance status of the loan .