( recommendation 2 ) . we conducted this performance audit from february 2018 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we noted that documents were missing , illegible , or did not corroborate the information claimed regarding at least one employee's residency for 9 of 12 certifying firms that we reviewed . we also stated that in 5 of these 9 cases , the firm would not be eligible for hubzone certification if the sba analyst had not counted such employees . in its comments , sba stated that it is only required to verify that no fewer than 35 percent of a hubzone firm's employees reside in a hubzone . sba asserted that it had sufficient documentation to conclude that at least 35 percent of each firm's employees resided in a hubzone for each of the 12 firms we reviewed . while sba analysts may have addressed insufficient documentation by following additional procedures , which are described in the report , we found that these procedures were not documented in sba's internal written policies for certifying hubzone firms and analysts did not document their use of these procedures in the case files we reviewed . therefore , we were not able to verify that sba took such steps to verify the employees' addresses . in the draft report , we identified an inconsistency when reviewing the case files for the only puerto rican hubzone firm recertified between june 2017 and may 2018 . specifically , the firm reported on its application that it had zero employees , but also claimed 19 of its employees lived in a hubzone . in its comments , sba stated that these numbers came from a program examination system that is no longer used by the agency and therefore would not have been administratively correct to use in the 2017 recertification process . however , the file we received from sba's hubzone certification tracking system asks for such information and had a response date noted as december 26 , 2017 . we recognize and noted that the firm was not required to submit corroborating documentation to verify employee information , because it was under the $1 million threshold . however , sba policy states that recertifying firms must represent that the circumstances relative to their eligibility at the time of certification have not materially changed . in this instance , sba recertified the firm when basic information obtained for the firm appeared to be erroneous and did not indicate that the firm was in compliance with the employee residency requirement . in the draft report , we stated that sba did not consistently follow its quality review procedures to complete three distinct levels of review when approving the 12 puerto rican firms in our non - generalizable sample for certification . in its comments , sba stated that while its legacy system , the hubzone certification tracking system , requires three levels of review , its internal policies do not require that each level of review be performed by different staff .