these sites have the potential t ster . far broader spectrum of users than the federal regi . in summary , current laws and guidance governing the federal government's collection , use , and disclosure of personal informatio have gaps and other potential shortcomings in three broad categories: ( 1 ) the privacy act and e - government act do not always provide protections for federal uses of personal information , ( 2 ) laws and guidance may not effectively limit agency collection ) the and use of personal information to specific purposes , and ( 3 privacy act may not include effective mechanisms for informing the public . in assessing the appropriate balance between the needs of the federal government to collect personally identifiable information for programmatic purposes and the assurances that individuals should have that their information is being sufficiently protected and properly used , congress should consider amending applicable laws , such as the privacy act and the e - government act , according to the alternatives outlined in our report , including revising the scope of the laws to cover all personally identifiable information collected , used , and maintained by the federal government ; ● setting requirements to ensure that the collection and use of personally identifiable information is limited to a stated pur and ● establishing additional mechanisms for informing the public a privacy protections by revising requirements for the structure and publication of public notices . in commenting on a draft of our report , omb officials noted that they shared our concerns about privacy and stated they believe it would be important for congress to consider potential amendments to the privacy act and the e - government act in the broader context of all existing privacy and related laws that congress has enacted . though we did not make specific recommendations to omb , the agency provided comments on the alternatives identified in conjunction with our matter for congressional consideration . regarding alternatives for revising the scope of laws to cover all personally identifiable information collected , used , and main by the federal government , omb stated that it would be import for congress to evaluate fully the potential implications of revisio ns such as amending the privacy act's system - of - records definition . webelieve that , given that the privacy act's controls on the collection , use , and disclosure of personally identifiable information do not consistently protect such information in all circumstances of its collection and use throughout the federal government , amending theact's definition of a system of records is an important alternative for congress to consider . we agree with omb , however , that any consideration of amendments to the privacy act and e - government act should be considered thoroughly and within the context of all existing laws . further , the challenge of how best to balance the federal ' government's need to collect and use information with individuals privacy rights in the current technological and political environmen t merits a national public debate on all relevant issues , inclu alternatives i have highlighted today . mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony today . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have .