dhs faces significant financial management challenges . what specific management challenges does the department face ? this testimony continues gao's long - standing efforts to provide congress with information on homeland security strategies and programs . in february of last year , we testified on the desired characteristics of national strategies , and whether various strategies — including the national strategy for homeland security — contained those desired characteristics . in march of last year , we summarized strategic homeland security recommendations by gao and selected congressionally chartered commissions . in july of last year , we reported on gao recommendations to dhs and the department's progress in implementing such recommendations . in january of this year , we provided a comprehensive report on dhs and other federal agency efforts and challenges related to implementing the national strategy for homeland security . and just last month in march , we reported on dhs progress in management integration . together , these baseline efforts are intended to aid congressional oversight in assessing the effectiveness of federal homeland security activities . my comments are based on our wide - ranging , completed , and ongoing work , and our institutional knowledge of homeland security and various government organizational and management issues . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in an effort to increase homeland security following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , president bush issued the national strategy for homeland security in july 2002 and signed legislation creating dhs in november 2002 . the strategy set forth the overall objectives , mission areas , and initiatives to prevent terrorist attacks within the united states , reduce america's vulnerability to terrorism , and minimize the damage and assist in the recovery from attacks that may occur . the strategy also called for the creation of dhs . the department , which began operations in march 2003 , represented a fusion of 22 federal agencies to coordinate and centralize the leadership of many homeland security activities under a single department . although the national strategy for homeland security indicated that many federal departments ( and other nonfederal stakeholders ) will be involved in homeland security activities , dhs has the dominant role in implementing the strategy . the strategy identified six mission areas and 43 initiatives . dhs was designated the lead federal agency for 37 of the 43 initiatives . in addition , dhs had activities underway in 40 of the 43 initiatives . in addition , dhs has the dominant share of homeland security funding . figure 1 shows the proposed fiscal year 2006 homeland security funding for federal departments and agencies , with dhs constituting about 55 percent of the total . the november 2002 enactment of legislation creating dhs represented a historic moment of almost unprecedented action by the federal government to fundamentally transform how the nation protects itself from terrorism . rarely in the country's past had such a large and complex reorganization of government occurred or been developed with such a singular and urgent purpose .