food and drug administration . bacterial vaginosis: developing drugs for treatment guidance for industry ( draft ) . silver spring , md . : 2016. http: / / www.fda.gov / downloads / drugs / guidancecomplianceregulatoryinfo rmation / guidances / ucm510948.pdf department of health and human services . food and drug administration . department of health and human services . this lack of development has been attributed to various challenges . for example , the development of new drugs , including antibiotics , is often a costly and lengthy process . to obtain fda's approval to market a new drug , a drug sponsor must conduct extensive research in order to demonstrate that the drug is both safe and effective . although high costs and failure rates make drug development risky for drug sponsors , creating a safe and effective new drug can be financially rewarding for the drug sponsor and beneficial to the public . however , antibiotics are often less profitable than other drugs because they are generally designed to work quickly and are typically administered for only a brief time . fda oversees the drug development process and the approval of new drugs for marketing in the united states . fda generally reviews drug sponsors' plans for conducting clinical trials and assesses drug sponsors' applications for the approval of new antibiotics . fda also releases guidance for industry as a way to communicate its current thinking on a particular topic with the purpose of assisting drug sponsors in the development of drugs . for example , fda has released several guidance documents to assist drug sponsors with the development of antibiotics , including information on designing clinical trials and measures to demonstrate a drug's effectiveness . the gain provisions required fda to take certain steps to encourage drug sponsors to develop antibiotics , particularly those that treat serious or life - threatening infections . specifically , fda was required each year to review , and revise as appropriate , at least three guidance documents related to the development of antibiotics . fda was also required to finalize a guidance document on the development of antibacterial drugs for serious or life - threatening infections , particularly in areas of unmet medical need . the gain provisions also established the qidp designation and made incentives available to sponsors of qidps — fast track designation , priority review designation , and 5 years of additional market exclusivity . fast track designation may expedite fda's review of an application by allowing drug sponsors to have increased communication with fda and by allowing fda to review portions of the application as they come in rather than waiting for a complete application . although drug sponsors that receive qidp designation are also entitled to receive fast track designation , drug sponsors must still request this designation and typically do so prior to submitting their application to fda for review . priority review has been automatically granted to applications with the qidp designation . it reduces fda's goal time for the review of an application from 10 months to 6 months . market exclusivity is a statutory provision for exclusive marketing rights for certain periods upon approval of a drug application , if certain statutory requirements are met .