we disagree . nrc agrees that a general threat exists , and this report , in combination with our previous reports , demonstrate that there are vulnerabilities in current nrc security requirements and that the potential consequences of misusing these materials could be significant . furthermore , the report discusses new evidence related to the consequence of an rdd that nrc has not yet considered . for the second recommendation with which it disagreed , nrc stated that it has already considered the issue of aggregation of radioactive material and has taken or is in the process of taking actions to clarify relevant guidance and procedures . again , we disagree . we acknowledge that nrc is taking action to better educate licensees on how to comply with requirements related to aggregation . however , these actions do not address the issue of licensees taking advantage of nrc's security requirements which permit the storing of multiple category 3 quantities that are just below the threshold for category 2 at the same facility . finally , for the nrc recommendation to consider additional security measures for high - risk quantities of category 3 materials , the agency said that it has been considering our recommendation in connection with its response to the recommendations in gao - 16-330 . however , after we issued gao - 16-330 , nrc staff subsequently recommended that the nrc commission not implement the recommendations from that report . nrc stated that our report and recommendations lack important context in that we did not consider all aspects of risk — threat , vulnerability , and consequences . we disagree . first , as the report states , nrc agrees that a general threat exists for the theft and misuse of radiological materials . second , the report also states that we have addressed vulnerability in several past gao reports that provide examples of how the controls that nrc and others have put in place to prevent the theft or misuse of these materials are not always implemented correctly . in fact , we found gaps in these controls each time we reviewed the security of radioactive materials . these gaps in controls create vulnerabilities . having discussed threat and vulnerability , this report adds important new information concerning the consequences of an rdd . in this regard , both the sandia studies and the results from our national academy of sciences expert meeting show that prompt fatalities from radiation are unlikely to occur if an rdd is detonated , while the same event could result in tens of billions of dollars in economic damage and potentially hundreds to thousands of deaths from evacuations . nrc also stated that our evidence was insufficient for recommending regulatory and policy changes . specifically , they said that the sandia studies ( 1 ) were based on scenarios that were not probable , ( 2 ) did not credit existing protective measures to prevent an rdd , and ( 3 ) were not subjected to a formal review and endorsement process . in addition , they said that the views expressed by experts who attended our national academy of sciences meeting resulted in conclusions that were not fully supported . we disagree with these characterizations of the studies and our expert meeting .