in your response .

 ) how do they work ? improving financial literacy . , etc . payout options plans make available to retiring participants ( eg , description and / or value of retirement benefits under available options ) . seeking financial “advice,” and other resources for retirement income planning . how to project potential retirement income from pensions / retirement plan savings . the value of expected db and / or dc plan benefits ( i.e. , what a participant's accumulation is likely to provide ) . how to compare annuity and lump sum amounts ( i.e. , how to compare equivalent amounts ) . de - emphasize information and education on investing / investments vis - à - vis retirement income needs . available annuity products employers could offer . the tradeoffs of extending one's working life . the pricing of annuity products ( i.e. , administrative fees ) . how guaranteed lifetime income from a participant's retirement plan could enhance government provided retirement income . how various types of retirement savings plans are taxed . how to take inventory of retirement income sources . we analyzed the responses to the questions above to develop the phase ii questionnaire . the purpose of the second phase was to provide the panelists with the opportunity to consider the other panelists' responses to the first phase and to respond in a structured , quantifiable way . phase ii , which ran from april 3 to april 18 , 2003 , consisted of several closed - ended questions on the categorized responses to phase i ( all response codes / categories were included in follow - up questions ) . in phase ii , panelists rated these items on various dimensions ( eg , major / minor factor , effectiveness of options , help / hinder coverage , ease of compliance ) depending on the theme . we also asked the experts to rank responses to phase i questions one and three . we pretested the questions for the second phase ; using the same methods as in phase i. twenty - two of the 24 panelists that completed the phase i survey also completed phase ii ( about 92 percent response rate for those included in phase ii ) . those that did not complete this phase were dropped from subsequent phases . as part of the analysis , we calculated the frequency of responses to identify the highest rated items for phase ii . the results in this section are displayed based on responses that were rated in the top two rating categories for questions 1 and 3-6 , as well as the top five responses identified most frequently in the top five for questions 2 and 7 . to be included in the top five for the rating questions , at least 85 percent of panelists had to respond to the question . for the questions with a five - point scale , we collapsed the scale to a three - point scale by combining the top two available responses and combing the bottom two available responses .