balance . we found that the measures for 8 of the 18 shared service product lines we assessed addressed the attribute of balance , while 5 partially demonstrated this attribute , and 5 did not address balance . we have previously reported that balance exists when a set of measures ensures that an organization's various priorities are covered . some of the sets of measures are not balanced . for instance , the measures we reviewed for the contracting and procurement shared service were only focused on cost savings attributed to the product line initiatives , but they did not address other program activities , such as variation reduction , redundancy elimination , and ensuring the timely completion of contractor performance evaluations . officials explained that the initial metrics focused on savings , but they plan to develop and track other metrics after initial operating capability in a phased approach . performance measurement efforts that lack balance overemphasize certain aspects of performance at the expense of others , and may keep dod from understanding the effectiveness of its overall mission and goals . government - wide priorities . we found that the measures for 10 of the 18 shared service product lines we assessed addressed the attribute of government - wide priorities , while 8 partially demonstrated this attribute . we have previously reported that agencies should develop a range of related performance measures to address government - wide priorities , such as quality , timeliness , efficiency , cost of service , and outcome . for instance , within the medical logistics shared service , the medlog services ( housekeeping ) product line has a measure “cost per square foot,” which addresses cost . shared service officials are also developing a measure that would address “frequency of complaints,” which will address quality of service when completed . when measures do not cover government - wide priorities managers may not be able to balance priorities to ensure the overall success of the program . a senior dha official noted that the development of metrics for the dha shared services continues as a work in progress , with the more mature shared services having made more progress on their specific measures , and further noted that officials are continuing to evolve these measures through the shared services work groups . dod implemented the ten dha shared services in a phased approach between october 1 , 2013 , and september 30 , 2014 . we found that the maturity of the shared services' metrics is determined in part by the date they reached initial operating capability and also by the extent to which those services were already consolidated prior to incorporation into the dha: already joint areas: according to dod , 3 of the 10 shared services represent areas that were already joint efforts prior to dha . these shared services had either previously been executed by the former tricare management activity , including the tricare health plan and the pharmacy shared services , or were led by a single service and managed through a series of joint program committees , such as the medical research and development shared service .