adequate . an “adequate” rating describes a program that needs to set more ambitious goals , achieve better results , improve accountability , or strengthen its management practices . ineffective . at that time , a key performance measure for assessing fams was based on coverage of targeted critical flights under various risk categories . this measure is still applicable currently ; however , its designation has been changed from an output measure to an outcome measure . moreover , this performance measure — the coverage of targeted critical flights — is now considered a proxy indicator regarding air marshals' ability to defeat an attempted attack . also , in further response to the findings of omb's 2003 assessment , fams established two additional outcome measures , one of which serves as another proxy indicator of air marshals' ability to defeat an attempted attack: the additional proxy outcome measure is the average annual rate of accuracy in air marshals' firearms requalification testing . the additional , non - proxy outcome measure is based on a national survey of households to determine the level of public confidence in air marshals' ability to promote aviation security . these updated measures have been approved by the department of homeland security — and also were approved in 2008 by omb during its part - based reassessment of fams . an overview of fams's updated performance measures is presented in table 7 . in march 2006 , the director of the federal air marshal service ( fams ) communicated to employees his intention to establish working groups to examine a variety of issues ranging from mission , organizational , and operational topics to workforce satisfaction and quality - of - life concerns . two months later , in may 2006 , the director communicated to fams employees that 12 working groups had been established , with each chaired by a field office special agent - in - charge ( sac ) and that subject matter experts from the field and headquarters were available to assist in an advisory role . subsequently , the number of working groups increased to a total of 36 . table 8 categorizes the 36 working groups and briefly summarizes the purposes of each . also , regarding the status of the 36 working groups as of october 1 , 2008 , fams officials reported the following ( see notes to table 8 ) : 18 working groups ( table note a ) : each of these working groups had completed its work and given a final report to fams management . each report had been reviewed by fams executives and then distributed to agency employees via a broadcast message from the fams director . if applicable , the broadcast message also presented management's responses to any recommendations made by the respective report . 9 working groups ( table note b ) : each of these working groups had completed its work and given a final report to fams management . the reports were undergoing review by fams executives . 5 working groups ( table note c ) : each of these working groups had yet to complete its work and give a final report to fams management .