strategic alignment . clear linkages exist between the agency's mission , goals , and culture and its training and development efforts . the agency's mission and goals drive a strategic training and development approach and help ensure that the agency takes full advantage of an optimal mix of strategies to improve performance and enhance capacity to meet new and emerging challenges . leadership commitment and communication . agency leaders and managers consistently demonstrate that they support and value continuous learning , are receptive to and use feedback from employees on developmental needs and training results , and set the expectation that fair and effective training and development practices will improve individual and organizational performance . stakeholder involvement . agency stakeholders are involved throughout the training and development process to help ensure that different perspectives are taken into account and contribute to effective training and development programs . stakeholders' views are incorporated in identifying needed performance enhancements , developing and effectively implementing well - thought - out strategies , and helping to conceptualize and use balanced measures that accurately reflect the extent to which training and development efforts contribute toward achieving results . accountability and recognition . appropriate accountability mechanisms , such as performance management systems , are in place to hold managers and employees responsible for learning and working in new ways . appropriate rewards and incentives exist and are used fairly and equitably to encourage innovation , reinforce changed behaviors , and enhance performance . effective resource allocation . the agency provides an appropriate level of funding and other tools and resources — along with external expertise and assistance when needed — to ensure that its training and development programs reflect the importance of its investment in human capital to achieving its mission and goals . partnerships and learning from others . coordination within and among agencies achieves economies of scale and limits duplication of efforts . in addition to benchmarking high - performing organizations , these efforts allow an agency to keep abreast of current practices , enhance efficiency , and increase the effectiveness of its training and development programs . data quality assurance . the agency has established policies and procedures that recognize and support the importance of quality data and of evaluating the quality and effectiveness of training and development efforts . it establishes valid measures and validated systems to provide reliable and relevant information that is useful in improving the agency's training and development efforts . continuous performance improvement . agency practices and policies foster a culture of continuous improvement and optimal organizational performance regarding training and other activities . stakeholders rely on and use program performance information and other data to assess and refine ongoing training and development efforts ; target new initiatives to improve performance ; and design , develop , and implement new approaches to train and develop employees . the following is gao's comment on the department of the interior's letter dated january 23 , 2004 . we have clarified the mission statement of the fish and wildlife service to note its collaboration with others to accomplish its mission . in addition to the persons named above , k. scott derrick , gerard burke , t.j. thomson , and thomas davies , jr. made key contributions to this report .