the office oversees the idaho national laboratory . the office of science's mission is to deliver scientific discoveries and major tools that transform our understanding of nature and advance the energy , economic , and national security in the united states . this office is the nation's single largest funding source for basic research in the physical sciences , and supports research in energy sciences , advanced scientific computing and other fields . the office oversees 10 of doe's national laboratories . we provided a draft of this report to doe for its review . doe provided written comments , which we have reprinted in appendix iii . research offices solicit research proposals from national laboratories . this proposal solicitation helps the offices determine where to invest doe funds . the national laboratories submit work proposals for new and ongoing projects , and research office staff review these proposals and hold merit reviews — often with outside experts — to help determine which laboratory projects to invest in . according to information provided by the office of science , research offices conduct in - depth merit reviews for new laboratory work proposals , and most research offices review about one - third of ongoing laboratory projects each fiscal year ; these reviews generally consist of three or more individual peer reviewers . for example , according to the basic energy sciences research office , which is one of the office of science's six research offices , in fiscal year 2015 research office staff reviewed approximately 132 of 395 ongoing laboratory projects , in addition to 64 new work proposals . research office staff monitor project performance . since then , doe has funded more than $100 million in upgrades . we conducted this performance audit from september 2015 to february 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . doe invests in a wide range of civilian r&d programs that are managed by five program offices within the office of the under secretary for science and energy , or by arpa - e , which reports directly to the secretary of energy . these offices have the goal of enhancing u.s. security and economic growth through transformative scientific and technological innovation , and through market solutions to overcome science , energy , and environmental challenges that the united states faces . these program offices and arpa - e fund r&d that is conducted by doe national laboratories , universities , industry , nonprofit organizations , state governments , and other federal laboratories . each program office and arpa - e may fund r&d at any of the national laboratories . for example , the office of science funds civilian r&d at all 17 of doe's national laboratories , including the national laboratories sponsored by the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) .