depository services . depository services designates new depository libraries , inspects participating libraries , administers self - studies , provides continuing education and training , and produces administrative publications . its staff is responsible for relations with the federal depository libraries . in 1988 , an ota report addressed the impact of electronic technology on federal information dissemination , examined the infrastructure for federal information dissemination , and offered several institutional alternatives for the superintendent of documents . these alternatives included centralizing all or most government dissemination functions in one office or agency ; privatizing the superintendent of documents ; reorganizing the superintendent of documents as part of a legislative printing office ; and consolidating the superintendent of documents with the national technical information service and creating a government information office or corporation . in a 1993 report to the superintendent of documents , the depository library council recommended restructuring the fdlp . the council noted that as structured , the depository library program was foundering so badly that its very existence was threatened , and suggested restructuring the program to ensure its future viability . the council proposed ten alternative fdlp models , ranging from the creation of a national collection of last resort to the development of a network of super - regional depository libraries . no action was taken on the council's proposals . the next effort to reorganize the office of the superintendent of documents came in 1993 , when the house of representatives passed the government information dissemination and printing improvement act of 1993 ( h.r . title xiv of the bill transferred the position , functions , and staff of the office of the superintendent of documents to the library of congress . the bill stated that the superintendent of documents shall be appointed by , and serve at the pleasure of , the librarian of congress . concerned about the potential impact of the internet on federal information dissemination , the congress passed the government printing office electronic information access enhancement act . the act directed the superintendent of documents to provide a system of online access to the congressional record and the federal register by june 1994 . in response , gpo created gpo access — an internet portal that provides free online access to fdlp libraries . in december 1995 , gpo made gpo access available free of charge over the internet . in 1998 a government printing reform bill was introduced by senator john warner as s. 2288 — the wendell h. ford government publications reform act of 1998 . the focus of the legislation was to restructure the federal printing laws to eliminate reliance on the constitutionally suspect authorities of the joint committee on printing and to strengthen the government printing office's control of federal agency printing and other dissemination activities and its responsibility for providing permanent public access to government information . the bill would have abolished the joint committee on printing and transferred many of its responsibilities to the house committee on house oversight and the senate committee on rules and administration . the bill also would have renamed gpo the government publications office , to be administered by the public printer .