the bureau had not prepared such narratives . additionally , none of the three schedules were supported by a schedule baseline document — a single document that defines the organization of a schedule , describes the logic of the network , describes the basic approach to managing resources , and provides a basis for all parameters used to calculate dates . sound documentation helps with analyzing changes in the program schedule and identifying the reasons why actual schedule results vary from their estimates , thereby contributing to the collection of data that can be useful to evaluations of schedule efforts , and that can be used to support future estimates . while the bureau has made improvements to implement the recommendations regarding the comprehensiveness and construction characteristics of the bureau's scheduling practices , the bureau's lack of resource loading and a risk assessment of the schedule continue to affect the reliability of the bureau's schedule . the schedule would be a more useful management tool if the bureau increased the schedule's reliability by addressing these weaknesses . to address these remaining weaknesses , we continue to believe that these recommendations are valid in order to ensure the 2020 schedule can support key management decisions . we provided a draft of this report to the department of commerce . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iv the department of commerce agreed with our findings . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the under secretary of economic affairs , the acting director of the u.s. census bureau , and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this report assesses the extent to which the bureau is using leading practices for scheduling key projects . we did this by focusing on three 2020 projects . we selected the three projects from the december 17 , 2017 , version of the 2020 census integrated master schedule . that schedule consists of 255 total projects , of which 134 were remaining to be completed . we made our selections based on the cost of the projects , their significance to the 2020 census , and the fact that they were in progress . the 3 projects selected for review are 2018 end - to - end census test address canvassing , 2018 end - to - end census test nonresponse follow - up , and 2020 census geographic programs . we reviewed the project schedules and underlying sub - schedules to assess them against the 10 scheduling leading practices by: checking for specific problems that could hinder the schedule's ability to respond to changes . for example , we: examined if there are any open - ended activities ( i.e.