training and evaluation . canine handlers we interviewed in four locations ( 74 of 75 handlers ) , generally spoke positively of the instruction they had received during their training courses and missions . for example , some canine handlers cited the hands - on instruction and feedback they received from tsa canine training and evaluation section ( ctes ) evaluators during their training missions as particularly beneficial . however , some canine handlers we interviewed ( 26 of 67 evaluated ) suggested that tsa seek ways to improve the consistency and objectivity of the evaluation process . for example , some canine handlers stated that while one evaluator may consider a canine sitting a few feet away from the explosive training aid a “fringe” response and count it positively , another evaluator would consider the same scenario a nonproductive response ( npr ) . as noted earlier , a specified number of nprs are allowed to pass an evaluation and maintain certification . ( 2 ) to what extent has tsa deployed passenger screening canine teams using a risk - based approach and determined their effectiveness prior to deployment ? in addition , this report includes information on the actions tsa has taken to enhance ncp since we issued our last report , in 2008 ( see app . this report is a public version of a prior sensitive report that we provided to you . tsa deemed some of the information in the prior report sensitive security information ( ssi ) , which must be protected from public disclosure . the department of defense ( dod ) also determined some of the information in our report to be operationally sensitive . therefore , this report omits sensitive information regarding the number of deployed canine teams by type , results of our analysis of canine team data , and tsa's assessment of psc teams , among other things . the information provided in this report is more limited in scope as it excludes such sensitive information , but it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report and the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine what data tsa has on its canine program , what these data show , and the extent to which tsa has analyzed these data to identify program trends , we interviewed tsa oso officials about the type of canine team data they collect and analyze to monitor canine team performance consistent with standards for internal control in the federal government . using data from the agency's canine website system ( cws ) , we analyzed the number of training and utilization minutes recorded by canine handlers from may 2011 through april 2012 — the most recent data available at the time of our analysis . we compared the number of minutes canine teams spent training each month ( known as training minutes ) with tsa's requirement . we analyzed the number of minutes canine teams were utilized each month ( known as utilization minutes ) by type of handler ( leo and tsi ) to identify any differences . in addition , we collected and reviewed monthly reports on canine team training and utilization from canine team supervisors — an area canine coordinator and field canine coordinators .