( app . ii describes these demonstration proposals. ) as of may 2004 , most of the pending proposals were not under active review by hhs primarily because the department had not determined the effect of the medicare prescription drug legislation on the pharmacy plus demonstration proposals . hhs officials told us in october 2003 that arkansas , rhode island , and indiana officials had asked that review of their states' proposals be put on hold until after congress had completed consideration of the medicare legislation . to what extent has hhs ensured that the approved demonstrations are budget neutral to the federal government ? how well supported are states' assumptions about savings that may accrue to medicaid from the pharmacy plus demonstration waivers ? what steps are states and hhs taking to evaluate approved demonstrations and to monitor if they are functioning as intended ? our work is based on a review and analysis of pharmacy plus demonstration waiver proposals considered and approved by hhs from january 2002 through may 2004 . our analysis covers only demonstration proposals submitted in response to hhs's pharmacy plus initiative . to determine the status of demonstrations under this initiative , we analyzed hhs data on all proposals it considered , including their number , outcomes , and characteristics . for approved demonstrations , we analyzed the applications as submitted by the states ; hhs decision memorandums and approval letters ; the applications as ultimately approved ; hhs's terms and conditions for approved demonstrations ; and , when available , the states' plans ( called operational protocols ) for how the demonstrations will operate . we also discussed the process of review and approval with officials of the reviewing agencies — hhs , cms , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) — and we obtained information from officials representing the states with approved demonstrations . to assess budget neutrality , we obtained available budget justifications and documentation from state and federal officials and discussed with them the budget negotiations associated with each approved demonstration . to examine the assumptions behind the initiative and the likelihood of associated savings , we reviewed published literature and interviewed officials from the kaiser commission on medicaid and the uninsured and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) . we discussed plans for evaluating the approved demonstrations with hhs and state officials . during our review , congress passed the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 , which adds a drug benefit to medicare , the federal program providing health insurance for the majority of people age 65 or older regardless of income . we considered the limited information available as of may 2004 about the relationship between pharmacy plus and the act . we conducted our work from december 2002 through june 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . established in 1965 under title xix of ssa , medicaid is the nation's health care financing program for low - income families and certain people who are age 65 or older or disabled . the program accounted for about $244 billion in federal and state expenditures in fiscal year 2002 and covered an estimated 53 million people .