substantially met . the documentation for the estimate contains a summary narrative about the project as well as high - level cost summaries . the documentation discusses risk and contingency reserve . gao - 09-3sp . the estimated cost to construct the cmrr , according to estimates prepared in april 2010 , is nearly six times higher than the project's initial cost estimate that was prepared in 2005 . the project's estimated completion date has also been delayed by at least 8 to 12 years . our review of these most recent detailed cost and schedule estimates for the cmrr project found that the estimates generally reflect best practices , but are not yet entirely reliable . since cmrr was first proposed , its costs have risen significantly , and its schedule has been repeatedly delayed . specifically , in 2005 , when doe developed initial plans for cmrr , it estimated that the project would cost from $745 million to $975 million and would be completed between 2013 and 2017 . this estimate was prepared using preliminary information — before a detailed project design was substantially under way — and was therefore considered by doe to be a rough estimate . in april 2010 , nnsa estimated that the cmrr will cost between $3.7 and $5.8 billion — a nearly six - fold increase from the initial estimate — and that construction will be complete by 2020 — a 3- to 7-year delay . in february 2012 , after we had provided nnsa with a draft of this report for its comments , nnsa announced that it had decided to defer cmrr construction by at least an additional 5 years , bringing the total delay from nnsa's original plans to 8 to 12 years . nnsa officials explained that the majority of the cost increases occurred because of changes to the facility's design and because of project delays . specifically , modifications to the facility's design . to address concerns about seismic activity , the project design was modified to strengthen the facility to withstand a potential earthquake . for example , significant design changes resulted from the need to thicken the concrete walls to satisfy increasingly stringent seismic requirements . in addition , to proceed to final design , project officials had to evaluate the potential effects of an earthquake on the facility's complex ventilation system . this effort included several studies , consultations with vendors and other designers , and an assessment of the availability of equipment that would meet seismic requirements . overall , los alamos estimates the seismic related design changes increased the project costs by almost $500 million . delays in the construction start date and longer overall project duration . cmrr construction was originally expected to begin in 2008 , but was first delayed until 2013 and is now not expected to begin before 2018 . the initial delay in starting construction from 2008 to 2013 had varying causes , including facility design changes described previously as well as the additional time needed for nnsa to determine where and how to consolidate plutonium operations in the nuclear security enterprise , according to project officials .