teach grant . individual colleges and universities elect whether to participate in the program and choose the grade levels and education programs in which students may receive the grant . students participating in the teach grant program may generally receive up to $4,000 a year while in school and must fulfill teaching service requirements after graduation or the grant converts to an unsubsidized direct loan . stafford teacher loan forgiveness . teachers who teach for 5 consecutive years in a low - income school can receive up to $5,000 in loan forgiveness or up to $17,500 if also teaching in certain subjects . perkins loan teacher cancellation . eligible teachers can have up to 100 percent of their perkins loans cancelled over the course of 5 years of qualifying service . the maximum annual amount a student can borrow under the perkins loan program is generally $5,500 for undergraduates and $8,000 for graduate and professional students . to what extent has education taken steps to effectively manage and evaluate these programs ? to assess participation in the teach grant , stafford teacher loan forgiveness , and perkins loan teacher cancellation programs , we reviewed data from the national student loan data system ( nslds ) from the last decade for the stafford forgiveness and perkins cancellation programs , and from school year 2008-2009 for the teach grant — the year in which education first awarded the grants . to determine the extent to which recipients were satisfying grant requirements , we assessed participation data from the teach grant servicer , also these data beginning with school year 2008-2009 for the same reason.included information on the status of teach grant recipients such as the number of recipients still in school and those that started the service period . for those in the service period , we reviewed the number of recipients who have satisfied the grant requirements , those who had their grant converted to a loan , and those who were teaching or had certified intent to teach . we compared this and other information about the teach grant program to education's departmental and federal student aid ( fsa ) specific strategic planning documents , which outline goals and objectives both for federal financial aid programs and teacher recruitment and retention . we developed estimates for the population potentially eligible for the teach grant and stafford teacher loan forgiveness programs by analyzing data from education's integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) for the 2012-2013 school year and the schools and staffing survey ( sass ) for the 2011-2012 school year , the most recent years the data were available . we determined that nslds , teach grant servicer , ipeds , and sass data are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report by testing it for accuracy and completeness , reviewing documentation about systems used to produce the data , and interviewing agency officials . to describe program benefits and challenges as identified by stakeholders , we conducted eight focus groups with college officials from 58 colleges and universities — four with officials from institutions that offered the teach grant program and four with officials from institutions that did not offer the program .