annual budget justification . in 2017 , we reported that nrc did not present actual obligation data in its annual budget justifications for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 , and without this information , it was difficult for users of the budget justification — including congress and licensees — to understand how nrc used its appropriations . we also reported that , in spite of an agency initiative to decrease overhead costs , nrc's obligations for overhead — currently named corporate support — increased each year from fiscal year 2011 to 2015 due to increases in rent , utilities , and information technology investments , among other things . as a part of its fees transformation initiative , nrc planned to include additional information on actual obligation data to better enable stakeholders to determine how nrc spent its appropriation . starting with fiscal year 2018 , nrc began presenting actual obligation data in its annual budget justification . nrc data show that the agency had about a 4 percent decrease in actual obligations for corporate support from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal year 2019 , from $302.9 million to $291.2 million , as shown in table 1 . these reductions were a result of nrc's corporate workload reductions to reflect efficiencies as well as current and projected declines in agency workload , among other things . however , actual obligations for corporate support as a percentage of nrc's total agency - wide obligations increased by about 2.3 percent during this same time period . specifically , in fiscal year 2016 , corporate support was about 30.4 percent of total nrc obligations ( $302.9 million of $996.6 million ) , whereas in fiscal year 2019 , corporate support was about 32.7 percent of total nrc obligations ( $291.2 million of $891.5 million ) . in some years , reductions in corporate support were offset by pay increases consistent with federal government - wide guidance and investments in information technology , among other items . in addition , nrc officials said that corporate support as a percentage of nrc's total obligations increased because program resources decreased as nrc's projected workload declined . in addition to presenting actual obligation data in its annual budget justification , nrc began presenting more detailed information on the status of funds it carried over from previous fiscal years starting in its fiscal year 2018 budget justification . specifically , nrc began reporting the amounts of carryover funds that were allocated in a given fiscal year and the amounts of these funds available for obligation at the beginning of a fiscal year , as shown in table 2 . according to nrc officials , the agency generally allocates carryover funds based on ( 1 ) congressional direction to use carryover funds to supplement annual appropriations , and ( 2 ) the agency's discretion in order to address urgent mission needs . in its fiscal year 2018 and 2019 budget justifications , nrc presented this carryover data by appropriation funding category , while it presented the rest of the information in its budget justification by the agency's business lines . according to nrc officials , the difference in presentation limited the ability of users of the budget justification to understand where these carryover funds were being allocated .