gao - 11-65 . adjudicators , according to agency officials , a subject's prior clearance investigation and adjudication may not meet the standards of the inquiring agency . although opm has developed some training , security clearance investigators and adjudicators are not required to complete a certain type or number of classes . as a result , the extent to which investigators and adjudicators receive training varies by agency . consequently , as we have previously reported , agencies are reluctant to be accountable for investigations and / or adjudications conducted by other agencies or organizations . both dod and dhs components use the tool . in addition , dod issued guidance in september 2011 and august 2012 requiring its personnel to use opm's tool to determine the proper position sensitivity designation . a dhs instruction requires personnel to designate all dhs positions — including positions in the dhs components — by using opm's position sensitivity designation guidance , which is the basis of the tool . opm audits , however , have found inconsistency in these position designations , and some agencies described problems implementing opm's tool . for example , during the course of our 2012 review , dod and dhs officials raised concerns regarding the guidance provided through the tool and expressed that they had difficulty implementing it . specifically , officials from dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement stated that the use of the tool occasionally resulted in inconsistency , such as over - or underdesignating a position , and expressed a need for additional clear , easily interpreted guidance on designating national security positions . dod officials stated that they have had difficulty implementing the tool because it focuses more on suitability than security , and the national security aspects of dod's positions are of more concern to them than the suitability aspects . we expect to issue a report on this process in the spring of 2014 . once an individual has obtained a personnel security clearance and as long as they remain in a position that requires access to classified national security information , that individual is reinvestigated periodically at intervals that are dependent on the level of security clearance . for example , top secret clearance holders are reinvestigated every 5 years , and secret clearance holders are reinvestigated every 10 years . some of the information gathered during a reinvestigation would focus specifically on the period of time since the last approved clearance , such as a check of local law enforcement agencies where an individual lived and worked since the last investigation . executive branch agencies do not consistently assess quality throughout the personnel security clearance process , in part because they have not fully developed and implemented metrics to measure quality in key aspects of the personnel security clearance process . to promote oversight and positive outcomes , such as maximizing the likelihood that individuals who are security risks will be scrutinized more closely , we have emphasized , since the late 1990s , the need to build and monitor quality throughout the personnel security clearance process .