the marines currently lack the training capacity to conduct this training . in 2004 , at the request of the marine corps , the center for naval analyses conducted a study to identify expeditionary brigade training requirements and the region that could best support these requirements . additional details on our scope and methodology are in appendix i . during initial entry training , recruits are trained on service tasks and skills , including basic military tactics , weapons training , and marksmanship . in addition , the services have annual training requirements that are focused on tasks such as crew - served weapons training , reacting to chemical and biological attacks , and offensive and defensive tactics . prior to deploying overseas , units must also complete a set of service - directed predeployment training requirements , including a mission - rehearsal exercise . the army's force generation model ( arforgen ) is a cyclical unit - readiness model that affects the types of training that units conduct during each phase . through arforgen , the army builds the readiness of units as they move through three phases: reset , train / ready , and available . the army uses these phases , which are described in figure 1 , to prioritize resources and coordinate training , personnel , and equipment . as shown in figure 1 , units entering the available phase may or may not be deployed to conduct operational missions ; units that are deployed in support of operations are known as deployed forces . units in the available phase that are not deployed are known as contingency forces . these units may conduct training or exercises with other services , governmental agencies , or military security forces from other nations . if units are deployed , they will return to the reset phase upon redeployment — regardless of the length of deployment . if they are not deployed , units will return to the reset phase after 12 months . there are no prescribed time lengths for one complete arforgen cycle because the length of the cycle is driven by the length of active - component deployments , and reserve - component mobilizations . while current deployments are typically 12 months long , the army has also used deployments of varying lengths , including 6 and 15 months , to support its ongoing operations . for the army's active - component forces the arforgen cycle is three times as long as its deployments , and for its reserve - component forces the cycle is five times as long as its mobilizations . the army maintains four ctcs: the battle command training program , fort leavenworth , kansas ; the national training center , fort irwin , california ; the joint readiness training center , fort polk , louisiana ; and the joint multinational readiness center , hohenfels , germany . the battle command training program trains the command element of a unit . the national training center , joint readiness training center , and the joint multinational readiness center , collectively referred to as the maneuver ctcs , train brigade combat teams — approximately 5,000 servicemembers — during rotations that last for 18 to 25 days .