the results our analysis of credit scores should be interpreted with some caution . first , the time periods for the two sets of credit scores are different . initial credit scores for businesses receiving 7 ( a ) loans in our analysis are from 2003 to 2006 . the scores developed by d&b / fic for small businesses receiving conventional credit are based on data from 1996 through 2000 that include information on outstanding loans that may have originated during or many years before that period . second , d&b / fic's scores for small businesses receiving conventional loans may not be representative of the population of small businesses . although d&b / fic combined hundreds of thousands of financial records from many lenders and various loan products with consumer credit data for their credit score development sample , they explained that the sample was not statistically representative of all small businesses . another score developed by d&b , called the financial stress score ( fss ) , gauges the likelihood that a firm will experience financial stress — for example , that it will go out of business . sba officials said that based on analyses of these scores , the difference in the repayment risk of lending associated with 7 ( a ) loans was higher than the risk posed by small firms able to access credit in the conventional lending market . according to an analysis d&b performed based on these scores , 32 percent of 7 ( a ) firms showed a moderate to high risk of ceasing operations with unpaid obligations in 2006 , while only 17 percent of general small businesses had a similar risk profile . as already mentioned , sba disagreed with the results of our credit score comparison . in its written comments to our prior report , sba primarily reiterated the cautions included in our report and stated that the riskiness of a portfolio was determined by the distribution in the riskier credit score categories . sba said that it had not worked out the numbers but had concluded that the impact on loan defaults of the higher share of 7 ( a ) loans in these categories would not be insignificant . although sba disagreed with our results , we believe that our analysis of credit scores provides a reasonable basis for comparison . specifically , the data we used were derived from a very large sample of financial transactions and consumer credit data and reflected the broadest and most recent information readily available to us on small business credit scores in the conventional lending market . as sba noted in its comments , we disclosed the data limitations and necessary cautions to interpreting the credit score comparison . taking into consideration the limitations associated with our analysis , future comparisons of comparable credit score data for small business borrowers may provide sba with a more conclusive picture of the relative riskiness of borrowers with 7 ( a ) and conventional loans , which would also be consistent with the intent of our recommendation that sba develop more outcome - based performance measures . we also compared some of the characteristics of 7 ( a ) and conventional loans , including the size of the loans .