ii ) . this appendix provides information on the analysis we conducted to determine the incidents of truck and bus bombings presented in this report . it provides information on the methodology used to identify incidents worldwide and the detailed results of our analysis . we used open sources , such as press and wire service reports , to determine the extent of bus and truck bombings . we first reviewed the general strengths and weakness of different open - source databases and consulted open source search experts . we reviewed eight databases and chose to use four based on the breadth and completeness of their media sources , years , and geographic coverage ; whether they contained sufficient detail to verify that the event was a truck or bus bombing ; and whether they allowed for independent verification of source information . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent has tsa assessed the security risks associated with commercial vehicles and used this information to develop and implement a security strategy ? ( 2 ) what security actions have key government and private sector stakeholders taken to mitigate identified risks to commercial vehicle security , and to what extent has tsa measured the effectiveness of its actions ? ( 3 ) to what extent has tsa coordinated its strategy and efforts for securing commercial vehicles with other federal entities , states , and private sector stakeholders ? to determine the extent to which tsa has assessed the security risks associated with commercial vehicles and used this information to develop and implement a security strategy , we analyzed strategic security planning documents and risk assessment documentation — including assessments of threat , vulnerability , and consequences — and interviewed agency officials . specifically , we reviewed dhs and tsa's threat assessments and interviewed officials from tsa's office of intelligence and hmc . to evaluate tsa's efforts to assess vulnerability , we examined the results of its vulnerability assessments , known as corporate security reviews ( csrs ) , attended two missouri pilot csrs , and met with tsa hmc officials , fmcsa field inspectors , and missouri state officials to discuss the csrs . we also met with dot fmcsa officials regarding their security inspection programs . to assess tsa's efforts to conduct consequence assessments , we interviewed officials from tsa's hmc and dhs's national protection and programs directorate . we also reviewed risk assessment and strategy documents and interviewed hmc officials to determine the extent to which their risk assessments were informing tsa's security strategy , and we compared their actions to dhs risk management guidance . to identify the security actions key federal government stakeholders have taken to mitigate risks to commercial vehicle security , and the extent to which tsa has measured the effectiveness of its actions , we reviewed agency annual reports , field risk assessment summaries , and performance reports , and interviewed officials from tsa , phmsa , and fmcsa . to identify state actions , we interviewed officials of two associations representing state transportation and law enforcement organizations . we also interviewed officials from eight states and conducted site visits at five .