the other key piece of data is crash data . state officials said they were planning to make this a long - term project and apply it to other types of roadside safety hardware . officials noted that they are still in the process of adding the capability for keeping the data up to date . these officials also told us that the application was relatively inexpensive to develop , and fhwa officials noted that at least one state was interested in learning more about the application . state officials told us that as of yet , however , this technology has not been shared across states . fhwa has ongoing research to identify best practices for the collection of data on roadside safety hardware . however , this research is limited to guardrail end terminals , and the planned scope of work may not be sufficient to fill the gaps created by the lack of ispe literature at the state level . fhwa officials told us that in the summer of 2015 , fhwa began a pilot study on the collection of data on guardrail end terminals' performance . according to fhwa officials , the first phase of this pilot study is expected to last through the end of 2016 . officials plan to identify current challenges to conducting ispes as well as recommend best practices for: 1 ) the collection of real - time data on crashes involving roadside safety hardware ; 2 ) interagency communication at the state level regarding crash reporting ; and 3 ) data management regarding hardware maintenance and location . fhwa is currently collecting inventory and crash data in four states ( missouri , pennsylvania , massachusetts , and california ) that have agreed to participate in this pilot . fhwa officials stated that within a selected area of each state , data will be collected by examining crash sites for six different models of guardrail end terminals . this data could produce information needed to assess the performance of the devices with respect to the risk of severe occupant injury if the study were to be continued . according to fhwa officials , crash specialists from nhtsa , the agency that collects and reports data on fatal crashes for dot , will conduct detailed on - site investigations for fatal and serious injury crashes , generally within 24 hours of receiving notification of the crash . data on crashes resulting in property damage only and other minor crashes will also be collected . officials told us that they plan to continue collecting data through 2016 for this phase of the project . according to fhwa officials , however , publishing findings on the effectiveness of guardrail end terminals' performance is not part of their current efforts because they first want to provide guidance to states on best practices for performance data collection . officials noted that the time frame for the current phase of the pilot would be insufficient to collect enough data for statistically significant findings . fhwa officials told us that they will not determine whether to include performance findings as part of future phases of the pilot study until this phase is complete at the end of 2016 .