ssa has served the public for over 70 years . recent staffing reductions are increasingly challenging field offices' ability to meet the demand for services . my remarks today will address ( 1 ) the effect that staffing reductions may be having on field office operations and ( 2 ) the challenges ssa faces in meeting field service delivery needs in the future . my written statement is based on our ongoing work for this committee , and we will provide you a full report later this year . to conduct our work , we interviewed ssa headquarters officials responsible for operations , budget , and strategic and human capital planning and obtained relevant documentation . we interviewed managers and staff in 21 field offices and two social security card centers to gain their perspectives on the effect of staffing reductions . we selected a wide variety of the field offices based on the size of the populations they served , their geographic location , the number of staff , and customer wait times . table 7 lists the field offices we visited and their beneficiary populations . during the same time period , ssa processed fewer di and ssi claims ( nonmedical determinations only ) ; continuing disability reviews ; and ssi redeterminations . ssa attributes the high volume of post - entitlement actions to the growth in beneficiary populations . ssa is shifting work among field offices based on their workloads in an effort to increase overall efficiency . if a field office has work demands that it cannot immediately cover , that office can request that some work be transferred to another office . offices that have a particular expertise in a certain type of work make themselves available , as they can process it more quickly . field managers told us , however , that sometimes they are reluctant to share work because the office that receives and processes the work receives numerical credit , which helps an office justify a greater staff level for the future . managers are also using claims processing personnel to fill in as necessary to perform the duties typically done by lower - graded employees , and in some cases , even office managers take on the duties of their employees . such duties include answering the telephone , providing initial services to arriving customers , processing requests for new or replacement social security cards , and conducting some administrative duties . while all field office personnel recognize the need to serve visitors , many also told us that such work is taking away from time spent processing claims and managing the office . ssa is encouraging customers to use automated services to help field offices accomplish their work . however , many field staff said that real gains in the use of automated services will only likely be achieved by future generations of customers . ssa's vision for its “eservice” program is that the public , businesses , and government agencies will be able to conduct all business through secure , electronic channels — thereby increasing the efficiency with which the agency can serve the public .