ii ) . dhs also offered additional technical and clarifying comments which we incorporated as appropriate . dhs's letter stated that the draft adequately identified the pertinent issues that have troubled state and local emergency management officials , and that it would consider our recommendations . dhs's letter also stated that some recommendations in our draft report have been partly implemented , including improvements to the overall functionality of the lessons learned information sharing portal . we revisited dhs's lessons learned information sharing portal as of december 7 , 2006 and it appears to have improved some of its search and organizational functions . we have found , however , that some of the issues we previously identified still remain . therefore , we revised our recommendation to reflect the need for continued improvement of this portal . dhs's letter raised concerns that our discussion of a single federal agency to lead and coordinate evacuations reflected a misunderstanding of the federal response process because , for large and complex disasters , no single federal agency can provide the entire response support required . we did not intend to suggest that a single federal agency can provide such support for evacuation . rather , we stated that the lead , coordinating , and supporting federal agencies to provide evacuation assistance when state and local governments are overwhelmed were not clear in the national response plan . dhs's letter notes , in contrast to an earlier discussion we had with dhs officials , that dhs is the single agency responsible for leading and coordinating evacuation support to the states , and that this responsibility was emphasized by the amendments to the stafford act in october 2006 . we modified our draft as appropriate to reflect dhs's role in response to these amendments , but we retained our recommendation related to this issue because agency roles and responsibilities to provide evacuation assistance still need to be clarified in the national response plan . dhs's letter stated that many issues related to evacuations are being considered in ongoing revisions to the national response plan , including the roles and responsibilities of federal agencies as well as and private sector and nongovernmental agencies . we are encouraged to learn that these issues are part of the national response plan review and revision process . dhs also commented that our draft report implied that the events of hurricane katrina were a “typical occurrence.” this is not an accurate summary of our findings . rather , our report emphasizes that there has been a heightened awareness of evacuation preparedness for transportation - disadvantaged populations as a result of hurricane katrina , and that we and others remain concerned about the level of preparedness among federal , state , and local governments . we received oral comments on a draft of this report from dot officials , including the national response program manager , office of intelligence , security , and emergency response , office of the secretary . dot officials generally agreed with the information contained in the report and stated they would consider our recommendation .