this is not enough . if fema had a more timely , proactive approach to sharing lessons learned with all 10 states and had taken the initiative to apply them where unresolved issues were slowing progress , the program would be farther along . a more proactive management approach to share and apply success stories , such as with special tone alert radios purchased by arkansas , may have helped resolve issues in indiana . the benchmarks fema uses to measure performance are not defined consistently in the national planning guidance and in fema's policy papers . the information about the benchmarks in these documents cannot be fully reconciled and used for measuring compliance . ( 2 ) what progress have the communities in the 10 states made toward being fully prepared ? ( 3 ) what changes in federal management relations with the states and communities in the program could help achieve the goal of full preparedness ? the scope and methodology of our work are described in appendix i . regarding reported financial information , we did not independently determine its reliability . in 1985 , the congress required the department of defense to carry out the destruction of the u.s. stockpile of chemical agents and munitions and established an organization within the army to manage the disposal program . the congress directed the program to provide maximum protection to the environment , the general public , the personnel involved in disposing of the chemical weapons at the eight storage sites . further , the congress authorized the secretary of defense to make grants to state and local governments , either directly or through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to assist them in carrying out functions related to emergency preparedness . in 1988 , the army established the chemical stockpile emergency preparedness program ( csepp ) to help communities near the stockpile storage sites establish a full level of emergency preparedness and response capabilities . csepp also helps to implement the emergency preparedness at the army installations storing the chemical stockpile . the congress originally set 1994 as the date for the complete destruction of the stockpile . this date was later extended to 2007 , after the senate ratified the convention on the prohibition of the development , production , stockpiling and the use of chemical weapons and on their destruction , commonly known as the chemical weapons convention , on april 24 , 1997 . under the convention , april 29 , 2007 , is the deadline for the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles . csepp is a partnership between the army , as custodian of the chemical stockpile , fema , which has long - standing experience in preparing for and dealing with all types of emergencies , and state and local governments . in october 1997 , the army and fema signed a revised memorandum of understanding under which fema assumed responsibility for off - post ( civilian community ) program activities . the army continued to manage “on - post” ( installation ) emergency preparedness and provide technical and financial support for both off - post and on - post activities . fema provides the civilian community with expertise , guidance , training , and other support .