contractor . the contractor is generally to receive a cost - savings incentive fee of about 35 percent of the verified net savings . for new savings related to employee benefits , however , the contractor is not to receive a share , and the savings are to be split between the government ( 50 percent ) and site reinvestment projects ( 50 percent ) . the contractor's cost - savings incentive fee is to be paid out of cost savings that nnsa has verified . the contract requires cns to reimburse the government for the cost - savings incentive fee in the event that cns does not sustain the savings for the remainder of the contract performance period . according to cns's proposed savings estimates , cns planned to earn approximately $222 million in cost - savings incentive fees over the potential 10-year contract . per the contract , the contractor may also receive award fees annually based on nnsa's evaluation of its performance . the available award fee for each potential year of the contract ranges from approximately $20 million to approximately $40 million . government . the government generally is to receive 35 percent of the verified net savings . for new savings related to employee benefits , however , the government is to receive 50 percent of the verified net savings . the portion of verified savings that is available for the government allows nnsa to return those savings to the programs for which funds were originally obligated , and the funds can be spent within the same program at y - 12 , pantex , or another site within the nuclear security enterprise . site reinvestment . the remaining approximately 30 percent of the verified net savings is for site reinvestment projects . as noted above , however , the site reinvestment share for savings related to employee benefits is 50 percent . site reinvestment projects may include: projects ( such as a parking structure , an office building or a cafeteria ) that serve the m&o site as a whole rather than a discrete program or implementation costs for future cost savings initiatives , among other things . types of potential savings associated with the cost savings program include , for example: annual new savings . in each fiscal year , cns validates and nnsa verifies annual new savings for the cost reduction initiatives implemented in that year . examples of annual new savings include positions that were reduced in a certain program area , in a given fiscal year . as discussed previously , cost savings are only creditable under the contract if they do not negatively affect the mission . sustained savings . in each fiscal year , cns validates and nnsa verifies sustained savings resulting from cost reduction initiatives implemented in prior years . for example , cns can claim sustained savings for each year it does not hire back employees into positions that were reduced in a prior year and for which cns claimed savings . cumulative contract savings . cumulative contract savings is the sum of all contract savings that have accumulated from annual new savings and the sustainment of savings produced in prior years .