audit contractors . the mig's audit contractors conduct postpayment audits of medicaid providers . audit leads are selected by the mig's division of field operations , generally by looking at providers across one or more applicable algorithms to determine if they have been overpaid or demonstrated egregious billing patterns . from the hiring of audit contractors in december 2007 through february 2012 , the division assigned 1,550 msis audits to its contractors . during an audit , the contractor may request and review copies of provider records , interview providers and office personnel , or visit provider facilities . if an overpayment is identified , the contractor drafts an audit report , which is shared with the provider and the state . ultimately , the state is responsible for collecting any overpayments in accordance with state law and must report this information to cms . a summary of the audit contractor activities is shown in figure 2 . in june 2011 , cms released its fiscal year 2010 report to congress , which outlined a redesign of the nmap with an approach that closely resembled the test audits . the report described the redesign as an effort to enhance the nmap and assist states with their program integrity priorities . cms refers to this new approach as collaborative audits . in these collaborative audits , mig and its contractor primarily used mmis data and leveraged state resources and expertise to identify audit targets . in contrast , msis audits used separate review contractors and msis data to generate lists of providers with potential overpayments , and the mig selected the specific providers to be audited . from june 2007 through february 2012 , payments to the contractors for on an annual test , msis , and collaborative audits totaled $102 million.basis , these contractor payments account for more than 40 percent of all of the mig's expenditures on medicaid program integrity activities . contractor payments rose from $1.3 million in fiscal year 2007 and reached $33.7 million in fiscal year 2011 . ( see fig . the total cost of the nmap is likely greater than $102 million because that figure does not include expenditures on the salaries of mig staff that support the operation of the program . the msis audits were less effective in identifying potential overpayments than test and collaborative audits . the main reason for the difference in audit results was the use of msis data . according to mig officials , they chose msis data because the data were readily available for all states , they are collected and maintained by cms , and are intended for health care research and evaluation activities . however , the msis audits were not well coordinated with states , and duplicated and diverted resources from states' program integrity activities . compared with test and collaborative audits , the return on msis audits was significantly lower . as of february 2012 , a small fraction of the 1,550 msis audits identified $7.4 million in potential overpayments . in contrast , 26 test audits and 6 collaborative audits together identified $12.5 million in potential overpayments ( see fig . review contractors .