reclamation . during reclamation of mine sites , water is needed to cool , compact , and stabilize the waste piles of retorted shale and to revegetate disturbed surfaces , including the surfaces of the waste piles . for in - situ operations , in addition to the typical revegetation of disturbed surfaces , as shown in figure 3 , water also will be needed for reclamation of the subsurface retorted zones to remove residual hydrocarbons . the volume of water that would be needed to rinse the zones at present is uncertain and could be large , depending primarily on how many times the zones need to be rinsed . in addition , some companies envision reducing water demands for reclamation , as well as for extracting , retorting , and upgrading , by recycling water produced during oil shale operations or by treating and using water produced from nearby oil and gas fields . recycling technology , however , has not been shown to be commercially viable for oil shale operations , and there could be legal restrictions on using water produced from oil and gas operations . power generation . water is also needed throughout the life cycle of oil shale production for generating electricity from power plants needed in operations . the amount of water used to produce this electricity varies significantly according to generation and cooling technologies employed . for example , thermoelectric power plants use a heat source to make steam , which turns a turbine connected to a generator that makes the electricity . the steam is captured and cooled , often with additional water , and is condensed back into water that is then recirculated through the system to generate more steam . plants that burn coal to produce steam use more water for cooling than combined cycle natural gas plants , which combust natural gas to turn a turbine and then capture the waste heat to produce steam that turns a second turbine , thereby producing more electricity per gallon of cooling water . thermoelectric plants can also use air instead of water to condense the steam . these plants use fans to cool the steam and consume virtually no water , but are less efficient and more costly to run . population growth . additional water would be needed to support an anticipated increase in population due to oil shale workers and their families who migrate into the area . this increase in population can increase the demand for water for domestic uses . in isolated rural areas where oil shale is located , sufficiently skilled workers may not be available . based on studies that we reviewed , the total amount of water needed for in - situ oil shale operations could vary widely , from about 1 to 12 barrels of water per barrel of oil produced over the entire life cycle of oil shale operations . the average amount of water needed for in - situ oil shale production as estimated by these studies is about 5 barrels .