plan management . the marketplace is to provide a suite of services for state agencies and health plan issuers to facilitate activities such as submitting , monitoring , and renewing qualified health plans . financial management . the marketplace must be designed to provide support to consumers in completing an application , obtaining eligibility determinations , comparing coverage options , and enrolling in health care coverage . the data hub is a cms system that acts as a single portal for exchanging information between the federally facilitated marketplace and cms's external partners , including other federal agencies , state - based marketplaces , other state agencies , other cms systems , and issuers of qualified health plans . the data hub was designed as a “private cloud” service supporting the following primary functions: real - time eligibility queries . the federally facilitated marketplace , state - based marketplaces , and medicaid / chip agencies transmit queries to various external entities , including other federal agencies , state agencies , and commercial verification services , to verify information provided by applicants , such as immigration and citizenship data , income data , individual coverage data , and incarceration data . transfer of application and taxpayer information . the federally facilitated marketplace or a state - based marketplace transfers application information to state medicaid / chip agencies . conversely , state agencies also use the data hub to transfer application information to the federally facilitated marketplace . in addition , the internal revenue service ( irs ) transmits taxpayer information to the federally facilitated marketplace or a state - based marketplace to support the verification of household income and family size when determining eligibility for advance payments of the premium tax credit and cost - sharing reductions . exchange and monitoring of enrollment information with issuers of qualified health plans . further , cms , issuers of qualified health plans , and state - based marketplaces exchange enrollment information on a monthly basis to reconcile enrollment records . submission of health plan applications . issuers of qualified health plans submit “bids” for health plan offerings for validation by cms . connections between external entities and the data hub are made through an internet protocol that establishes an encrypted system - to - system web browser connection . encryption of the data transfer between the two entities is designed to meet nist standards , including federal information processing standard 140-2 . this type of connection is intended to ensure that only authorized systems can access the data being exchanged , thus safeguarding against cyber attacks attempting to intercept the data . the data hub is designed to not retain any of the data that it transmits in permanent storage devices , such as hard disks . according to cms officials , data are stored only momentarily in the data hub's active memory . the entities that transmit the data are responsible for maintaining copies of their transmissions in case the data need to be re - transmitted . as a result , cms does not consider the data hub to be a repository of personally identifiable information . state - based marketplaces generally perform the same functions that the federally facilitated marketplace performs for states that do not maintain their own marketplace .