when using professional service contracts . the three agencies collectively increased the percentage of obligated dollars for performance - based , firm - fixed - price contracts from about 16 percent to about 53 percent from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , with the food and nutrition service making the most significant gains . ( see fig . as part of their emphasis on performance - based and firm - fixed - price contracts , departmental management , the food and nutrition service , and the forest service are taking steps to encourage use of such contracts . as of fiscal year 2013 , departmental management directs its contracting officers to provide written justification in the contract file if the contracts are not performance based , according to agency acquisition operating procedures . forest service officials told us that the agency has recently been able to focus on improving completion of contractor assessments because the agency has finished a contracting initiative in another area , freeing up resources that can be devoted to this effort . in addition , the forest service has developed a specific written strategy for meeting omb's compliance targets for contractor assessments . the forest service's strategy was prepared in response to usda's 2013 request that each agency within the department develop a plan detailing steps to improve reporting . some of the steps included in the forest service plan were to appoint and train regional staff tasked with responsibilities related to contractor assessments and create a tracking spreadsheet to provide weekly updates on cpars activity . moreover , the forest service included compliance with contractor assessments among its goals in a recently updated strategic plan . however , unlike the forest service , neither departmental management nor the food and nutrition service has a strategy for meeting omb's targets . according to standards for internal control in the federal government , strategies for meeting agency performance goals are an important part of sound program management . without such a strategy , it is unclear how , when , or whether departmental management and the food and nutrition service will increase their contractor assessment compliance to the extent laid out in those targets . usda's departmental management , food and nutrition service , and forest service have all shown improvement in recent years in selecting lower - risk types of contracts for professional services and overseeing those contracts . for example , the three agencies have made it a priority to increase their use of performance - based , firm - fixed - price contracts and have increased the percentage of obligated dollars used for these types of contracts . the agencies have also taken steps to improve contract oversight , as evidenced by all three agencies developing templates for quality assurance surveillance plans . nevertheless , additional improvements in contract oversight could better position the agencies to ensure that the government gets what it is paying for under these contracts .