labor . despite labor's efforts with the new form 5500 requirements , information on asset - based fees is still not explicitly required to be reported on the form . as we have previously reported , the form does not explicitly list all of the fees paid from plan assets . for example , plan sponsors were not required to report mutual fund investment fees to labor , even though they received this information for each of the mutual funds they offered in the 401 ( k ) plan in the form of a prospectus . will the new requirements provide useful information to labor and others ? to determine whether labor's new requirements provide clear and understandable guidance to plan sponsors , we interviewed nine plan sponsors . we randomly selected three plan sponsors from the form 5500 database , and selected six plan sponsors referred by industry associations , plan service providers , well - known industry experts , industry associations , researchers , and labor . we also reviewed related documents from labor , such as its compliance assistance and technical guidance information , and frequently asked questions ( faq ) from its web site that are meant to aid employers in complying with the new regulations and forms revision . in addition , we reviewed erisa and relevant regulations governing 401 ( k ) plans , including labor's proposed regulations , to understand current and proposed annual reporting requirements . do labor's new requirements provide clear and understandable guidance to plan sponsors ? we interviewed and collected documentation from those affected by the new schedule c requirements , to get their views on whether these new requirements will provide useful information to labor , plan sponsors , and others . we also interviewed and collected documentation from a variety of stakeholders , including plan sponsors , service providers , industry and consumer associations , attorneys , and labor . we also collected and analyzed information on the form 5500 from other sources , such as the reports and testimonies from erisa advisory council working groups . finally , we reviewed previous work done by gao to provide an update on labor's efforts regarding the form 5500 and its regulatory initiatives . we conducted this performance audit from october 2008 through november 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . erisa , among other requirements , establishes the responsibilities of employee benefit plan decision makers ( fiduciaries ) and the requirements for disclosing and reporting plan fees . we obtained these stakeholders' views on the new requirements and identified any challenges sponsors might face . erisa is designed to protect the rights and interests of participants and beneficiaries of employee benefit plans and to outline the responsibilities of the employers and administrators who sponsor and manage these plans .