( fig . 8 shows real annual average natural gas prices and electricity prices at a key wholesale gas hub and a key electricity hub. ) specifically , natural gas prices more than doubled from 2002 to a peak in 2005 , declined somewhat , and peaked again in 2008 . according to eia , these increases in prices were initially due to increasing demand for natural gas and hurricanes that disrupted gulf coast natural gas production , among other factors . natural gas prices dropped in 2009 and have remained low since — the result of lower demand due to the economic recession and increasing natural gas production from development of shale gas resources , among other factors . these changing natural gas prices generally contributed first to higher and then lower wholesale electricity prices since 2002 . additionally , as discussed previously , pipeline constraints and competing demands have affected the delivery of natural gas in some regions . this situation has influenced natural gas and wholesale electricity prices during the winter months . for example , during january 2014 , the month a polar vortex occurred , monthly natural gas and wholesale electricity prices in new england — a region heavily dependent on natural gas for generating electricity — reached their highest levels , according to available historical data . prices moderated the following winter , with january 2015 wholesale electricity prices in new england around 60 percent lower than prices the previous january . more generally , ferc reported that wholesale electricity prices were more moderate in january and february 2015 compared to january and february 2014 , helped by more stable and less volatile natural gas prices . negative wholesale electricity prices in some instances , wholesale electricity markets experience negative prices — that is , power plant owners paying consumers to take their electricity . for example , owners of certain power plants are sometimes unwilling or unable to reduce their generation even if there is little or no demand for the electricity they generate . this can be the case for owners of wind plants , which may receive $23 per mwh of electricity generated from the federal production tax credit , sometimes making it economically beneficial for these wind plants to pay consumers to take their electricity so they can continue to receive the credit . it can also be the case for power plants that are costly to shut down and restart , such as nuclear plants . owners of these power plants may be willing to accept negative prices for a short time in order to avoid the cost of shutting the plant down . our analysis of available hourly data at electricity hubs within u.s. regional transmission organizations indicates that negative prices occurred on average 0.7 percent of the time from 2005 through 2014 . specific trends in instances of negative prices varied by electricity hub , and the annual percent of negative prices varied across the hubs , ranging from 0 percent to 9.8 percent over that time period . in most cases , any payment consumers might receive as a result of these negative prices is more than offset by the cost of purchasing electricity in other hours .