dod response: concur . the deficiencies identified within the digital training management system ( dtms ) have been identified and the development of solutions addressing these deficiencies has been directed by hq department of army execution order of december 2010 regarding the implementation of the army culture foreign language strategy . recommendation 2: the gao recommends that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to document the language proficiency for soldiers completing predeployment language training within the digital training management system and the army training requirements and resources system . dod response: concur . most predeployment language training is of such short duration that language proficiency will not be measurable . rather , emphasis will be to document language proficiency for general purpose forces ( gpf ) completing predeployment foundational language training ( usually sixteen weeks or longer ) conducted at language training detachments . the total army personnel database will remain the primary system for recording language proficiency of army personnel . the army training requirements and resources system ( atrrs ) already facilitates the requirement for tracking and reporting language and culture training through completion of atrrs managed training courses . dod has taken some steps to address our recommendations . test scores are reported as interagency language roundtable skill levels measured on a scale from 0 ( no proficiency ) to 5 ( functionally native proficiency ) . dod guidance also establishes broad regional proficiency skill level guidelines . these guidelines include culture knowledge and skills and are intended to provide dod components with benchmarks for assessing regional proficiency needs , for developing initial and sustainment regional proficiency curricula at service and professional military education schools , and for assessing regional proficiency capabilities . our prior work has found that dod has not yet established a way to test or otherwise evaluate the culture knowledge and skills of service members in accordance with these guidelines . the army and marine corps maintain a number of service - level training and personnel systems . at the department level , dod maintains several additional information systems that draw upon or provide data to the services' training and personnel systems . table 1 provides information on key army and marine corps training and personnel systems and other dod information systems . the army and marine corps have captured some information at the unit level for those service members who completed language and culture predeployment training for ongoing operations . today , and in the foreseeable future , military operations require u.s. personnel , in particular army and marine corps ground forces , to communicate and interact with multinational partners and local populations . dod , and the army and marine corps , have emphasized the need to build and sustain language and culture knowledge and skills in the general purpose forces . the army and marine corps are providing language and culture predeployment training in support of ongoing operations . dod relies on formal tests to measure service members' proficiency in a foreign language . various training and personnel systems exist within dod at the service and department level .