nrc has not performed this activity for the transition . nrc's comment references our statement that it did not plan to establish measures of success to assess progress toward its goals . nrc indicated that it plans to use gsa - established measures related to transition progress and identified various tracking tools . homeland security does not plan to develop such a process . homeland security's transition manager stated that the department did not have a documented inventory maintenance process or policy at its headquarters or any of its components . the transition manager stated that the department has instructed its components to maintain their inventories . however , there was no documentation of this instruction , and the department did not have plans to document a maintenance process . without a documented inventory maintenance process , agencies may not consistently and accurately capture the changes to their telecommunications inventories during and after transition , hindering their ability to ensure that they are billed appropriately by the vendor or to determine areas for optimization and sharing of telecommunications and it resources across the agency . sound transition planning practices , as described in our earlier work , include identifying strategic telecommunications requirements and incorporating them into transition planning . to accomplish this , agencies should use an inventory of existing services to determine current and future telecommunications needs . delays occurred for several reasons . for example , delays occurred because agency efforts to order services were impeded by the inability of gsa and the long - distance contractors to rapidly add , through a contract modification process , transition - critical services to the fts2001 contracts . other identified reasons for transition delays included that agencies were slow to place orders for transition services and that contractors had issues with staffing and billing that impaired their efforts to support agencies' transition activities . we also reported that encountered delays would , among other things , cause agency telecommunications costs to rise . in 2006 , we reported on sound transition planning practices that agencies could use to improve the likelihood of a smooth transition . these planning practices are to establish a telecommunications inventory , perform a strategic analysis of telecommunications requirements , establish a structured transition management approach , develop a transition plan . each of these sound planning practices consists of various components ( for example , developing a transition plan consists of ( 1 ) identifying and documenting objectives and measures of success ; ( 2 ) determining risks that could affect success ; and ( 3 ) defining transition preparation tasks and developing a time line for these tasks ) . we assessed the progress of six agencies in preparing for the transition and reported that although agencies were early in the planning process , they were generally planning to employ sound transition planning practices in their transition management efforts . however , officials at two of the agencies stated that they did not plan to fully identify necessary resources .