administering contracts . bie did not identify staff to administer some contracts , which has contributed to some jom programs affected by these contracts going unfunded . according to bie and bia officials , bie did not assign any staff to administer at least 20 contracts in california , including helping contractors renew their contracts when they expired , typically after 3 years . as a result , these contracts — totaling over $300,000 — expired and were not renewed , disrupting jom services . a bie official informed us there were lapses in administering these contracts because bie closed the office responsible for administering them as a result of its reorganization which began in 2014 , and never assigned anyone to assume responsibility for the contracts associated with that office . bie has not assessed whether similar lapses in coverage may have occurred in other states or regions . bie officials identified the unallocated funds from california in september 2019 . in october 2019 , bie officials began efforts to identify and contact officials responsible for all the jom programs whose contracts lapsed in california due to gaps in bie's administration of the program and began the process to start new jom programs in the future . however , without identifying staff to administer all jom contracts , problems with renewing and awarding contracts may persist . reviewing the appropriateness of contract types . interior's office of the solicitor does not have a role in reviewing the issuance of new jom contracts , according to a senior attorney in that office . the office of the solicitor's lack of a role in reviewing jom contracts increases the risk that contracts are not used appropriately . for example , we found that bie has been using self - determination contracts to disburse jom funds to non - tribal contractors , which is not authorized by the indian self determination and education assistance act . under the act , only indian tribes and tribal organizations are eligible to enter into self - determination contracts ; these contracts may not be used for non - tribal entities , such as school districts and states . the use of self - determination contracts for contractors that are not eligible to receive them can result in costs to the government . self - determination contracts include provisions that would not otherwise be included in non - tribal jom contracts , according to a senior attorney in the office of the solicitor . for example , self - determination contracts may include contract support costs and extend the federal tort claims act to tribal government employees administering the federal program ( s ) under these contracts . by identifying staff who have the capacity to carry out oversight activities and clearly defining related responsibilities such as conducting site visits and reviewing jom annual reports , bie could provide support to contractors in improving their program activities and procedures and reduce the risk of potential fraud and abuse of jom funds . therefore , school contractors that were disbursed jom funds through self - determination contracts may have received contract support costs and legal protections they would not have been eligible to receive , according to the senior attorney .