ii. ) the nipp defines the overarching approach for integrating the nation's critical infrastructure protection and resilience activities into a single national effort . dhs developed the nipp in collaboration with public - and private - sector owners and operators and federal and nonfederal government representatives , including ssas , from the critical infrastructure community . it details dhs's roles and responsibilities in protecting the nation's critical infrastructures and how sector stakeholders should use risk management principles to prioritize protection activities within and across sectors . it emphasizes the importance of collaboration , partnering , and voluntary information sharing among dhs and industry owners and operators , and state , local , and tribal governments . according to the nipp , ssas are to work with their private - sector counterparts to understand cyber risk and develop sector - specific plans that address the security of the sector's cyber and other assets and functions . the ssas and their private - sector partners are to update their sector - specific plans based on dhs sector - specific plan guidance issued in 2014 . nist used several methods to obtain and incorporate stakeholder views when developing its cybersecurity framework . respondents to our survey were generally satisfied with nist's efforts and methods to develop the framework . also , nist met the requirements under executive order 13636 and the cybersecurity enhancement act to develop an approach that can help critical infrastructure organizations manage cyber risk . executive order 13636 , released in february 2013 required nist to create a flexible performance - based cybersecurity framework that includes a set of standards , procedures , and processes that align policy , business , and technological approaches to address cyber risks . in addition , under the cybersecurity enhancement act , enacted into law in december 2014 , nist is required to facilitate and support the development of a voluntary set of standards , guidelines , methodologies , and procedures to cost - effectively reduce cyber risks to critical infrastructure . in february 2014 , nist issued the framework for critical infrastructure cybersecurity . in developing the framework , nist used several methods to obtain and incorporate the views of experts from government , industry , and academia . specifically , it solicited public comments through formal “requests for information,” held workshops with stakeholders to identify and develop elements of the framework , and published a draft version of the framework for further review and comment . figure 1 summarizes the development of the framework . nist began the collaboration process for developing the framework on february 26 , 2013 , when it issued a formal request for information in the federal register to seek comments regarding risk management practices , frameworks , standards , guidelines , and best practices . nist received 246 unique comments in response to the request from organizations and individuals representing , among others , large companies , associations , sector coordinating councils , federal agencies , universities , and international companies . nist analyzed the comments received to , among other things , identify common cybersecurity practices and methods to facilitate discussions on the development of the framework .