threshold methodology . the threshold methodology calculates the percentages of improved readers on the basis of changes in the proportion of children who improve from below a threshold level of reading in a baseline assessment to a level at or above that threshold in an endline assessment . for example , different threshold levels of reading are created using the average numbers of words read correctly per minute and numbers of reading comprehension questions answered correctly for the sample of assessed children at baseline . the percentage of improved readers is then calculated on the basis of the differences between the proportions of children at each of these threshold levels at baseline and at endline . gain score methodology . the gain score methodology ranks assessment results for a sample of children assessed at baseline and a sample assessed at endline and matches results for individuals in each sample to calculate percentages with improved reading skills . for example , assessment results for the child reading the 10th fewest words correctly per minute at baseline are matched with results for the child reading the 10th fewest words correctly at endline . the percentages of children with improved reading skills are calculated on the basis of the numbers of matched pairs whose reading skills increased by a given minimum — for instance , who read an additional 1 , 5 , or 10 words correctly per minute . the usaid contractor staff used assessment data from eight usaid programs to compare percentages of improved readers that they calculated using the two methodologies and various minimum reading levels . according to the contractor's analysis , using the two methodologies to analyze the same assessment results produced different estimates of the percentages of children demonstrating improved reading skills . specifically , the contractor found that the gain score methodology consistently produced higher estimates of improved readers than did the threshold methodology . according to the contractor , the discrepancy in the estimates from the two methodologies occurs because the threshold methodology only counts children whose reading improves across a threshold level . the threshold methodology does not count children who demonstrate some level of improved reading , but whose reading skills remain below or above a threshold level . the usaid contractor has also reviewed possible procedures for extrapolating the percentages of samples of assessed children demonstrating reading improvements to all children exposed to the reading interventions . however , the contractor noted that it needs to conduct further technical work before making recommendations regarding these procedures to usaid . lack of information about progress relative to usaid's primary grade reading goal limits the agency's ability to assess its current approach to achieving its reading goal and establish a realistic goal for a post - 2015 education strategy . because usaid has not selected a methodology for estimating total numbers of children with improved reading skills resulting from exposure to primary grade reading interventions , it has not produced interim estimates of its progress toward the goal of 100 million children with improved reading skills by december 2015 . in addition , usaid's education strategy and guidance did not establish any interim targets for measuring progress toward usaid's primary grade reading goal .