project status . glas users did not define status the same way and therefore may have entered the status of their projects inconsistently . to report a project's status , glas users selected from a drop - down list of options , including started , percentage completed , and completed . we asked officials at four of the five agencies we reviewed how they defined “completed” and found that the agencies did not mean the same thing when selecting completed . for example , one agency official told us that for projects involving construction , completed means that the bulk of the contractor's effort was completed and that the ecological benefits of the project were at least partially realized , even if additional project activities and final payments may have not been completed . officials from another agency told us that completed means that all of the funds for the project were obligated and expended , or all contracts were completed , cancelled , or terminated . epa officials told us that many recipients did not report projects as completed until the grant itself was closed out , which can take as long as a year from the completion of fieldwork . congressional decision makers . without this information in omb's budget crosscut reports , which is required to be included by law , it is not possible for decision makers to view glri funding in the context of the funding of overall great lakes restoration activities , because information on such activities would only be available from each agency , making less information readily available for congressional oversight . of the $1.66 billion epa allocated to all task force agencies , as of january 2015 , the five task force agencies we reviewed were allocated $1.43 billion . these agencies had obligated $1.38 billion and expended $993 million , or about 69 percent of their allocations ( see fig . 4 ) , on 1,696 glri projects . using information from epa's glas database as of july 2014 for glri funds made available in fiscal years 2010 through 2013 , we found that the five task force agencies we reviewed funded a total of 1,558 glri projects using glri funds as of july 2014 . as shown in table 2 , epa and the fish and wildlife service funded the most projects as of july 2014 . to use glri funds on restoration activities , the task force agencies conduct the work themselves or enter into financial agreements with other entities to conduct the work , primarily through grants , cooperative agreements , or contracts . the different types of financial agreements have different purposes . for example , epa officials noted that the distinguishing factor between a grant and a cooperative agreement is the degree of federal involvement in project activities . a single glri project in glas can involve agency - conducted work , one or more of the types of financial agreements , or a combination of these . using data we obtained from the five agencies reviewed , we found that the extent to which the agencies used each type of financial agreement in obligating their glri funds made available in fiscal years 2010 through 2013 varies by agency ( see fig .