dod concurred with both of these recommendations . while dod has made some progress in drafting a community - wide plan to increase its capability and capacity to meet the statutory accounting - for goal , as of june 2013 dod had not completed a community - wide plan . we have previously reported that overarching plans can help agencies better align their activities , processes , and resources to collaborate effectively to accomplish a commonly defined outcome . however , our july 2013 report found that community - wide planning to meet the accounting - for goal established by congress has been impeded by disputes and by a lack of coordination among members of the missing persons accounting community , with dpmo and jpac developing two competing proposed plans , neither of which encompassed the entire accounting community . in response to a december 2009 memorandum from the deputy secretary of defense directing the deputy assistant secretary of defense for prisoner of war / missing personnel affairs to begin planning to meet the accounting - for goal , usd policy and pacom allowed the development of these two competing proposed plans for obtaining additional funding and resources to meet the mandated capability and capacity . according to dpmo officials , neither the joint staff nor usd policy provided oversight or intervention in the disagreement . these officials stated that such oversight and intervention could have helped jpac and dpmo to resolve their impasse by improving communication , interaction , and cooperation . both plans called for increased capability and capacity and for a new satellite remains identification laboratory located in the continental united states . however , the two plans differed as to which organization would have control over much of the increased capability and capacity , with each plan favoring the organization that authored it . the other accounting community members and their resource needs were not mentioned in either proposed plan . the dispute concerning the competing proposed plans was resolved through dod's program budget review process in january 2011 , after being assessed by a dod - wide team led by dod's office of cost assessment and program evaluation . the central identification laboratory is the laboratory component of jpac . the military services have a role , with their service casualty offices serving as the primary liaison for families concerning missing persons recovery and accounting . officials from these offices also assist families and help explain the methods used to account for their missing loved ones . additional activities include gathering family deoxyribobucleic acid ( dna ) reference samples , coordinating responses to family inquiries and concerns , and maintaining family contact information . the past conflict accounting section of the armed forces dna identification laboratory conducts dna analyses of remains of missing persons from past military conflicts for jpac and its laboratory component , the central identification laboratory , and maintains the past conflict accounting family reference sample database , to include processing of all dna references . the armed forces dna identification laboratory is part of the armed forces medical examiner system , which reports to the army surgeon general .