vets does not have such a management system . the agency does not have clear goals that it communicates to states or that it tracks with outcome data . vets' goals are not reflected by the performance measures that the agency uses to monitor state performance . for example , one agency goal is to provide high - quality case management to veterans , but the agency has no state performance measures for assessing the quality of case management for veterans . instead , the performance measure is the percentage of veterans served who enter employment . because vets' performance measures do not reflect the agency's goals , the agency cannot track how well its goals are being met . furthermore , current performance measures do not affect how services are delivered to veterans . several one - stop managers and dvop and lver staff said that they provide services that veterans need without concentrating on the required performance measures , hoping that the services meet or exceed the measures . although vets is working to improve its performance measures , it still lacks a comprehensive system to manage performance . vets' efforts to ensure that intensive services are focused on those veterans most in need by “targeting” specific groups of veterans are unfocused . in its strategic plan , the agency , for case management and intensive services , targets disabled veterans , minority veterans , female veterans , recently separated veterans , veterans with significant barriers to employment , special disabled veterans , homeless veterans , veterans provided vocational rehabilitation under the va , and veterans who served on active duty in the armed forces under certain circumstances . this includes nearly all veterans , and not necessarily those most in need of service . the numerous categories of targeted veterans could result in the vast majority of veterans being targeted for case management . a vets official said that the focus for service should be on veterans with the greatest needs as determined by individual assessments because groups targeted on a national level do not necessarily correlate to the needs of veterans in particular states or local areas . unnecessary performance measures often add to dvop and lver work , without measuring quality of service to veterans . some state and vets officials we spoke with expressed concern about having performance measures that specifically focus on service to vietnam - era veterans . the law requires vets to report to the congress on states' service to vietnam - era veterans ; consequently , vets includes this service as a performance goal . since these veterans make up such a small percentage of the workforce , due in part to the fact that many are at or near retirement age and may not be seeking employment , dvop and lver staff may spend much of their time trying to identify and serve this group of veterans in order to meet vets' performance goals . in fact , one state vets official , who is also a disabled vietnam - era veteran , said that the time - consuming service to vietnam - era veterans might be a distraction to dvop and lver staff . in addition , where appropriate , we interviewed local workforce board members .