the department has not issued stays of foreclosure in either of these lawsuits . in june 2001 , usda's acting general counsel wrote a memo that explained the department's reasoning for issuing stays of foreclosure in response to some class action lawsuits , but not others . according to the memo , the stay of foreclosure agreement included in the pigford consent decree was reached only in the context of litigation and only to settle a lawsuit in which a class action had already been certified by the district court . direct loans are considered delinquent when a payment is 30 days past due . when a borrower's account is 90 days past due , fsa county staff formally notify him or her of the delinquency and provide an application for restructuring the loan . to be considered for loan restructuring , borrowers must complete and return an application within 60 days . fsa staff process the completed application and notify borrowers whether they are eligible for loan restructuring . if a borrower does not apply or is not eligible for loan restructuring , and the loan continues to be delinquent , fsa notifies the borrower that it will take legal action to collect all the money owed on the loan ( called loan acceleration ) . if the borrower does not take action to settle their account within a certain period of time , fsa may start foreclosure proceedings . without a standard , transparent policy that lays out the factors usda considers in deciding whether or not to issue stays , the department faces the continued problem of having its decisions viewed as unfair . furthermore , if fsa and ocr do not improve their process for reconciling their respective lists of complainants , fsa runs the risk of violating its policy of not taking foreclosure actions against farmers with pending discrimination complaints . in october 2000 , hispanic farmers ( garcia v. glickman ) and women farmers ( love v. glickman ) each filed class action lawsuits against usda alleging similar claims that usda willfully discriminated against them in processing applications for farm credit and farm programs . specifically , they alleged that loans were denied , provided late , or provided with less money than needed to adequately farm . when farmers believe that fsa has discriminated against them , they may file a discrimination complaint with usda's ocr . for the complaint to be accepted , it must be filed in writing and signed by the complainant ; be filed within 180 days of the discriminatory event ; and describe the discriminatory conduct of a usda employee or the discriminatory effect of a departmental policy , procedure , or regulation . farmers may also seek compensation for violations of their civil rights by filing individual or class action lawsuits . further , the acting general counsel wrote that in all three of the pending lawsuits — keepseagle , garcia , and love — no adequate factual bases had been alleged to support the claims of discrimination made by most of the named plaintiffs . fsa does not maintain historic information on accelerations or foreclosures in a manner for this information to be readily retrieved or analyzed .