employment service . the employment service was created in 1933 by the wagner - peyser act , making labor exchange services — that link job seekers with job opportunities — universally available to employers and job seekers alike without charges or conditions . historically , many states colocated local employment service and ui offices so that when ui claimants applied for benefits at employment service offices , they would be exposed to employment services . today , states' labor exchanges typically involve online databases where job seekers can look for work and apply for jobs , and where employers can post jobs and recruit employees . in addition , employment service offers a range of services to job seekers , including job search assistance , job referral , placement assistance , assessment , counseling , and testing . employment service also offers a number of services to employers , including taking job orders , recruitment , screening , referrals of job seekers , assisting with job restructuring , and helping employers manage layoffs . wia adult and wia dislocated worker programs . when wia was enacted in 1998 , it replaced the job training partnership act ( jtpa ) programs for economically disadvantaged adults and youth and for dislocated workers with three new programs — wia adult , dislocated worker , and youth — that provide a broader range of services to the general public , no longer using income to determine eligibility for all program services . wia programs provide for three tiers , or levels , of service for adults and dislocated workers: core , intensive , and training . core services include basic services such as job searches and labor market information . these activities may be self - service or require some staff assistance . intensive services include such activities as comprehensive assessment and case management — activities that require greater staff involvement . training services include such activities as occupational skills or on - the - job training . labor's guidance provides for monitoring and tracking of performance for the adult and dislocated worker programs to begin when job seekers receive core services that require significant staff assistance . wia currently excludes job seekers who receive core services that are self - service and informational in nature from being included in the performance measures . trade adjustment assistance . wia and taa reporting requirements are similarly limited and do not provide a complete picture of claimant services and outcomes . wia tracks several performance measures directly related to outcomes for adults and dislocated workers , including job placement , job retention , and wage gain or wage replacement . labor requires states to report their performance on these measures in both quarterly and annual reports . in addition , once each year states submit a file to labor , the wia standardized record data ( wiasrd ) file , containing a complete record of demographic , services , and outcome information on each wia registrant who has exited the program . while these records contain information on whether or not the wia registrant is also a ui claimant , they do not contain information for those claimants who are not registered under wia .