thus , fema did not have title to any of the boats . specifically , our searches for boat titles found that no transfer of title and / or registration had taken place on any of the 17 new boats , that is , the serial numbers were “not on file.” of the remaining 3 used boats , title searches revealed that all 3 remain registered to their previous owners . we did not validate the potential collection amount . however , the amount that fema had collected on overpayments related to hurricanes katrina and rita supports our prior statements that detective controls , while an important element of a fraud prevention program , are more costly and not as effective as preventive controls . as fema's historical experience demonstrated , once a payment had been disbursed because of weak preventive controls , it is difficult to identify individuals who received the improper payments , contact those individuals , and collect on those payments . as discussed previously , when system edit checks that should occur during the processing of disaster registration are circumvented , significant improper payments occur that require extensive data mining and follow - up actions to identify and recover improper payments . in addition to the difficulties in collecting overpayments , there are limitations to the ability of detective controls in identifying all instances of overpayments . for example , our conversations with several foreign students indicate that although some have received recoupment letters , others have not . the limitations of detective controls are demonstrated through gao's own experience with the fema registration , payment , and recoupment processes . as we testified previously , gao submitted a number of registrations using false identities and fictitious addresses to test the effectiveness of fema's internal controls . we also testified that we received payments on registrations we submitted . however , to date , we had not received recoupment notices from fema indicating that it had identified the undercover registrations that gao submitted . after our last testimony in june of 2006 , we received another payment of more than $3,200 for rental assistance on a property that did not exist . in total , we received six payments on five registrations using falsified information , without receiving any recoupment notices from fema . we found weak accountability over fema property bought for hurricanes katrina and rita relief efforts using government purchase cards . our investigation revealed that dhs overstated the number of items fema had actually located on the day of our july16 , 2006 , testimony and that additional items are missing . in total , of the 246 laptops , printers , flat - bottom boats , and gps units that we investigated for this testimony , 85 items are missing and presumed lost or stolen . moreover , during the course of our investigation , we found that fema did not have titles to any of the 20 flat - bottom boats it purchased for hurricanes katrina and rita . the fact that fema could not locate two of the flat - bottom boats raises additional concerns about dhs's accountable property controls .