order no . 13,010 , 61 fed . reg . 37,347 ( july 15 , 1996 ) . the white house , office of homeland security , national strategy for homeland security . pub . this report answers the following questions: to what extent have federal entities assessed the risks to the nation's highway infrastructure and coordinated these efforts ? to what extent has dhs developed a risk - based strategy , consistent with applicable federal guidance and characteristics of an effective national strategy , to guide its highway infrastructure security efforts ? what actions have government and highway sector stakeholders taken to secure highway infrastructure , and to what extent has dhs monitored the implementation of asset - specific protective security measures ? to identify what efforts federal entities have taken to assess the risk to highway infrastructure and coordinated their efforts , we obtained and analyzed risk assessment data from dhs and the department of transportation ( dot ) , comprised of various threat , vulnerability , and consequence related assessments for highway infrastructure assets . we sought to determine the reliability of these data by , among other things , obtaining information on the processes used for collecting and maintaining written data from agency officials . on the basis of our review of the processes used to collect the data , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we interviewed dhs , dot and selected state transportation , homeland security , and law enforcement officials , associations representing highway infrastructure owners and operators , and members of the highway government coordinating council ( gcc ) and the highway sector coordinating council ( scc ) , to discuss federal risk assessment efforts . we also obtained information on federal coordination and collaboration activities from tsa and highway infrastructure stakeholders and compared these efforts to the coordination requirements established in homeland security presidential directive - 7 , as well as gao's recommended practices for effective collaboration . to assess the extent to which dhs developed a risk - based strategy consistent with applicable federal guidance , including the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) and the transportation systems sector - specific plan ( tssp ) and best practices to guide its highway infrastructure security efforts , we reviewed federal agency reports , guidelines , and infrastructure security studies on risk management sponsored by industry associations . we also interviewed dhs and dot officials , state , and industry association highway infrastructure representatives regarding their use of risk management principles for protecting highway infrastructure . as the principal strategy for protecting the nation's highway infrastructure , we also analyzed tsa's highway modal annex to determine how it aligned with the requirements set out in executive order 13416 , strengthening surface transportation security . in addition , we assessed the extent to which the highway modal annex contained the desirable characteristics for an effective national strategy that we have previously identified .