all sale proceeds are deposited into the treasury . under this act , the agency must offer the land for sale under competitive bidding procedures — public auction — unless specific equity or public policy considerations support noncompetitive procedures . for example , blm could decide to give preference to the state or local government in which the parcel is located , a parcel's current user , an adjoining landowner , or another person . aside from public auctions , sales are generally requested by potential buyers who apply to buy specific parcels . the agency can respond to such applications by ( 1 ) using modified competitive bidding procedures — i.e. , offering the parcel for sale under competitive bidding procedures and allowing the applicant to match the highest bid received — or ( 2 ) selling directly ( noncompetitively ) to the applicant . under flpma , blm sold about 55,000 acres during fiscal years 1991 through 2000 and received about $38 million . figure 4 shows the acres sold under flpma , and the amount received , annually for fiscal years 1991 through 2000 . over this 10-year period , blm sold about 24,000 acres ( roughly 45 percent of the total ) in 336 competitive sales . the remaining 31,000 acres ( about 55 percent of the total ) were sold in 495 noncompetitive sales . figure 5 shows the number of competitive and noncompetitive sales blm made under flpma annually during this same 10-year period . the santini - burton act authorizes blm to sell land — up to 700 acres per year — that is located within a defined area of las vegas , nevada , to allow for more orderly community development . when blm sells this land , it must follow flpma requirements and receive at least fair market value.the law reserves 85 percent of the sale proceeds , which are deposited into the treasury , to be used to repay the forest service for acquiring environmentally sensitive land around lake tahoe . to analyze the difference in prices between competitive and noncompetitive sales completed by blm during fiscal years 1991 through 2000 , we identified the parcels that were sold under each procedure , and identified the appraised value and the sale price , using available information from blm's public lands database , the agency's website , and the federal register . we also contracted with mr. peter d. bowes — an independent and certified appraiser in denver , colorado , who has over 40 years of experience in appraising properties and has worked with various government entities — to provide his professional advice on our analysis . he did not reappraise the properties discussed in this report nor review the appraisals . we conducted our work from september 2000 through august 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , jay cherlow , christine colburn , jennifer duncan , cynthia rasmussen , and amy webbink made key contributions to this report . blm had allowed a 1¼ - mile recreational railroad associated with a tourist attraction in arizona to be partially built on public land ; however , the field office later determined that it had improperly done so .