limited stops . increasing distances between stations or shelters improves operating speeds . improved stations and shelters . bus terminals and unique stations or shelters differentiate bus rapid transit service from standard bus service . ( see fig . intelligent transportation system technologies . advanced technology can maintain consistent distances between buses and inform passengers when the next bus is arriving . cleaner and quieter vehicles . improved diesel buses and buses using alternative fuels are cleaner than traditional diesel buses . in our september 2001 review of bus rapid transit systems , we found that at least 17 u.s. cities were planning to incorporate aspects of bus rapid transit into their operations . a variety of federal grant programs could be used to help fund bus rapid transit projects , but few projects are in line to receive awards . the federal transit administration ( fta ) has also provided funding for several bus rapid transit projects through a demonstration program . grant funds administered primarily by fta and , to a lesser extent , by the federal highway administration are available for bus rapid transit projects . however , few bus rapid transit projects are ready to compete for these funds , competition for funding is intense , and constraints on the use and size of the grants limit their usefulness for bus rapid transit projects . fta's new starts program is the primary source of federal funding for the construction of new transit systems and extensions to existing systems . it provides grants of up to 80 percent of the capital costs of bus and rail projects that operate on exclusive rights - of - way . to obtain funds , a project must progress through a local or regional review of alternatives , develop preliminary engineering plans , and receive fta's approval of the final design . fta annually proposes new starts projects to the congress for funding , basing its proposal on an evaluation of each project's technical merits , including its planned mobility improvements and cost effectiveness , and the stability of the locality's financial commitment . in making its funding proposal each year , fta gives preference to projects with existing grant agreements . fta then considers projects with overall ratings of “recommended” or “highly recommended” under the evaluation criteria . the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) authorized about $6 billion in “guaranteed” funding over 6 years for new starts transit projects . as table 1 indicates , few bus rapid transit projects are ready to compete for new starts funding . apart from the one project that has already received a funding commitment , none has progressed far enough for fta to evaluate it for funding , and not all of the six projects that are in the preliminary engineering and final design categories may decide to compete for new starts funding . in addition to bus rapid transit projects , light rail , heavy rail , and commuter railroad projects can compete for new starts funding . nationwide , over 200 projects are now in various stages of development , and these other types of projects outnumber bus rapid transit projects in all of the new starts program categories .