use of nutrient management plans . eqip data show that nutrient management plans — the agency's primary method for ensuring that those practices intending to conserve one resource ( eg , soil ) do not inadvertently harm another resource ( eg , water ) — were funded on properties in less than one - third of the watersheds where soil conservation practices that nrcs acknowledges could degrade water quality were also funded . according to nrcs officials , there are several reasons why the data on nutrient management plans do not provide a complete picture of water protection efforts . for example , it is possible that some of the acres within the 820 watersheds where these practices were funded were actually not vulnerable — that is , were not close to water bodies of concern — and therefore did not require a nutrient management plan to ensure that water quality was protected . we continue to believe , as we state in the report , that without examining such information , neither we nor nrcs could determine that certain practices are not having unintended effects on water quality . nrcs commented on our finding that from 2005 to 2010 the environmental quality incentives program funded nearly 8,000 practices that — if implemented in isolation — can increase nonpoint source pollution . specifically , in its letter , the agency stated that “nrcs does not implement practices in isolation . in fact , nrcs analysis of its environmental quality incentives program data show an average of four practices funded per contract.” we acknowledge that nrcs does not fund practices in isolation and have revised the report to clarify this statement . nonetheless , our statement is correct in that the nearly 8,000 practices we identified have the potential to have a negative effect on water quality if , depending on site - specific conditions , the proper companion practices are not installed along with them . we note in the report that nrcs generally funds multiple practices per contract — an average of 4 , according to nrcs' letter — but that this figure does not shed light on the type of practices that are being installed and whether the additional practices properly mitigate the potentially negative effects on water quality . it was for this reason that we recommended that nrcs analyze available information , which may involve obtaining site - specific information from field offices , to determine the extent to which appropriate mitigation measures are implemented when nutrient management plans are not in use . nrcs stated that we misinterpreted the agency's use of its conservation practice physical effects ( cppe ) assessments , noting that , “the cppe matrix is a generalized , national tool that provides a first approximation of potential effects for each practice… interpretation of the effects of individual practices using the cppe matrix is not appropriate for assessing overall effects of site - specific conservation plans.” we acknowledge that usda generally implements suites of practices as part of site - specific conservation plans and have made changes in the report to clarify this point .