cpd manages the youthbuild program . cpd programs generally fall into three categories: ( 1 ) formula grants , of which the largest are the community development block grant and the home investment partnership program , which account for the majority of cpd funding ; ( 2 ) competitive homeless programs ; and ( 3 ) competitive nonhomeless programs , including youthbuild . while no staff are dedicated solely to youthbuild oversight , cpd monitors the program as part of its oversight responsibilities for 22 programs and initiatives , which 829 staff ( 233 in headquarters and 596 in field offices ) administered as of the beginning of fiscal year 2007 . in fiscal year 2006 , congress appropriated $19.1 billion for the cpd programs and initiatives , of which youthbuild represents a small portion . the first program appropriation for youthbuild was $40 million for fiscal year 1993 . appropriations reached a high of $65 million in fiscal year 2002 , but dropped to $49.5 million in fiscal year 2006 , the last year in which hud was authorized to award grants ( see fig . hud has provided program funding for youthbuild through an annual competitive grant application process . any applicant can receive up to a $700,000 grant ; however , new applicants and rural / underserved applicants primarily receive grants up to $400,000 . grant awards can last up to 30 months ( or longer if the grantee is given an extension ) , but some grantees use the funds at a much quicker rate and usually reapply every year , while others may take the full 30 months . prospective grantees are state , private , nonprofit , and local entities that implement the youthbuild program by serving low - income youth , ages 16 to 24 , who demonstrate educational need — either by virtue of being high - school dropouts or by justifying their need for inclusion in the program . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees and the secretaries of housing and urban development and labor . as a result of a lack of verified and aggregated data or analysis and limited oversight , hud largely was unable to tell how well the individual youthbuild grantees performed . hud requires grantees to submit performance reports , including closeout reports , but hud has not developed or fully utilized information — particularly from the closeout reports — that could help it assess youthbuild grantee programs and has lacked resources to conduct comprehensive oversight of grantees . such information serves as the basis for management and oversight of programs . for instance , hud states in the instructions for filling out the closeout reports that the reports will be used to monitor and evaluate progress of grantees and programs . further , the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) shifted the focus of federal managers from the number of tasks completed or services provided to a more direct consideration of the outcomes or results of the program .