gao . undocumented aliens: questions persist about their impact on hospitals' uncompensated care costs , gao - 04-472 . washington , d.c.: may 21 , 2004 . gao . are direct questions not highly sensitive ? yes , not highly sensitive . yes . mostly ; 17% of foreign - born sample adults interviewed by telephone . there are direct questions on hiv , other stds . national survey of drug use and health ( nsduh ) yes . all interviewed in person . an adult respondent reports on self and provides proxy responses for others in his or her household . in - person data for 6,744 households with 1 or more foreign - born members ( 2006 ) . yes . for some questions , but not all , 4,829 foreign - born adults self - report ( 2004 ) . yes . 7,364 foreign - born age 12 and older and 4,934 foreign - born age 18+ self - report ( 2004 ) . yes . a follow - back could specify self - report only . ( acs data include both self - report data and proxy data in which one member of a household provides responses for others. ) there are direct questions on respondent's use and sale of drugs like marijuana and cocaine . yes , not highly sensitive . yes . a follow - back could specify personal interviews only . ( acs is mixed mode , mostly mail. ) the views of immigrant advocates , which were echoed by some other experts , suggested three additional criteria for a candidate “host” survey: 1. data collection by a university or private sector organization , 2. no request for the respondent's name or social security number , and 3. protection from possible release of grouped answers survey data for small geographic areas ( to guard against estimates of the undocumented for such areas ) . the experts based their views on ( 1 ) methodological grounds ( foreign - born respondents would be more likely to cooperate , and to respond truthfully , if all or some of these criteria were met ) and ( 2 ) concerns about privacy protections at the individual or group levels . these criteria are potentially important , in part because the success of a self - report approach hinges on the cooperation of individual immigrants and , most likely , also on the support of opinion leaders in immigrant communities . with respect to the first criterion above , we note that with the exception of initial gao pretests , all tests of the grouped answers approach have involved data collection by a university or private sector organization . without further tests , we do not know whether acceptance would be equally high in a government - fielded survey . as shown in table 4 , an acs follow - back would potentially not meet any of the three criteria based on immigrant advocates' views . only one survey ( nsduh ) met all three criteria based on immigrant advocates' views — and because of its sensitive questions on drug use , that survey did not meet the design - based table 3 criteria . does a nongovernment organization conduct field work ?