syria . since 2011 , syria has been plagued by an ongoing multisided armed conflict fought primarily between the government of president bashar al - assad , along with its allies , and various forces opposing both the government and each other . syria's economy has deeply deteriorated amid the ongoing conflict , declining by more than 70 percent from 2010 to 2017 . during 2017 , the ongoing conflict and continued unrest and economic decline worsened the humanitarian crisis , necessitating high levels of international assistance , as more than 13 million people remained in need inside syria and the number of registered syrian refugees increased from 4.8 million to more than 5.4 million . multiple terrorist groups operate inside syria , raising the potential risk of terrorist financing . additionally , according to a central intelligence agency report , syria is a transit point for opiates , hashish , and cocaine bound for regional and western markets , and weak anti - money - laundering controls and bank privatization may leave it vulnerable to money laundering . the u.s. maintains a comprehensive syria sanctions program . a general license in the syria regulations authorizes nonprofit organizations to provide services , including financial services , to syria in support of certain not - for - profit activities , such as activities to support humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs and support education in syria . organizations providing humanitarian assistance that is not authorized by the general license may apply for a specific license to engage in those transactions . the united states has provided approximately $3.3 billion in humanitarian assistance for syria since 2012 . somalia . since 1969 , somalia has endured political instability and civil conflict , and is the third - largest source of refugees , after syria and afghanistan . somalia lacks effective national governance and maintains an informal economy largely based on livestock , money transfer companies , and telecommunications . in the absence of a formal banking sector , money transfer companies have sprung up throughout the country , handling up to $1.6 billion in remittances annually . according to a 2016 state report , somalia remained a safe haven for terrorists who used their relative freedom of movement to obtain resources and funds , recruit fighters , and plan and mount operations within somalia and neighboring countries . the united states maintains a targeted list - based somalia sanctions program . organizations providing humanitarian assistance may apply for a specific license to engage in transactions that otherwise would be prohibited by the somalia sanctions regulations . the united states has provided approximately $1.2 billion in humanitarian assistance for somalia since 2012 . haiti . currently the poorest country in the western hemisphere , haiti has experienced political instability for most of its history . remittances are the primary source of foreign exchange , equivalent to more than a quarter of gdp , and nearly double the combined value of haitian exports and foreign direct investment . in january 2010 , a catastrophic earthquake killed an estimated 300,000 people and left close to 1.5 million people homeless .