gao - 20-234t . washington , d.c.: november 13 , 2019 . it comprises both software and hardware . the f - 35 program has been developing alis capabilities incrementally . a fully functional alis is critical to the operational success of the f - 35 . alis is intended to enable holistic fleet management , improve speed , enhance readiness , and reduce costs to the f - 35 program . however , we have reported over the past 5 years on key risks associated with alis . in 2014 , we found that alis was experiencing recurring problems , including user issues , which were contributing to time - consuming workarounds for maintainers and a backlogged issue - resolution process . additionally , we found that the f - 35 program did not have a process , with metrics and targets , to determine and address the most significant performance issues with alis . as a result , we recommended that dod establish a performance measurement process for alis . in 2016 , we reported on several key risks with alis , such as challenges deploying , data accuracy and accessibility issues , and the lack of a redundant infrastructure in the event of a system failure . we recommended that dod develop a plan to prioritize and address alis issues . we also found that training for alis was largely ineffective and lacked a standardized , common curriculum for teaching users how to operate alis . we recommended that dod develop a standardized , program - wide plan for alis training . in 2018 , based on classified findings , we recommended that the f - 35 program test the operation of the f - 35 disconnected from alis for extended periods of time in a variety of scenarios to assess the risks related to operating and sustaining the aircraft . dod concurred with these recommendations and has taken some actions in response , such as developing a training plan for alis users . you asked us to review dod's efforts to address concerns from users of alis , improve alis functionality , and determine the long - term viability of the system . this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) improvements have been made over the past 5 years and challenges remain for users of the f - 35's alis , and ( 2 ) dod is taking actions to enhance the long - term viability of the system . for each of our objectives , we reviewed relevant f - 35 sustainment and alis - related data , plans , program briefings , guidance , and other documentation . we interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment ; the f - 35 joint program office ; the director , operational test and evaluation ; the u.s. air force ; the u.s. navy ; the u.s. marine corps ; and the prime contractor , lockheed martin . we conducted site visits to 5 of the 10 u.s. f - 35 locations — luke air force base , edwards air force base , nellis air force base , marine corps air station yuma , and naval air station lemoore .