several states have laws to encourage recycling . for example , 11 states currently encourage the recycling of beverage containers through deposit laws , or bottle bills — california , connecticut , delaware , hawaii , iowa , maine , massachusetts , michigan , new york , oregon , and vermont . most of these states impose 5-cent deposits on all beverage containers covered by their program ; other states impose varying amounts depending on the type of container . bottle bill states differ in the way that they treat unredeemed deposits . in four states , unredeemed deposits are retained by the state , and in some cases these funds are used to bolster recycling efforts . in six other states , unredeemed deposits are kept by beverage distributors and bottlers , while in michigan , 75 percent of unredeemed deposits are allocated to the state , with the remaining 25 percent provided to beverage retailers to defray the costs of administering the program . redemption systems for used beverage containers vary from state to state , but in general , most states allow consumers to return used beverage containers to either retailers or participating redemption centers . moreover , commerce is not implementing activities to stimulate the development of new uses for recycled materials in the united states . nonetheless , according to commerce officials , the agency supports increased international trade in recycled and recyclable materials as part of its general trade promotion responsibilities . moreover , commerce's director of the office of materials and machinery told us that the agency supports recycling in other ways as well . for example , in 2004 , china began requiring scrap metal exporters to obtain a license before shipping their materials to china . commerce officials intervened with the chinese government on behalf of the institute of scrap recycling industries to resolve some of the issues that had surfaced as a result of the licensing requirement . recycling stakeholders we interviewed identified various federal policy options that they believe could help municipalities increase their recycling rates . the three policy options cited most frequently as top priorities were to establish a nationwide campaign to educate the public about recycling , enact a federal bottle bill in which beverage containers may be returned for money , and require producers to establish a system that consumers can use to recycle their products . other policy options for helping municipalities to increase recycling include facilitating the sharing of recycling best practices , expanding epa research on the economic and environmental benefits of recycling , providing additional grant money for recycling projects , reducing or removing subsidies to industries that extract virgin materials , and providing subsidies to the recycling industry . the policy option most frequently identified by stakeholders as a top priority for helping municipalities increase their recycling rates was to establish a nationwide campaign to educate the public about recycling . some stakeholders who cited this option as a top priority commented that public interest in recycling had waned and a national campaign was needed to reinvigorate the public and help increase the supply of recyclable materials .