fta has not implemented this recommendation . establishes a “small starts” program for projects develop a streamlined evaluation process for projects requesting less than $75 million in new starts funds . eliminates the “exempt” classification for projects requesting between $25 million and $75 million in new starts funding , with a total project cost of less than $200 million . ( see app . i for more information about our scope and methodology. ) tea - 21 authorized a total of $36 billion in “guaranteed” funding for a variety of transit programs , including financial assistance to states and localities to develop , operate , and maintain transit systems . under one of these programs , new starts , fta identifies and selects fixed - guideway transit projects for funding — including heavy , light , and commuter rail ; ferry ; and certain bus projects ( such as bus rapid transit ) . fta generally funds new starts projects through ffgas , which establish the terms and conditions for federal participation in a new starts project and also define a project's scope , including the length of the system and the number of stations ; its schedule , including the date when the system is expected to open for service ; and its cost . to obtain an ffga , a project must progress through a local or regional review of alternatives and meet a number of federal requirements , including providing information for the new starts evaluation and rating process ( see fig . as required by tea - 21 , new starts projects must emerge from a regional , multimodal transportation planning process . the first two phases of the new starts process — systems planning and alternatives analysis — address this requirement . the systems planning phase identifies the transportation needs of a region , while the alternatives analysis phase provides information on the benefits , costs , and impacts of different corridor - level options , such as rail lines or bus routes . the alternatives analysis phase results in the selection of a locally preferred alternative — which is intended to be the new starts project that fta evaluates for funding , as required by statute . after a locally preferred alternative is selected , project sponsors submit a request to fta for entry into the preliminary engineering phase . following completion of preliminary engineering and federal environmental requirements , the project may be approved by fta to advance into final design , after which the project may be approved by fta for an ffga and proceed to construction , as provided for in statute . fta oversees grantee management of projects from the preliminary engineering phase through construction and evaluates the projects for advancement into each phase of the process , as well as annually for the new starts report to congress . we have recognized the new starts program as a good model that the federal government could use for approving other transportation projects . to help inform administration and congressional decisions about which projects should receive federal funds , fta assigns ratings based on a variety of financial and project justification criteria , as defined by its program regulations , and then assigns an overall rating .