for example , the u.s . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , and the office of the assistant secretary for administration , dot . merchant maritime academy and most of state maritime academies' cadet programs ( 4 of 6 ) and union training providers ( 3 of 5 ) expected that implementing the revised stcw requirements would have no effect on the potential benefit of decreasing the risk of property loss , whereas with other types of providers , such as colleges and universities , most ( 10 of 15 ) expected a positive effect from the benefit . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . such analyses are intended to answer the question: “how small could the non - quantified benefits be before the rule would yield zero net benefits ? ” we describe the coast guard's benefits estimates in more detail below . executive order 13563 directs agencies to periodically review significant regulations to identify those that may be outmoded , ineffective , insufficient or excessively burdensome , and to modify the regulations according to what has been learned . coast guard officials said they would consider conducting a retrospective analysis of its estimated costs and benefits of implementing the revised stcw requirements after sufficient time has passed for the costs and benefits to be realized , and if funds are available . most training providers who responded to our survey ( 68 percent ) reported that they anticipated that implementing the revised stcw requirements would increase their organization's costs . about half of all survey respondents ( 49 percent ) expected to increase their organization's training prices in 2017 while 37 percent expected no change in prices . training providers generally reported that they expected their costs of implementing stcw requirements to be equal to or higher than the coast guard's estimates in its regulatory analysis of the stcw final rule . specifically , in estimating the costs of implementing the revised stcw requirements , coast guard estimated average dollar costs for small and non - small training providers across five cost categories . for example , using coast guard estimates , the average cost for initial auditor training — one of the five cost categories — for small providers was $3,499 and for non - small providers was $16,023 . across these five cost categories , about half of responding training providers ( 46 to 50 percent ) indicated that their costs would be similar to coast guard's cost estimates , as shown in figure 7 below . about a third of respondents ( 28 to 39 percent ) expect costs to be higher than coast guard estimated and 2 to 14 percent anticipated costs lower than coast guard's estimates . in addition , a small number of providers ( between 10 and 13 ) responded “other” to these questions .