risk model . bsee regional officials who have longstanding experience evaluating offshore risk told us that the model is not sophisticated enough to identify platforms for risk - based inspection planning , and that they could have identified its deficiencies earlier in the program development process . specifically , they said that the model does not contain sufficient information to target facilities for additional risk - based inspections . for example , argonne's model does not incorporate risk factors such as a facility's change in ownership status or operator bankruptcy — factors that bsee regional officials told us can be correlated with higher risk , as operators tend to reduce expenditures on maintenance at these times . additionally , the model does not account for the severity of incidents of noncompliance — for example , whether an incident results in shutting down a facility or a warning — or the quantity assessed — such as whether a facility was cited many times or once in a single inspection . some bsee regional officials considered these types of operator performance and risk - related intelligence to be as , or more , important for identifying high - risk facilities than the five factors assessed by the model . bsee headquarters worked directly with argonne on the risk model , and although headquarters officials said they included regional personnel , they did not provide us with evidence of efforts they made to include those personnel or obtain their input on the risk model's initial development . bsee headquarters officials told us that argonne reached out periodically to senior regional personnel , but they did not specify when the laboratory conducted such outreach , what contributions regional personnel made , or whether regional personnel raised concerns during argonne's outreach . specifically , according to one official , the inspection team needed between 500 and 600 total work hours to complete the pilot inspection , in part due to the time required in developing a facility - specific protocol . for comparison , the official told us that a typical annual inspection of a deep water platform requires about 100 total work hours . in addition , the official told us that annual inspections are a more comprehensive review of a facility's safety systems because inspectors test and validate all necessary components , whereas a risk - based inspection considers only specific aspects of safety performance culture . therefore , it is not clear whether risk - based inspections , as performed during the pilot , have proven to be a more effective method for evaluating safety relative to annual inspections . additionally , bsee's inspection planning methodology prescribes that the risk - based oversight team provide final pilot reports to the operators of the facilities at the earliest opportunity . however , according to officials , bsee did not provide the operator of the first pilot facility with a report of its findings . similarly , they said bsee did not provide a report to the operator of the second pilot facility , only a verbal debrief until the operator requested a report through bsee's regional office .