of march 2011 . this approach helped ensure that the two data sets were comparable to one another and corresponded to the data that would have been available in fiscal year 2012 . these data were not adjusted for reporting delays . according to the cdc , estimates of persons living with hiv ( i.e. , hiv prevalence data ) in a given year are generally more accurate when at least 12 months have elapsed since the end of the measurement period , as both diagnoses and deaths are often subject to reporting delays . the specific direction of any bias is unclear and may vary by jurisdiction . for each msa , we calculated the absolute relative difference between cumulative aids cases and the number of cases of persons living with hiv ( including aids ) . additionally , we identified examples of msas that had similar numbers of persons living with hiv but received notably different amounts of hopwa formula funds for fiscal year 2012 . we also compared the current hopwa funding formula to our previous work that addressed funding grants based on cumulative aids cases , including the deceased . to describe hud's proposed changes to the hopwa funding formula , we reviewed hud's congressional budget justifications for fiscal years 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 . gao , housing: hud's program for persons with aids , gao / rced - 97-62 ( mar . 24 , 1997 ) and hiv / aids: changes needed to improve the distribution of ryan white care act and housing funds , gao - 06-332 ( feb. 28 , 2006 ) . received both hopwa and ryan white part a grants . we used hrsa's 2011 ryan white hiv / aids program expenditure data to identify grantees that had spent ryan white part a funds on housing assistance . we compared the locations of the ryan white part a grantees that had funded housing assistance to locations of the formula hopwa grantees and selected four cities that had both . we based our selection on grant size ( i.e. , grant amounts at either the higher end or middle of the range in fiscal year 2011 ) , the presence of ryan white part a grantees that had expended ryan white part a funds on housing assistance , and geographic diversity . based on this analysis , we selected new york city , new york ; new orleans , louisiana ; san francisco , california ; and st. louis , missouri . in each city , we interviewed officials from the formula hopwa grantees and ryan white part a grantees ; one or more hopwa project sponsors ; one or more ryan white part a subgrantees ; the local hud field office ; the local continuum of care grantee ; and at least one hiv advocacy organization . we selected hopwa project sponsors and ryan white part a grantees based on discussions with grantee staff and selected advocacy organizations based on information from a national hiv advocacy organization about active local hiv advocacy organizations .