gao - 10-292t . washington , d.c.: december 2 , 2009 . banning or limiting the use of chemicals . epa's strategy does not articulate how the agency would overcome the regulatory challenges it experienced in the past . in particular , epa officials told us that , even if epa has substantial toxicity and exposure data , the agency is challenged in meeting the statutory requirement under section 6 of tsca to limit or ban chemicals . further , epa's strategy does not identify the resources needed to meet its goal of ensuring chemical safety . for example , epa's strategy does not identify the resources needed to carry out risk assessment activities , even though risk assessment is a central part of epa's effort to manage chemicals under its new approach . specifically , epa does not identify roles and responsibilities of key staff or offices — for example which office within epa will develop the toxicity assessments needed to support its planned risk assessments — or identify staffing levels or cost associated with conducting its risk assessment activities . without a clear understanding of the resources needed to complete risk assessments and other activities identified in its strategy , epa cannot be certain that its current funding and staffing levels are sufficient to execute its new approach to managing chemicals under existing tsca authorities . when developing new initiatives , agencies can benefit from following leading practices for federal strategic planning . of these leading practices , it is particularly important for agencies to define strategies that address management challenges that threaten their ability to meet long - term goals . in our march 2013 report , we stated that without a plan that incorporates leading strategic planning practices — particularly a plan that clearly articulates how epa will address management challenges — epa cannot be assured that it its new approach to managing chemicals , as described in its existing chemicals program strategy , will provide a framework to effectively guide its efforts . extending significant new use rules to articles . since 2009 , epa has made increasing use of its ability to subject chemicals contained in certain products , or “articles,” such as furniture , textiles , and electronics , to significant new use rules . generally , those who import or process a substance as part of a product are exempted from compliance with a significant new use rule . epa's proposals would eliminate this exemption for certain chemicals . however , it is too early to assess the impact of epa's proposed actions because they have yet to be finalized . in addition , in some cases , omb has not met the established 90-day time for reviewing epa's proposed actions — which has increased the time frames for formally proposing and finalizing them . limited by executive order to 90 days , although it can be extended . any rules that epa plans to issue under tsca that are considered significant regulatory actions , as defined by executive order 12866 , are subject to review by the office of information and regulatory affairs , an office within omb , prior to being proposed in the federal register .