reg . suspension from a federal health care program.indicated that developing the additional disclosure requirements has been complicated by provider and supplier concerns about what types of information will be collected , what cms will do with it , and how the privacy and security of this information will be maintained . cms has not established the core elements of compliance programs for providers and suppliers , as required by ppaca . we previously reported that agency officials indicated that they had sought public comments on the core elements , which they were considering , and were also studying criteria found in oig model plans for possible inclusion.2014 , cms reported that it had not yet scheduled a proposed rule for publication . medicare uses prepayment review to deny claims that should not be paid and postpayment review to recover improperly paid claims . as claims go through medicare's electronic claims payment systems , they are subjected to prepayment controls called “edits,” most of which are fully automated ; if a claim does not meet the criteria of the edit , it is automatically denied . other prepayment edits are manual ; they flag a claim for individual review by trained staff who determine whether it should be paid . due to the volume of claims , cms has reported that less than 1 percent of medicare claims are subject to manual medical record review by trained personnel . increased use of prepayment edits could help prevent improper medicare payments . our prior work found that , while use of prepayment edits saved medicare at least $1.76 billion in fiscal year 2010 , the savings could have been greater had prepayment edits been used more widely . based on an analysis of a limited number of national policies and local coverage determinations ( lcd ) , we identified $14.7 million in payments in fiscal year 2010 that appeared to be inconsistent with four national policies and therefore improper . we also found more than $100 million in payments that were inconsistent with three selected lcds that could have been identified using automated edits . thus , we concluded that more widespread implementation of effective automated edits developed by individual macs in other mac jurisdictions could also result in savings to medicare . cms has taken steps to improve the development of other types of prepayment edits that are implemented nationwide , as we recommended . for example , the agency has centralized the development and implementation of automated edits based on a type of national policy cms has also modified its called national coverage determinations.processes for identifying provider billing of services that are medically unlikely to prevent circumvention of automated edits designed to identify an unusually large quantity of services provided to the same patient . we also evaluated the implementation of cms's fraud prevention system ( fps ) , which uses predictive analytic technologies as required by the small business jobs act of 2010 to analyze medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) claims on a prepayment basis . fps identifies investigative leads for cms's zone program integrity contractors ( zpic ) , the contractors responsible for detecting and investigating potential fraud .