both plans have the same benchmark because they are in the same county . plan a submits a bid of $700 per member per month ( pmpm ) . because the plan's bid is $100 pmpm below the benchmark , it receives a rebate equal to 75 percent of that amount , or $75 pmpm . plan a must use the $75 pmpm rebate to provide additional benefits , reduced premiums , reduced cost sharing , or any combination of the three . plan b , however , submits a bid that is $40 pmpm above the benchmark . as a result , the plan receives no rebate . we disagree that the report is not balanced . we provided a fact - based assessment of how rebates were projected to be used in 2007 , and identified important issues related to cost sharing . even though cost sharing would be less , on average , in ma plans than in medicare ffs , an important finding of our report is that beneficiaries who use certain services with high cost sharing in ma plans could have higher overall out - of - pocket costs than under medicare ffs . cms provided several additional comments . cms commented that it did not disagree with our finding that 16 percent of beneficiaries were in plans with higher inpatient cost sharing than medicare ffs . however , it noted that our discussion of the issue and accompanying table and figure did not account for several factors that would have mitigated the impact of the finding . specifically , cms commented that we should have considered that ma plans generally combine physician cost sharing in the hospital with inpatient hospital cost sharing , which would have decreased the difference in cost sharing between ma plans and medicare ffs . although we had noted this in table notes in the draft , we agree that this should be clearer and modified our text and accompanying figure comparing ma and medicare ffs cost sharing , and clarified existing table notes . while this may be true in some cases — we found that , on average , plans used 3 percent of their rebates to reduce part b premiums — it was beyond the scope of our work to make such a determination . ahip further stated that ma plans provide beneficiaries with options . beneficiaries who prefer more predictable expenses can choose ma plans with higher premiums and lower cost sharing , while beneficiaries who are less averse to risk can choose ma plans with lower premiums and higher cost sharing . we agree that the ma program provides beneficiaries with options and have added this point to the text of our report . with regard to our reporting on ma plan medical loss ratios , ahip representatives indicated that our point was fairly stated , but they asked us to mention this point in the results in brief section of the report . we believed that we made this point clear in our discussion of medical loss ratios and that the issue did not warrant mentioning in our high - level summary .