this situation is illustrated further in figure 2 below . significant production funds will also be spent on the non - line - of - sight cannon and spin out systems between now and the fcs core production decision in 2013 . to meet congressionally required fielding dates , the army began building non - line - of - sight cannon prototypes last year , but has encountered some setbacks due to development issues and delays . the vehicles are planned to be used as training assets and will not be fieldable systems . the army is planning for a seamless transition between these prototypes and production of the core fcs systems , but given the financial investment from the army and consequently , the energized industrial base , this could create pressure to proceed into core production prior to achieving a solid level of knowledge on which to move forward . currently , the army's efforts to field spin out systems relies on a rushed schedule that calls for making production decisions before production - representative prototypes have clearly demonstrated a useful military capability . a shift in focus on the army's efforts to spin out capabilities to current forces from heavy brigade combat teams to infantry brigade combat teams resulted in moving the production decision from january 2009 to december 2009 . however , only one key test has been conducted under the new structure , and this event was a shortened version of an event that was originally planned to focus on the heavy brigade combat team . additionally , testing completed to date has involved surrogate or non - production representative forms of systems , and the three tests scheduled for this year will follow the same practice . army officials have said that they are considering an incremental or block acquisition approach to fcs in order to mitigate risks in four major areas: ( 1 ) immaturity of requirements for system survivability , network capability , and information assurance ; ( 2 ) limited availability of performance trade space to maintain program cost and schedule given current program risks ; ( 3 ) program not funded to cost analysis improvement group estimates and effect of congressional budget cuts ; and ( 4 ) continuing challenges in aligning schedules and expectations for multiple concurrent acquisitions . restructuring the fcs program around an incremental approach has the potential to alleviate the risks inherent in the current strategy and is an opportunity to apply recent dod policy updates , such as the creation of configuration steering boards , and provide decision - makers with more information before program commitments are made . on the other hand , an incremental approach entails its own oversight challenges . first , it presents decision makers with another fcs strategy to consider , possibly after the fiscal year 2010 budget is submitted . second , the approach must ensure that each increment stands on its own and is not dependent on future increments . as dod considers the current strategy , an incremental strategy , and its production commitments , it will also have to continue to pay close attention to the role being played by the fcs lead system integrator .