michael j . courts , ( 202 ) 512-8980 or courtsm@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , thomas costa ( assistant director ) , josé m. peña , iii ( analyst - in - charge ) , gezahegne bekele , sonja benson , gergana danailova - trainor , david dayton , teresa abruzzo heger , martin de alteriis , mark dowling , etana finkler , jeff hartnett , fang he , julia kennon , ben nelson , kyerion printup , john o'trakoun , jerry sandau , christina werth , and timothy young made key contributions to this report . standards for internal control in the federal government . gao - 14-704g , washington , d.c.: september 2014 . market research: better documentation needed to inform future procurements at selected agencies . gao - 15-8 . washington , d.c.: october 9 , 2014 . iraq and afghanistan: state and dod should ensure interagency acquisitions are effectively managed and comply with fiscal law . gao - 12-750 . washington , d.c.: august 2 , 2012 . acquisition planning: opportunities to build strong foundations for better services contracts . gao - 11-672 . washington , d.c.: august 9 , 2011 . department of homeland security improvements can further enhance abilty to acquire innovative technologies using other transaction authority . gao - 08-1088 , ( washington , d.c.: september 23 , 2008 ) . defense contracting: progress made in implementing defense base act requirements , but complete information is lacking . gao - 08-772t . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2008 . defense base act insurance: review needed of cost and implementation issues . gao - 05-280r . washington , d.c.: april 29 , 2005 . homeland security: further action needed to promote successful use of special dhs acquisition authority . gao - 05-136 . washington , d.c.: december . auditing and financial management: standards for internal control in the federal government . gao - aimd - 00-21.3.1 . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 1999 . the two provisions are described below . an “opt out” provision allowed contractors to obtain dba insurance on the open market instead of through the single insurer if the contractor could demonstrate that it could purchase dba insurance on the open market at a lower cost . insurers expressed concern to state that this opt out provision would encourage larger contractors and those with fewer claims to opt out of the program , leaving the single insurer with a pool of contractors representing a much higher level of risk . during the solicitation process , insurers asked state to withdraw this provision . state acknowledged that insurers wanted this provision withdrawn , but during the solicitation process state did not agree to the insurers' request . state officials told us this provision was included as a result of information , obtained through the request for information and other sources , indicating that some contractors could save money by purchasing insurance on the open market , and that it would allow contractors dissatisfied with the performance of the designated insurer to seek competitive alternatives if available .