( see app . i for a summary of state on - site review programs. ) due to a lack of staff , one state — west virginia — limits its mds reviews to off - site analysis of facility - specific monthly data . most of these states have been operating their mds review programs for 7 years or longer and developed them within a year of implementing an mds - based payment system . three of the nine states arrive at the facility unannounced while the other six provide advanced notice ranging from 48 hours to 2 weeks . the sample of facility mds assessments reviewed by each state varies considerably . assessment sample sizes generally range from 10 to 40 percent of a nursing home's total residents but some states select a specific number of residents , not a percentage , and a few specifically target residents in particular case - mix categories . for example , indiana selects a sample of 40 percent — or no less than 25 residents — across all major case - mix categories , while ohio's sample can be based on a particular case - mix category , such as residents classified as “clinically complex.” iowa officials told us that its reviewers select at least 25 percent of a facility's residents , with a minimum of 5 residents , while pennsylvania chooses 15 residents from each facility , regardless of case - mix category or facility size . in commenting on a draft of this report , officials told us that these errors are consistent with those found in other states with mds - based payment systems . state plans to publish the results of mds accuracy reviews on a web page to prevent simple but recurring errors virginia is not included because of the newness of its mds review program ( began operating in april 2001 ) . we have included the nine other states with longer standing on - site review programs . this column reflects the frequency of initial reviews for each facility . some states conduct follow - up reviews more frequently for facilities where problems have been identified . we asked states to select from the following categories: more important , equally important , and less important . cms officials consider the mds assessment form to have equal weight with the other components of the medical record , such as physician notes and documentation of services provided . as a result , cms asserts that the assessment must be consistent with , but need not duplicate , the medical record . in contrast , most of the nine states with separate on - site review programs require that support for each mds element that they review be independently documented in the medical record . state officials told us that certain mds elements , such as adls , are important to thoroughly document because they require observation of many activities by different nursing home staff over several days . as a result , some of these states require the use of separate flow charts or tables to better document adls . similarly , some states require documentation for short - term memory loss rather than accepting a nursing home's assertion that a resident has this condition .