we disagree . as we note in the report , cost and schedule estimates for the project were deficient in several areas , including comprehensiveness , accuracy , and credibility . estimates also failed to comply with gsa's internal guidance for cost and schedule . in its written response , gsa also commented that several of the leading practices gao identifies are better suited to non - real estate investments such as weapons systems , spacecraft , aircraft carriers , and software systems . we disagree . as stated in our report , we have applied our leading cost and schedule estimation practices in past work involving federal construction projects , and the leading practices were developed in conjunction with numerous stakeholders from government and the private sector , including dhs and gsa . furthermore , gsa acknowledged the value of our leading cost estimation practices in 2007 and issued an order to apply the principles to all cost estimates prepared in every gsa project , process , or organization . we are sending copies to the secretary of homeland security , administrator of gsa , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have questions about this report , please contact either david maurer at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov , or david wise at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ix . we conducted our review to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) developed dhs headquarters consolidation plans in accordance with leading capital decision - making principles , and ( 2 ) the extent to which dhs and gsa have estimated the costs and schedules of the dhs headquarters consolidation project at st. elizabeths in a manner that is consistent with leading practices . to determine the extent to which dhs and gsa developed dhs headquarters consolidation plans in accordance with leading capital decision - making principles , we reviewed and analyzed dhs and gsa capital planning documents and interviewed dhs and gsa officials responsible for the planning and management of the st. elizabeths project , as well as dhs and gsa senior leadership . we compared dhs and gsa capital planning actions against office of management and budget ( omb ) and gao leading practices ( see app . ii ) . our analysis of dhs and gsa efforts using criteria for leading capital decision - making focused on planning for the remaining segments or phases of the project because , as we stated in previous reports , the planning phase is the crux of the capital decision - making process . the results from this phase are used throughout the remaining phases of the process ; therefore , if key practices during this phase are not followed there may be repercussions on agency operations if poor capital investment decisions are made .