iii ) . for some nchip - funded activities , officials in the case - study states indicated that expenditures could be included in more than one category . in these cases , based on input from state officials , we selected the category that was most descriptive of the activity . for each of the case - study states , these spending category analyses covered nchip grant awards for fiscal year 1995 ( when the program was initiated ) through fiscal year 2002 ( the most current data available at the time of our visits ) . regarding ballistics registration systems , we interviewed nchip managers to determine if nchip guidelines allow nchip funds to be used to develop and implement such systems and , if so , the extent to which states have used or are planning to use nchip funds for this purpose . in addition , in visiting the 5 case - study states , we asked state officials if nchip money had been or would be used to develop and implement ballistics registration systems . we reviewed bjs's biennial survey data and / or reports ( for 1993 , 1995 , 1997 , 1999 , and 2001 ) on the automation status of states' criminal history records . we contacted bjs managers to clarify ( when necessary ) the survey data and discuss automation progress , including the contributing roles played by nchip and other federal grants and by the states' use of their own funds . further , we reviewed bjs and fbi information regarding the progress of states in making criminal history and other relevant records accessible nationally by , for example , conforming with the fbi's standards for national data systems — including , as applicable , nics , the national crime information center ( ncic ) , iii , and the integrated automated fingerprint identification system ( iafis ) . iv ) . for more in - depth perspectives , we reviewed data on the use of nchip grant funds by the 5 states we selected for case studies . preliminarily , we reviewed information in grant files maintained by the office of the comptroller ( a component of the department of justice's office of justice programs ) . then , we visited each of the 5 states and interviewed state officials responsible for nchip - funded projects . at our request , using definitions provided by bjs , the officials grouped their respective state's grant awards into applicable spending categories ( see app . also , in each of the 5 case - study states , we discussed these issues with state officials . to determine various factors that are relevant considerations for policymakers in debating the future of nchip , we interviewed nchip and nics managers , as well as officials in the 5 case - study states . we also contacted officials from other organizations , such as search ( the national consortium for justice information and statistics ) and the american prosecutors research institute . further , we relied on insights gained in addressing the objectives of this work .