review proposals . all five gpos in our review reported considering multiple aspects of a vendor and product when reviewing proposals , including weighing financial and nonfinancial criteria , and then scoring competing vendors in order to inform their contracting decisions.example , one gpo reported reviewing aspects such as a vendor's ability to provide sufficient product to its customers , any documentation of concerns raised by food and drug administration ( fda ) inspections , quality and safety of the products , the source of raw materials , and bar code readability . issue rfps . representatives from all five gpos in our review reported generally issuing rfps as part of an open bidding process for products and services to place on contract . issuing rfps includes notifying vendors , and publicly posting information such as bid calendars , minimum requirements for vendors , and criteria that the gpos will weigh when considering competing proposals . all five gpos in our review have posted on their websites information about the minimum requirements that vendors must meet . for example , one gpo's website states that vendors must be the original equipment manufacturer or demonstrate an exclusive marketing relationship for the products included in the rfp , among other things . another gpo specifies meeting minimum levels of product quality , durability , and cost - effectiveness , as well as requirements for the financial stability and long - term viability of the vendor . a sample rfp provided by a gpo states that during the competitive bidding process , it will consider a vendor's product capabilities , maintenance , and ability to upgrade , as well as pricing and other financial factors . four of the five gpos in our review reported that under certain limited circumstances , they may award contracts to vendors without issuing rfps . for example , these “non - bid” contracts may be awarded to vendors that present a proprietary , patented , or innovative product ; if a small group of customers request a local or regional vendor contract ; or if a product supply shortage or other unique circumstances arise . the fifth gpo reported that all contracts are awarded through a competitive bidding process , even if there is only one bidder . a representative from one generic drug manufacturer stated that , while there is not much opportunity for innovation in the generic drug market , gpos will award contracts outside of the three - phased competitive bidding process to vendors that have innovative packaging — such as flip - top vials versus a pre - mixed bag — if it benefits their customers . a representative from this manufacturer stated that gpo contracts with vendors generally contain provisions that the gpos have the right to add additional vendors of the same product if the other vendor has innovative packaging . a representative from another gpo said that the gpo considers the “total value” of a product or service for their customers , not necessarily solely the price . the total value includes , for example , product quality , upfront price , discounts , rebates , and anticipated administrative fee revenue .