the projects are scheduled to be completed in 2004 . national park service fire facilities projects , nationwide: in 2002 , about $3.4 million was transferred from 13 fire facilities projects at 10 different parks . the projectsincluding construction of facilities for fire equipment storage ; a crew dormitory ; and fire engine storage buildings , among otherswere delayed for several months . four of these projects — in big bend national park ( texas ) ; yellowstone national park ( idaho , montana , and wyoming ) ; sequoia and kings canyon national parks ( california ) ; and shenandoah national park ( virginia ) were again delayed in 2003 when about $1.9 million was transferred . forest service fire facilities projects , california: in 2003 , the forest service deferred construction of two engine bays , one fire station , and three fire barracks in california because of funding transfers . consequently , fire crews at one forest must live in housing that , according to agency officials , is substandard and has required recurring maintenance to address roof leaks , plumbing malfunctions , and electrical failures caused by rodents damaging the wires . additionally , officials told us that such conditions make it difficult to recruit and retain fire crews . wildfire management courses , southern region: in 2003 , the forest service canceled two required training courses for officials who approve wildfire management decisions and expenses . about 80 officials who represent national forests in at least 12 states had planned to attend . one course emphasized cost containment , and the other covered a wide range of fire management issues , including safety . both courses were rescheduled and held in 2004 . fire research projects , montana: when funds were transferred in 2002 , the landfire project — a multiagency effort to collect comprehensive data on fire risk — was delayed about 3 months , the collection of data critical for modeling fire behavior was delayed about 6 months , and data on smoke levels were lost because an instrument was not purchased in time to use it during the 2002 fire season . in addition , temporary staff were released early in 2002 , further reducing the amount of research that could be performed . agency officials also targeted construction and land acquisition programs for funding transfers because these projects are often funded one year , with the expectation that the project will be implemented — and the funds spent — over several years . consequently , these programs often have large unused fund balances , and transfers can sometimes be made with minimal impact as long as the funds are reimbursed before they are needed . accordingly , some officials , especially in the interior agencies , told us that impacts to projects had been relatively limited . nevertheless , many construction and land acquisition projects were delayed or canceled , particularly in the forest service . some construction projects that were delayed due to funding transfers were delayed for 1 year or more because of seasonal requirements , even when funds were reimbursed after only a few months .