b . state agencies ? which ones ? federal partners ? which ones ? d. has a blending of tfer civil - military planning expertise been fully exploited to assess , strengthen , and advance state catastrophic preparedness planning ? e. how have tfer efforts incorporated the capabilities of the private sector as partners in planning activities ? documentation of lessons learned and recommendations for improvement . in the opinion of state stakeholders , has the tfer program resulted in demonstrable improvement in state planning capability ? b . to what degree has state - level tfer planning been synchronized with and improved the overall quality and effectiveness of planning efforts ? c. how were tfer planners integrated into the state emergency management structure and process ? d. has the tfer program resulted in meaningful recommendations for the improvement of catastrophic preparedness planning doctrine ? e. are tfer lessons learned exportable and useful to other states and regions to further the evolution and strengthening of their own planning programs ? f. has the pilot identified any additional planning / protocol / procedure shortfalls due to integration / synchronization efforts ? g. have any exercise after - action reports ( aars ) or assessment documents been developed by the site in the course of the tfer pilot implementation to evaluate the effectiveness of the pilot ? h. please provide recommendations for improvements to increase the effectiveness of the catastrophic planning programs . fema also requested copies of plans developed and collected feedback on the administrative aspects of the pilot program . data collection process . please provide copies of completed / draft plans . b . please provide an update of the program plan , to include the steps necessary to complete ongoing projects . administrative elements . describe any challenges faced managing the tfer funds . b . describe the hiring and retention process for your tfer planners . include time lines , training , and other elements as appropriate . c. describe additional administrative successes and challenges in managing the pilot . the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) launched the task force for emergency readiness pilot program ( tfer ) to improve the capacity and integration of efforts to plan a response to catastrophic disasters . under the tfer pilot , fema was to grant $350,000 to each of five participating states — hawaii , massachusetts , south carolina , washington , and west virginia . fema designed tfer to run 18 months , beginning on september 1 , 2008 , and ending on march 31 , 2010 , but extended the pilot program by an additional 6 months to allow the states more time to accomplish their goals . the tfer pilot was to emphasize horizontal integration of planning efforts across sectors , jurisdictions , and functional disciplines , as well as vertical integration among state , regional , and federal agencies . for example , regarding vertical integration , states were to integrate planning efforts with the department of defense ( dod ) through its defense coordinating officers and emergency preparedness liaison officers . to help develop plans to respond to catastrophic disasters , states could hire up to three full - time planners ideally with civilian and military planning expertise .