the scoring of h.r . 3947 , the federal property asset management reform act of 2002 , illustrates how scoring has , and will continue to have , an impact on the prospects for greater use of public - private partnerships . the bill — which was not enacted — would have authorized most federal real - property - holding agencies , including gsa , to enter into partnerships and other business arrangements with private firms to improve the government's real property . agencies could have sold , leased , or conveyed government property as part of the business arrangements and retained or spent the proceeds without further appropriations . what factors drive agencies to lease space that may be more cost - effective to own ? because of the extent of the government's control and use of the projects likely to be undertaken , cbo concluded that spending by the ventures associated with that financing should be treated as governmental and recorded as budget authority and outlays . what actions has the administration taken , and what alternative approaches have been proposed , to address agencies' reliance on costly leased space ? to answer the first question , we used publicly available data from frpp , as well as additional data analyses we requested from omb . these additional analyses used data from the three civilian real - property - holding agencies with the largest portfolios of leased building space held within the united states and u.s. territories — gsa , the u.s . postal service ( usps ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( agriculture ) — to develop a more detailed analysis and assessment of frpp data . we used data from gsa's public building service to examine trends in leasing because gsa had historical data and gsa's tenants represent a cross - section of federal agencies . these data are different from those of frpp . frpp data are governmentwide , while public building service data are more detailed and are only for properties that gsa controls . the frpp data were generally reliable for describing the inventory , but data quality concerns , such as missing data , which we identified both during this review and previously , would limit the usefulness of frpp for other purposes , such as strategic decision making . omb is taking action to address these data quality concerns . usps and agriculture could not provide us with an electronic copy of historical data on their leases ; therefore , we could not include information from these agencies in our analysis of trends . we determined that the frpp and gsa public building service data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review by reviewing gsa's data systems and other reports . in addition , we defined “domestic” or “domestically held” leased space as being in the united states and u.s. territories . to answer the second question , we analyzed seven gsa and three usps building leases to determine the estimated cost of leasing versus the cost of new construction .