from their internal baselines . until the program and the contractor reach final agreement on contract terms , however , this data may not reflect whether the contractor is accomplishing the work planned within the agency's allocated cost and schedule . until baselines are set and an integrated baseline review is held , the cost and schedule data can only be used as indicators of progress . furthermore , such data can be misleading as it lacks a comparison between work performed versus planned . nasa has yet to make mission decisions beyond em - 2 for the sls program and has not produced a complete life - cycle cost estimate for any of the three planned variants ; however , competition opportunities exist for future development work that may promote long - term affordability . although the agency has identified several possible destinations , it has not decided upon specific missions for the sls program beyond em - 1 and em - 2 , which will directly affect the program's future development path and flight schedule . mission selection will likely determine the order of future development efforts , as the program can only afford to develop one upgraded element at a time . each development effort may be large enough to constitute a separate project , but the full magnitude of these development efforts is unknown as the program has not established cost estimates for any of the three sls variants , including the 70-mt vehicle , beyond 2017 . although the program costs are as yet unknown , there are opportunities to improve long - term affordability through competition once the element upgrade development path has been determined . while the main engine contractor for future sls vehicles is likely to remain the same , the program plans to compete the acquisition of the advanced boosters . we are sending this report to nasa's administrator and to interested congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in order to assess the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) progress to conduct its first flight in 2017 , we interviewed and obtained briefings and relevant documents from nasa and contractor officials . we identified and evaluated technical and programmatic issues associated with each major space launch system ( sls ) element , including new and heritage hardware , by reviewing associated development plans and discussing relevant schedules and issues with agency officials . we also compared planned and actual progress in maturing system designs at the element and program level and evaluated how delays in element maturation and integration could affect the sls program as a whole .