b . court personnel other than judges d. government agencies other than the court e. other ( please specify ) b . court personnel other than judges d. government agencies other than the court e. other ( please specify ) b . court personnel other than judges c. court examiner or other compensated person appointed to review reports e. government agencies other than the court f. other ( please specify ) what steps , if any , are taken to verify information in financial and personal status reports ? ( check one for each step. ) information in personal status reports is verified . b . information in financial reports is verified . c. supporting documentation for financial information must be submitted ( eg , bank / brokerage statements ) . ( check one. ) if “yes,” what is the range of hourly rates typically approved ? how does your court handle petitions from guardians for compensation ? ( check one for each row. ) c. guardians are required to submit time and expense records to support their compensation petitions . d. petitions are approved by court personnel or judge unless a problem surfaces . do courts in your county require that guardians of the property be bonded ? ( check one. ) do courts in your county require background checks on guardians of the property ? ( check one. ) do courts in your county require background checks on guardians of the person ? ( check one. ) other than relying on reports by guardians , which , if any , of the following strategies does your court use after the initial hearing to assess the personal status of people who have guardians appointed by the court ? ( check one for each strategy. ) who reviews financial and personal status reports submitted by guardians appointed by your court ? ( check one for each type of reviewer. ) d. other ( please specify ) a . information in personal status reports is verified . b . information in financial reports is verified . c. supporting documentation for financial information must be submitted ( eg , bank / brokerage statements ) . d. other ( please specify ) a . information in personal status reports is verified . b . information in financial reports is verified . c. supporting documentation for financial information must be submitted ( eg , bank / brokerage statements ) . d. other ( please specify ) is your court required to document approval of financial and personal status reports ? ( check one. ) does your court use a computer ( s ) to track when financial and / or personal status reports are due and when they are filed ? d. guardians , other than family members , friends , or attorneys , who receive payment for services from the income or assets of the incapacitated person a. guardians who are family members or friends c. guardians , other than family members , friends , or attorneys , who receive payment for services from public sources ( eg , social service agencies , etc. ) about what percentage of the guardians appointed by your court are on the state registry ? ( check one. )