not all manufacturers shared the same perspective . one small manufacturer commented that the process could sometimes be relatively easy but that the selection process can be more difficult if the manufacturer is selling only one product . the gpos we studied were able to alter the duration of their process for selecting products to place on contract , particularly when they considered these products to be innovative . based on their reported information , gpos' product selection processes generally took 6 months , and ranged from as short as 1 month to as long as 18 months . one gpo specifically reported expediting or modifying its formal selection process when it considered a product to be innovative and wanted to award a contract quickly . most gpos did not have a distinctly separate process for selecting innovative technology but reported that these products were generally selected in a shorter amount of time compared with other products . figure 1 shows , across the seven gpos , the average minimum , most frequent , and maximum times taken for product selection . the gpos in our study reported consulting various sources before making a decision , including the gpo's customers requesting the product ; published studies about the product ; internal and external technology assessments ; and different manufacturers of the product , both with and without a gpo contract . in all cases , the gpos cited customer requests for products as the most important factor in identifying which products to place on contract . in selecting a manufacturer , six of the seven gpos , including the two largest , solicit proposals publiclyeither through requests for proposals or requests for bids through their web sites . two distributors' representatives told us that since the summer of 2002 , gpos have fewer bundling arrangements and that some bundles were “pulled apart. our analysis of data reported by the study gpos showed that , in 2002 , the two largest gpos typically awarded 5-year contracts , whereas the other five gpos typically awarded 3-year contracts . for some of these contracts , potential renewal periods constitute a portion of the contract duration . those contract terms remained fairly consistent between 2001 and 2003 , although two of the five gpos reported that their most frequent contract term declined by about 1 year . some gpos reported implementing policies that may lead to a future reduction in contract terms . one of the two largest gpos began in the first quarter of 2003 to exclude from new contracts the option for two 1-year contract extensions , so that when a contract expires , this gpo will solicit proposals for a new contract . we did not independently verify the information we obtained . the information gpos provided was self - reported . we conducted our work from may 2002 through july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in seeking to provide their hospital customers with medical - surgical products at favorable prices , gpos engage with manufacturers in certain contracting processes and sometimes use certain strategies to obtain price discounts . many manufacturers bid for gpo contracts because hospital purchases with these contracts may increase manufacturers' market share . gpos are subject to federal antitrust laws .