no dod costs are expected . contract has been renegotiated — the renegotiated land lease with the section 801 developer expires in may 2029 . structural lease: august 1988 — july 2008 number / type of units: 300 units ( all two - bedrooms ) occupancy rate: approximately 98 percent dod's lease payment: approximately $2,000,000 ( last payment was in july 2008 ) developer: universal services fort hood , inc. housing retained for military use — in june 2008 , the army signed a revised land lease with the section 801 developer of liberty village . the revised lease extended the contract terms , adding 10 years and expanding the reasons under which the contract may be terminated , including base closure , deactivation or substantial realignment , or in the interest of national defense . also under the revised lease , the army incorporated two characteristics used by fort hood's residential community initiative in which the developer rents directly to the service member and rental preference is given to active duty service members and civilian personnel at fort hood . the rental agreement allows unaccompanied military person - nel , active national guard and reserve , military retirees , federal government civilians , and unaffiliated civilians to rent the housing if occupancy falls below a certain rate . no costs for dod or community — because of the terms of the revised lease agreement , the military will retain use of the on - base housing . the department of defense ( dod ) and the local community will not incur any transition costs . land lease ( includes construction period ) : june 1986 — june 2018 structural lease: november 1987 — may 2007 number / type of units: 400 units ( three - , four - , and five - bedrooms ) decide whether to extend developer's lease — in june 2018 , fort wainwright will complete its section 801 out - lease . at the expiration of the out - lease , the developer is responsible for removing the property and restoring the land to its previous condition . however , the developer has requested an extension of the out - lease so that he may either refinance or sell the housing units . as of july 2010 , the army had not made a decision on whether to extend the out - lease . dod's lease payment: approximately $8,200,000 per year ( last payment was in may 2007 ) developer: north star alaska housing corporation housing transitioned to the general public's use — fort wainwright's in - lease expired in may 2007 . fort wainwright separated the birchwood units from the installation and the developer is operating the units as private housing . however , approximately 28 percent of the residents are service members assigned to fort wainwright . fort wainwright is the only installation with section 801on - base housing that has converted units to the general public's use under the terms of the out - lease phase of the original contract .