we have reflected these points in the report . nasa also stated that program personnel conducted a “deliberative analysis” of the costs involved . for these customers , nitaac not only awards customer orders but administers them as well . nitaac charges an additional fee of 1.5 percent to handle these agreements . nih has been managing all three information technology contracts since 1996 , when the original iw and cio - sp contracts were awarded under the authority of its service and supply fund ( 42 u.s.c 231 ) . the original ecs contract was awarded on september 29 , 1995 . table 8 shows reported annual operating results for sewp . the sewp iii fees shown table 9 below are applied to the value of purchases made by program customers . the fee is included as a separate contract line item on contract orders . nasa's governmentwide acquisition contract ( gwac ) is the scientific and engineering workstation procurement ( sewp ) contract . the current gwac , sewp iii , supports nasa's objective of meeting its own requirements for high - performance information technology , as well as similar needs in other agencies . nasa provides technical expertise in developing sewp contracts in areas such as electronic data interchange , web and imaging technology , order processing , and technology refreshment . nasa's role as the agent between the federal agencies and the prime contractors is accomplished by three major ordering processes: 1 ) pre - order decision - making , which allows users to check prices on - line for all of sewp's contracts and to track quotes requested from vendors ; 2 ) delivery order processing , which includes receiving delivery orders , checking for accurate information , and entering order information into sewp's database ; and 3 ) post - order quality assurance , which includes a quality assurance check with agency customers on product delivery , product functionality , and overall customer satisfaction . the program currently includes 12 prime contracts serviced by 8 prime contractors . the largest sewp customers are the air force , the army , and the navy . sewp iii is a fixed - price , indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract with a maximum value of $4 billion . the initial set of sewp iii contracts were awarded on july 30 , 2001 . the term of the contracts is 5 years . the contract specializes in providing advanced technology unix , linux , and windows - based workstations and servers , along with peripherals , network equipment , storage devices , and other information technology products . this fee is collected by the contractors and forwarded to the government quarterly . fees are reviewed each year and adjusted based on a comparison of revenues and costs . fees are not charged to nasa customers because of an agency policy against charging fees for internal use of nasa - based contracts . however , nasa noted that it is making an in - kind contribution by not charging some costs to the program , such as providing the contracting personnel to set up and administer the sewp contracts , the sewp program manager , and office space .