in 2000 , 11 states reported these types of linkages . about half of the states coordinated their tanf cash assistance or food stamps or medicaid programs with the one - stop centers , electronically or by referral in 2000 and 2001 . infrastructure limitations — in terms of both facilities and computer systems — continued to challenge states and localities in their efforts to coordinate tanf - related programs with one - stop centers . colocation of tanf services within the one - stop was not a viable option in many of the locations that we visited . officials in several states reported that available space at one - stop centers was limited and that the centers could not house additional programs or service providers . for example , connecticut developed a self - sufficiency standard that could be uniformly applied across tanf and wia , so that both programs would place clients in jobs with similar wage levels . one local one - stop center we visited in arizona also worked to accommodate differences in program definitions . at this center , tanf and wia officials worked together to develop training for both programs that enabled tanf clients to meet the requirement of a tanf work activity . as is the case with other programs in the one - stop centers , states and localities continue to struggle with the different reporting requirements attached to the various funding streams . each program has restrictions on how its money can be used and what type of indicators it can use to measure success . because the federal measures evaluate very different things , tracking performance for the tanf and wia programs together was difficult . despite the flexibility in tanf , state officials felt constrained by the need to meet federally required work participation rates , and they told us that they used these federal requirements to gauge how well their tanf work programs were performing . for example , one state official was concerned that the state tanf agency was focused more on meeting work participation rates than on designing programs that might help their tanf clients become self - sufficient . wia , on the other hand , has a different set of performance measures geared toward client outcomes , including the degree to which clients' earnings change over time and whether or not the clients stay employed . many states and localities are organizing their wia programs to maximize their ability to achieve these and other key client outcomes . these differences in program indicators often lead to very different program services for clients . because of these differences , coordinating tanf work programs with the one - stop centers was difficult . these different reporting requirements may need either state or federal action to resolve . officials from two states we visited said that their states' wia and tanf agencies were exploring the development of a shared system but that cost estimates were too high for it to be implemented at this time . as states and localities attempted to coordinate services for tanf clients through the one - stop , they encountered challenges to harmonizing program definitions and meeting reporting requirements .