gao - 14-128t . washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2013 . federal protective service: challenges with oversight of contract guard program still exist , and additional management controls are needed . gao - 13-694 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2013 . these recommendations and their status are discussed later in this statement . this testimony discusses challenges fps faces in ( 1 ) ensuring contract security guards deployed to federal facilities are properly trained and certified and ( 2 ) conducting risk assessments at federal facilities . it is based on our reports and testimonies issued from 2008 through 2013 on fps's contract guard and risk assessment programs.related products appears at the end of my statement . as part of the work for these products , we reviewed relevant statutes and federal guidance ; examined fps contract guard and risk assessment processes and procedures ; reviewed a sample of contract guard files ; conducted site visits to fps's 11 regions where we interviewed fps officials ; and interviewed fps's 31 guard companies and 4 risk management experts . this testimony is also based on preliminary results of our ongoing effort to determine the extent to which fps and select other federal agencies assess risk in accordance with federal risk assessment standards . we plan to issue our report early next year . as part of that work , we reviewed and analyzed risk assessment documentation and interviewed officials at nine federal agencies and compared each agency's methodology to interagency security committee ( isc ) standards . the nine selected agencies include: department of energy , office of health , safety , and security ; department of interior ; department of justice , justice protective service ; department of state , diplomatic security ; department of veterans affairs ; federal emergency management agency ; federal protective service ; nuclear regulatory commission ; and office of personnel management . these agencies were selected to achieve diversity with respect to the number and types of agencies' facilities , as well as the agencies' missions . we conducted our ongoing work from august 2012 to december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . also , our previously issued testimonies and reports were conducted in accordance with these standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional details about the scope and methodology can be found in each of these related reports . according to fps officials , since 2010 the agency has required its guards to receive training on how to respond to an active - shooter scenario . however , as our 2013 report shows , fps faces challenges providing active - shooter response training to all of its guards . without ensuring that all guards receive training on how to respond to active - shooter incidents , fps has limited assurance that its guards are prepared for this threat .