this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this testimony , please contact david powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by email at pownerd@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony include carol cha , neil doherty , joanne fiorino , kathleen s. lovett , colleen phillips , and karen richey . our objectives were to ( 1 ) discuss the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system ( npoess ) program's schedule , cost , trends , and risks and ( 2 ) describe plans and implications for moving the program forward . the excom did not select an option . we also met with officials from the department of defense , the national aeronautics and space administration , and noaa's national weather service and national environmental satellite data and information service to discuss user needs for the program . to identify schedule and cost changes , we reviewed program office contract data , the executive committee minutes and briefings , and an independent review team study , and we interviewed program officials . we compared changes in npoess cost and schedule estimates to prior cost and schedule estimates as reported in our july 2002 and july 2003 testimonies and in our september 2004 report . to identify trends that could affect the program baseline in the future , we assessed the prime contractor's cost and schedule performance . to make these assessments , we applied earned value analysis techniques to data from contractor cost performance reports . we compared the cost of work completed with the budgeted costs for scheduled work for a 6-month period , from march to september 2005 , to show trends in cost and schedule performance . we also used data from the reports to estimate the likely costs at the completion of the prime contract through established earned value formulas . this resulted in three different values , with the middle value being the most likely . we used the base contract without options for our earned value assessments . to identify risks , we reviewed program risk management documents and interviewed program officials . further , we evaluated earned value cost reports to determine the key risks that negatively affect npoess's ability to maintain the current schedule and cost estimates . to assess options and implications for moving the program forward , we reviewed the five options presented at the executive committee briefing and met with representatives of the national weather service and national environmental satellite data and information service to obtain their views on user's needs and priorities for satellite data . noaa officials generally agreed with the facts presented in this statement and provided some technical corrections , which we have incorporated . we performed our work at the integrated program office , dod , nasa , and noaa in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area , between june 2005 and november 2005 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .