however , this has not been the case . gao - 07-1134sp . washington , d.c.: july 2007 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . defense infrastructure: issues need to be addressed in managing and funding base operations and facilities support . gao - 05-556 . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2005 . military training: better planning and funding priority needed to improve conditions of military training ranges . gao - 05-534 . washington , d.c.: june 10 , 2005 . defense infrastructure: changes in funding priorities and management processes needed to improve condition and reduce costs of guard and reserve facilities . gao - 03-516 . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2003 . defense infrastructure: changes in funding priorities and strategic planning needed to improve the condition of military facilities . gao - 03-274 . washington , d.c.: february 19 , 2003 . dod did not use this method for fiscal year 2009 . instead , dod used the value of the sustainment cost factor that was determined in the first year that a ratio analysis was used and then applied actual prior year inflation to recompute the cost factor's value for fiscal year 2009 . dod's new method would be appropriate and result in accurate estimates under two circumstances — if the similar relationship between the two facility categories used in the ratio analyses existed only in the first year that the ratio analysis was used , or if the relationship between the known sustainment and replacement cost factors used in the ratio analysis remained the same from the original year to the current year . officials at oceana naval air station stated that many facility roof structures at the installation had exceeded their service lives and some were leaking , causing damage to interior building components . the officials noted that the roof of a weapons and radar training building at an oceana naval air station annex had standing water and leaked , which caused problems inside the building ( see fig . camp lejeune officials did not resolve the discrepancy during our visit . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the reliability of the annual funding estimates produced by the facilities sustainment model , we reviewed the documentation supporting the model's analytic framework — including the model's inputs , calculations , and assumptions — to determine whether the model provides a consistent and reasonable framework for estimating sustainment funding requirements . in addition , we assessed the accuracy and supportability of the model's key inputs — the inventory quantity and the sustainment cost factor . regarding inventory quantity , we reviewed dod regulations that require periodic verification of the accuracy of real property inventory information , determined the extent to which the military services had complied with these regulations , and discussed with service officials the reasons for noncompliance . oceana officials also stated that needed repairs to several aircraft hangar doors at the installation had been deferred due to inadequate sustainment funding ( see fig .