require management review . a rebaselining policy should identify and document rebaselining decisions , including the reasons for rebaselining ; changes to the approved baseline cost , schedule , and scope ; management review of the rebaseline request ; and approval of new baseline . the policy should also require an explanation of why the current plan is no longer feasible ; identify the problems that led to the need for a new plan of the remaining work ; and discuss measures in place to prevent recurrence . our analysis shows that agencies do not have comprehensive rebaselining policies . specifically , none of the agencies' rebaselining policies are fully consistent with all of the five practices mentioned above . most policies fully or partially addressed reasons for rebaselining , requiring management review , and requiring that the rebaselining process be documented ( 79 percent , 96 percent , and 88 percent , respectively ) , while describing the process for developing the new baseline and requiring validation of the new baseline were addressed the least ( 46 percent and 54 percent of the policies , respectively , did not address these practices ) . table 9 summarizes our assessment of agencies' rebaselining polices . agencies' policies vary in part because no guidance has been issued specifying what elements these policies are to include . as previously noted , omb has issued guidance which , among other things , requires baseline change requests to be approved by the agency heads and to be submitted to omb for approval . however , this guidance does not specifically address how agencies are to implement their rebaselining activities , including the key elements that should be addressed in their policies . in addition , officials from omb's office of e - government and information technology and the acting chief of omb's information policy and technology branch told us that , in their oversight function , they review agencies' earned value management policies , and in doing so determine whether these policies address rebaselining . however , they noted that they have not established specific criteria to evaluate the earned value management policies ( and therefore their rebaselining aspects ) and acknowledged that having such criteria would improve consistency among the policies and facilitate their oversight process . without comprehensive policies to guide their rebaselining activities , agencies may not be optimizing the effectiveness of rebaselining as a tool to improve performance management . in addition , their rebaselining processes may lack the transparency needed to ensure effective oversight . to address the weaknesses identified with agencies' rebaselining policies , we made recommendations to the director of omb and to the 24 major agencies . specifically , we recommended that the director of omb issue guidance for rebaselining policies that would include a minimum set of key elements , taking into consideration the criteria used in our report , and each of the heads of the 24 major agencies direct the development of comprehensive rebaselining policies that address the weaknesses we identified . we received comments on a draft of our report from 20 of the major agencies - - 4 of which stated that they had no comments .