the remainder are under review . of the 32 approved tas requests , 26 have also been approved for program authority — 24 for clean water , 1 for safe drinking water , and 1 for clean air . figure 1 shows the states where tribes have submitted and been approved for tas status under the three environmental acts , the number of tas submittals , and the number of tas approvals in each state . epa relies on grants as one of its primary ways to carry out its mission of protecting human health and safeguarding the environment . each fiscal year , epa awards approximately $4 billion in grants to state and local governments , tribes , educational , nonprofit organizations , and other entities for projects that range from conducting environmental research to constructing wastewater treatment facilities to developing regulatory programs . the funds are generally based on formulas laid out under each law or regulation . to be eligible for most epa grant programs , a tribe must be federally recognized . in addition , for some grant programs , such as section 106 — for the prevention , reduction , and elimination of water pollution - - under the clean water act , a tribe must also have obtained tas status to be eligible . for other grants , such as section 105 — to develop and administer programs that prevent and control air pollution or implement national air quality standards - - under the clean air act , a tribe is not required to have tas status , but tas status has a substantially lower matching contribution requirement ( from 5 percent with tas status to 40 percent without ) . the grants' tas criteria are less demanding and thus the review process is less rigorous than the review process for tas for program authority . in addition , the grant decision is based solely on epa's expertise , and epa does not generally get public comments on whether the tribe has jurisdiction . this ruling is known as the montana test . with respect to program authorization , epa's review process is generally the same for tribes and states . specifically: for the clean water act , epa determines , for example , whether the ( 1 ) water uses are consistent with the requirements of the act , ( 2 ) adopted criteria protect the designated water uses , and ( 3 ) appropriate technical and scientific data and analyses have been used . the clean water act allows states and tribes to establish water quality standards that are more stringent than federal requirements . under the safe drinking water act , epa requires states and tribes to demonstrate the capability to administer primary enforcement responsibility in a number of key areas . among other things , epa determines whether the state or tribe has ( 1 ) adopted drinking water regulations that meet or exceed epa's national primary drinking water regulations ; ( 2 ) adopted and is implementing adequate procedures for enforcing its regulations , including demonstrating authority to assess penalties for violations ; and ( 3 ) adopted and can implement an adequate plan to provide safe drinking water under emergency circumstances , such as hurricanes and other natural disasters .