however , it is too early to tell . the scope of such arrangements can vary . some arrangements may allow fda to obtain reports of inspections conducted by other countries , for informational purposes . other arrangements may involve more than the exchange of information . for example , fda and another country may enter into an arrangement to work towards the mutual recognition of each other's inspection standards or the acceptance of one another's inspections , in lieu of their own . cder uses a risk - based process to select some foreign and domestic establishments for postapproval gmp surveillance inspections . the process uses a risk - based model to identify those establishments that , based on characteristics of the establishment and of the product being manufactured , have the greatest public health risk potential should they experience a manufacturing defect . for example , fda considers the risk to public health from poor quality over - the - counter drugs to be lower than for prescription drugs . consequently establishments manufacturing only over - the - counter drugs receive a lower score on this factor in the risk - based process than other manufacturers . through this process , cder annually prepares a prioritized list of domestic establishments and a separate , prioritized list of foreign establishments . fda uses multiple databases to manage its foreign drug inspection program . drls contains information on foreign and domestic drug establishments that have registered with fda to market their drugs in the united states . these establishments must also list any drugs they market in the united states . these establishments provide information , such as company name and address and the drug products they manufacture for commercial distribution in the united states , on paper forms , which are entered into drls by fda staff . oasis contains information on drugs and other fda - regulated products offered for entry into the united states , including information on the establishment that manufactured the drug . the information in oasis is automatically generated from data managed by customs and border protection ( cbp ) . the data are originally entered by customs brokers based on the information available from the importer . cbp specifies an algorithm by which customs brokers generate a manufacturer identification number from information about an establishment's name , address , and location . facts contains information on fda's inspections of foreign and domestic drug establishments . fda investigators and laboratory analysts enter information into facts following completion of an inspection . according to drls , in fiscal year 2007 , foreign countries that had the largest number of registered establishments were canada , china , france , germany , india , italy , japan , and the united kingdom . these countries are also listed in oasis as having the largest number of manufacturers offering drugs for entry into the united states . specifically , according to oasis , china had more establishments manufacturing drugs that were offered for entry into the united states than any other country .