these reductions were dramatic . according to data from bts , carriers flew 20 percent fewer departures in september 2001 than in september 2000 . different airlines approached such cost - cutting in different ways . for example , us airways retired 111 older aircraft from its fleet , eliminating its boeing 737-200s , md - 80s , and fokker f - 100s . some carriers also replaced service from their large mainline jets with smaller aircraft operated by regional affiliates to better match capacity with passenger demand , as united did in some markets . in addition , united reduced the total number of departures in its system from about 2,400 before september 11 to 1,654 by october 31 , in part by reducing early morning and late evening flights . service to smaller communities was affected as part of the overall decrease in operations . these two factors — the economic downturn and aftermath of september 11 — played out in small communities as well as in larger markets . as with the nation as a whole , small communities saw dramatic decreases in passenger traffic . according to our survey of airport officials , passenger traffic at small communities fell by 32 percent between september 2000 and september 2001 — about the same percentage that , according to bts data , passenger traffic decreased throughout the country . over 80 percent of the airport managers we surveyed reported that passenger fear ( that is , general apprehension related to the events of september 11 , 2001 ) was a key factor in decreased enplanements at their airport since september 11 . airport directors also reported that passenger enplanements dropped because of air carrier service changes ( eg , fewer departures , smaller aircraft , or fewer carriers ) . in addition , managers indicated that basic economic conditions and post - september 11 airport security requirements reduced enplanements . thus , the general reductions in service that occurred at small communities can be seen as reflecting airlines' overall response to these factors . another way that these factors can be seen at work in small communities is in the decisions airlines made to withdraw from a community . in most cases , when an airline withdrew entirely from a community , it was a community in which the airline was competing with other airlines and had only a limited market share . more specifically , of the 36 small communities that lost a carrier between october 2000 and october 2001 , there were only six instances in which the carrier that discontinued operations was the largest service provider at the community . the effect of these decisions to withdraw from multiple - carrier markets can be seen in one characteristic we observed in the airline schedule data we analyzed: among the 202 communities we analyzed , service reductions tended to be greater in those communities with populations above 100,000 than in communities with populations below 100,000 . this was true across several types of service indicators , such as number of carriers , total number of daily departures , and number of nonstop flights to more than one destination .