( see app . i for additional details , including how we picked the six projects to review. ) we are continuing to examine this issue and expect to report to you on the final results of our work in spring 2003 , to aid in your consideration of the reauthorization of tea - 21 . according to fhwa , and based on its professional judgment , it typically takes from 9 to 19 years to plan , gain approval for , and construct a new , major federally funded highway project that has significant environmental impacts . however , these projects constitute only about 3 percent of all federally funded projects , according to fhwa . these highway projects are often carried out in four phases . ( see table 1. ) the time required varies with the size of the project , its complexity , and the public interest in the project . some projects may take as few as 3 years or as many as 20 years or more to complete . the six new highway construction projects that we reviewed ranged from a $1.7 million project in florida to upgrade an existing dirt road to a two - lane paved road , which took 8 years to complete , to a $50 million project to build a six - lane , 15 mile divided highway in texas , which took over 15 years to complete ( excluding the planning phase , for which information was not available ) . constructing a new , major roadway typically takes this long to complete because there can be as many as 200 major steps involved throughout a project's life , with approvals or input required from a number of federal , state , and other stakeholders . not surprisingly , officials in federal and state agencies and other knowledgeable organizations indicate that delivering larger , more complex or controversial projects may take longer to complete than is typical for most highway projects . in addition to needing more time because of their size and complexity , they often take longer to complete because they must comply with more federal and state requirements and because of the public interest that they may generate . a survey of 33 state departments of transportation conducted by the american association of state highway and transportation officials agree that larger projects take longer to complete . however , both our work and the association's survey are based on anecdotal information and officials' memories , as no federal or state baseline information exists on how long highway projects take . while there are many reasons for new highway construction projects to take a long time to complete , most studies on the topic focused on the timely resolution of environmental issues to improve project completion times , rather than examining all aspects of highway projects . the officials we contacted generally stated that environmental reviews resulted in better project decisions ; but reaching those decisions was difficult and time consuming , complicated by such factors as incomplete permit applications , limited resources at environmental agencies , and environmental opposition to projects . federal and state agencies have undertaken several initiatives to improve completion times for highway construction projects .