, the means of moving information ) . the army believes this process will allow for both large - and small - scale industry involvement that could lead to increased competition and lower costs . to implement this agile process , the army sends out sources sought notices to attract proposed solutions to identified network capability gaps and evaluates each of the proposed solutions at decision points after key phases.which systems will proceed further into the process . the army screens systems again during a laboratory validation in phase ii . the army notifies contractors as to whether their systems will be allowed to advance to the evaluation phase , where candidate systems are integrated with existing network capabilities and tested with a full army brigade . if the system performs well at the evaluation , the army decides whether or not to buy and field it . the army initially screens proposals at phase i to determine equipped with every vehicle platform currently in the army inventory , the 2nd brigade , 1st armored division assigned to brigade modernization command leads phases iii to v of the process and is responsible for executing the network integration evaluations ( nie ) , which are held semi - annually and typically last for approximately 6 weeks . the nies are designed to replicate current real - world conditions and include systems already fielded to the operational theater . soldiers , combat developers , training developers , materiel developers , and engineers participate in each event , providing feedback as the evaluation progresses . nies provide a venue for operational testing of formal acquisition programs and for demonstrating government and industry provided systems under evaluation in an operational environment . considering nondevelopmental items or commercial - off - the - shelf options has the potential benefit of substantially lower development time and cost . however , those options may not be available to address all of the capability gaps , and some development investments may be needed over time . also , given the realities of the federal budgeting process and the time commitments associated with full and open competition , it may not be possible to procure all emerging technologies immediately . however , if the army can find a way to procure and field new technologies within 2 to 3 years , that is still considerably better than a typical development effort that in the past has taken a decade or longer . industry participation may be a lynchpin to the continued availability of cutting edge network capabilities , but to date , army procurement of new network technologies from other than programs of record has been very limited . the army / industry relationship will have to be carefully monitored and nurtured — that should be a priority for both dod and the army . regarding oversight , the army's network investment is a dispersed portfolio of efforts funded in a number of places in the budget . while network modernization is not defined as a major acquisition program , it is a substantial level - of - effort investment that will encompass on the order of $3 billion a year indefinitely . the magnitude and duration of the financial commitment command attention regarding the affordability of the strategy .