fra resources . although most railroads we spoke with said they have worked closely with fra throughout the ptc implementation process , some railroads cited concerns with fra's limited staffing resources . these concerns focused on two of fra's responsibilities . first , fra officials must verify field testing of ptc . we also interviewed amtrak representatives . we interviewed or received written responses to our interview questions from ptc suppliers and independent ptc experts that we selected based on involvement with ptc and recommendations from fra , associations , and others . to determine how fra estimated the benefits and costs of ptc , we interviewed fra officials and experts , among others , and evaluated proposed and final regulatory impact analyses for the 2010 and 2012 ptc rules . we reviewed the regulatory analyses supporting the rules using standard economic principles and office of management and budget ( omb ) economic guidance ( circular a - 4 ) as criteria . see appendix i for more detailed information about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from october 2012 to august 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the u.s. railroad industry consists mostly of freight railroads but also serves passengers . freight railroads are divided into classes based on revenue . fra set no specific deadline for railroads to submit the safety plans , and according to fra , to - date only one railroad has submitted a final safety plan , which fra has approved . as it reported in its 2012 report to congress , fra's ptc staff consists of 10 ptc specialists and 1 supervisor who are responsible for the review and approval of all ptc final safety plans . fra also reported that this work covers the 37 railroads implementing ptc on over 60,000 miles of track . fra and railroads have expressed concern that railroads will submit their final safety plans to fra at approximately the same time , resulting in a potential review backlog particularly since each plan is expected to consist of hundreds of pages of detailed technical information . fra officials told us that they are dedicated to the timely approval of safety plans and that their oversight will not impede railroads from meeting the deadline . however , railroads report that their time frames are based on a quick turnaround in approvals from fra . if approvals are delayed , it could be a further setback in railroads' ptc implementation . generally commuter railroads face these same ptc implementation challenges , as well as others . first , because commuter railroads are using the ptc systems developed by freight railroads and amtrak , they are captive in many respects to the pace of developments of those entities and have few means to influence implementation schedules .