sec . sec has a bsa / aml team comprised of from five to seven ocie staff members , from three to five division of enforcement staff members , and three members from the division of trading and markets . the team is responsible for monitoring its bsa / aml examination program ; providing expertise to regional offices ; and maintaining communication with fincen , the sros , and other regulators on aml issues . further , sec broker - dealer examination staff have an aml working group consisting of one or more representatives from each regional office , who serve as aml experts . finra has nine aml regulatory experts . nfa and the chicago mercantile exchange have 130 and 59 examination staff respectively , all of which have been trained in bsa / aml . all of the regulators and their sros that examine financial institutions for bsa / aml compliance provide opportunities to their staff to receive bsa / aml training — provided by the agency , working groups ( such as ffiec ) , or outside vendors . ffiec , for example , provides both an aml workshop for examiners knowledgeable of bsa and experienced in examining institutions for bsa program compliance and , as of 2007 , an advanced bsa / aml specialists conference for designated bsa compliance examiners and other bsa subject matter experts . in 2007 , over 400 trainees participated in these programs . agencies and sros provided several examples of bsa / aml training available to their staff and others ( see table 11 ) . unlike the federal banking regulators , sec , and cftc , who incorporate bsa activities into their compliance programs , irs's bsa / aml activities are managed separately in its office of fraud / bsa within the small business / self employment division . this office is solely dedicated to examining nfbis for bsa compliance . since irs created the office , irs has tracked several bsa - specific output and efficiency performance measures , such as number of examinations , referrals , closures , and hours per case ( see table 12 ) . irs also has a detailed strategic plan devoted to bsa compliance and enforcement activities . we previously reported that irs lacked a measure for nbfi compliance rates with bsa and thus could not track program effectiveness over time . we recommended that the secretary of treasury direct fincen and irs to develop a documented and coordinated strategy — that would include priorities , time frames , and resource needs , and measure the compliance rate of nbfis — to improve bsa compliance by nbfis . irs and fincen responded by developing such a strategy , which identifies various nbfi categories , prioritizes actions to be taken overall and within each category for improving bsa compliance , explains who is responsible for the actions , and establishes the time frames for identifying whether an action has been completed or when it is to be completed . similar to the other regulators , irs's office of bsa / fraud conducts quality reviews of examinations . over the last several years , irs has increased the resources it devotes to bsa compliance .