was a challenge . although we pointed out earlier that all 24 agencies reported that they planned to use telework as a means to protect their employees in the event of an influenza pandemic , several agencies reported that it may be a challenge to implement the measure . nasa , for instance , reported that because of the high level of commitment of its employees to assure mission success , educating and encouraging its workforce to use various social distancing recommendations , such as teleworking from home , canceling meetings , and not reporting to work when sick , was a challenge . in addition , nsf reported that it did not know whether all of its employees had internet capabilities in their homes to carry out work tasks remotely , while sba reported that it was challenging to encourage all staff to become telework - enabled — such as having the appropriate capabilities at home to be able to work remotely . with respect to workspace configuration , dhs reported the difficulty of reconfiguring workspace to protect employees who must perform classified work in a sensitive compartmented information facility . such facilities present similar social distancing challenges for air traffic controllers who work in close capacity in air route traffic control centers , which we will discuss next . we reported in 2009 that faa pandemic plans to protect air traffic controllers were not ready for implementation and also highlighted various challenges in protecting air traffic controllers who had to perform onsite mission essential functions during an influenza pandemic . we followed up with faa officials on the extent of their progress on four specific issues . first , since our 2009 report , faa has ensured that its facilities developed plans to protect air traffic controllers during an influenza pandemic . in 2009 , we reported that the air traffic organization ( ato ) , faa's line of business responsible for air traffic controllers' services , had not directed facilities , such as its air route traffic control centers , to develop pandemic - specific plans . ato directed its facilities 3 months after our report was issued to develop contingency staffing plans to mitigate the probable impact of an influenza pandemic and also instructed its facilities on immediate preparedness steps at the facility level . for example , ato facility managers were instructed to identify employees who were eligible and willing to telework , ensure that the appropriate employees complete the faa telework program , and identify the minimum cadre of employees , by position , who would need to telework during an influenza pandemic outbreak to sustain mission essential services . second , faa augmented its agencywide pandemic plan with a workplace protection policy . in 2010 , faa updated ato's draft pandemic plan with detailed protective measures for its workforce , including air traffic controllers . for example , faa added information to the plan about sanitizers that are safe to use on air traffic control equipment . four agencies reported they did not require component level plans . the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , opm , and nsf reported in both 2009 and 2012 that they did not require their components to complete influenza pandemic plans .