v ) . education said that the report will provide the congress valuable information on fdlp and education's oversight of this program . education also commented that it has developed a successful approach to fdlp loan servicing and collection through procedures such as ongoing monitoring , periodic reviews , and student counseling . the reasons for these differences are not clear . do default rates for fdlp loans differ according to the various repayment options available ? what measures has education taken to ensure that fdlp student loans are being properly serviced and collected ? in comparing the default rates of the fdlp and ffelp programs , we relied upon education's annually calculated school cohort default rates , which are the rates at which schools' fdlp and ffelp borrowers have defaulted on their loans within 2 years of beginning repayment.in comparing default rates within the fdlp program , we used a different database that gave a more complete and current view of all fdlp defaults by two main categories of loans — nonconsolidated and consolidation — and , within these categories , by four repayment options . the default rates within fdlp were calculated using a different time frame — namely , defaults that occurred at any time during repayment — and are not comparable to the school cohort default rates that education computes annually.nonconsolidated loans are the basic loans with which students or their parents can help finance postsecondary education , while consolidation loans allow borrowers to combine their various federal education loans into a single loan . the four repayment plans — standard , extended , graduated , and income contingent — differ in the length of the repayment period and the flexibility of the repayment schedule . we were unable to compare fdlp and ffelp cohort default rates by type of repayment options student borrowers used because education's national student loan data system did not have information on repayment plans used by ffelp borrowers . appendix i further describes our scope and methodology . we conducted our review between march and september 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fdlp and ffelp provide funding that is vital to helping students meet postsecondary education costs . fdlp has two types of loans and offers multiple repayment options . nonconsolidated loans are the basic loans with which students or their parents can help finance postsecondary education . subsidized stafford loans , available only to students with a demonstrated financial need , are considered subsidized in that the federal government does not charge interest while the student is in school at least half - time , during a 6- month grace period after the student graduates or otherwise leaves school , and during periods in which loan repayment is deferred ( such as when the borrower is seeking but unable to find full - time employment ) . in contrast , unsubsidized stafford loans are available to all students regardless of financial need and do not include an interest subsidy . if the borrower chooses not to make interest payments while in school , the interest is added to the principal balance to be repaid as part of the total loan amount .