completing vulnerability assessments for individual wastewater systems . several experts noted the importance of establishing strong working relationships among utilities , local and state law enforcement agencies , fire departments , and other first response agencies in advance of a potential emergency situation . many added that enhanced partnerships among these entities can yield significant benefits to wastewater utilities including an increased ability to monitor critical infrastructure and facilities , improved understanding of agency roles and responsibilities , and faster response time to deal with potential security breaches . what specific activities should the federal government support to improve wastewater security ? what are the criteria that should be used to determine how federal funds are allocated among recipients to improve wastewater security , and how should the funds be distributed ? it was outside the scope of this review to ascertain the desirability of using federal funds to support wastewater security or to compare the merits of federal support of the wastewater industry with others such as the electric power or transportation industries . rather , we sought to obtain expert advice on how best to use federal funds to improve wastewater security , should congress agree that they should be appropriated for this purpose . to obtain information on these three questions , we conducted a three - phase web - based survey of 50 experts on wastewater security . we identified these experts from a list of more than 100 widely recognized experts in one or more key aspects of wastewater security . in compiling this initial list , we also sought to achieve balance in terms of area of expertise ( i.e. , state and local emergency response , preparedness , engineering , epidemiology , public policy , security , wastewater treatment , risk assessment , water infrastructure , bioterrorism , and public health ) . in addition , we sought experts from ( 1 ) key federal organizations ( eg , dhs , epa , and national science foundation ) ; ( 2 ) key state and local agencies , including health departments and environmental protection departments ; and ( 3 ) key industry and nonprofit organizations such as amsa , environmental defense , water environment federation , and the water environment research foundation ; and ( 4 ) water utilities serving populations of varying sizes . of the approximately 70 experts we contacted , 50 agreed to participate and complete all three phases of our survey . a list of the 50 participants in this study is included in appendix i . to obtain information from the expert panel , we employed a modified version of the delphi method . the delphi method is a systematic process for obtaining individuals' views and seeking consensus among them on a question or problem of interest . since first developed by the rand corporation in the 1950s , the delphi method has generally been implemented using face - to - face group discussions . for this study , however , we adapted the method to use on the internet . we used this approach , in part , to eliminate the potential bias associated with group discussions . these biasing effects include the dominance of individuals and group pressure for conformity .