these sources were issued in 2012 or 2013 . we also reviewed contracting and budget documents relevant to f - 22 modernization . to assess the air force's management of its f - 22 reliability and structural improvement efforts , we collected and analyzed air force reports and briefing materials on aircraft availability and reliability and repair projects . to assess challenges facing efforts to modernize the f - 22 and address reliability and structural problems moving forward , we analyzed program schedules and actual and projected aircraft availability data for fiscal years 2011 to 2018 , current as of august 2013 , and reviewed program documents discussing maintenance issues affecting the aircraft . we also discussed progress and plans for modernization and improvement efforts with dod , air force , and f - 22 program officials . we assessed the reliability of dod data on selected acquisition reports , cost estimates , and materiel availability rates and projections by reviewing documentation related to the data and interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . however , officials noted that modernization efforts can be completed outside of the depot if needed . one way the air force is attempting to address the depot maintenance situation is by consolidating all f - 22 depot maintenance at a government - operated facility in ogden , utah . according to an air force analysis of f - 22 depot operations , management turnover at the contractor - run depot in palmdale and additional workload to address aircraft corrosion issues contributed to this depot's delays in delivering aircraft back to the fleet . the palmdale facility has higher labor rates than the ogden facility and has charged more labor hours than the ogden facility when performing modifications . the air force analysis also found that consolidating all f - 22 depot maintenance at the ogden facility should provide better schedule performance while reducing costs for f - 22 depot maintenance by approximately $20 million per year . the air force plans to mitigate schedule risks related to depot consolidation by retaining a residual capacity at palmdale into 2015 . the f - 22 fleet will not achieve its availability requirement as scheduled despite substantial investments in rammp projects . rammp is intended to increase the availability of the f - 22 to perform its missions , primarily through improving reliability — the likelihood that the aircraft will operate without failure — and reducing the time required to maintain the aircraft . cumulative spending on rammp projects totals about $900 million through the end of fiscal year 2013 , and has had some positive effect on availability over time .