state officials . we interviewed state agency officials involved in permitting at the state level to learn about state permitting requirements and coordination undertaken with the corps districts on various aspects of shellfish aquaculture permitting . specifically , we interviewed officials from the maryland department of natural resources , washington department of ecology , virginia marine resources commission , louisiana department of natural resources , and louisiana department of wildlife and fisheries . non - governmental officials . we also interviewed non - governmental organizations with an advocacy role related to shellfish aquaculture or conservation to gain their perspectives on the corps' permitting process . we interviewed officials from the chesapeake bay foundation , the nature conservancy , pacific coast shellfish growers association , east coast shellfish growers association , oyster south , center for food safety , the coalition to protect puget sound habitat , the coalition to restore coastal louisiana , and the coastal protection and restoration authority of louisiana . we selected these organizations because each had interacted with one or more of the four corps districts we reviewed on shellfish aquaculture issues during the period of our review . commercial value of shellfish . endangered species act . under section 7 of this act , if a proposed corps action may affect a listed species or designated critical habitat , formal consultation is required with the u.s . fish and wildlife service or the national marine fisheries service . the corps may also undertake programmatic consultations with these agencies , which generally combine reviews for similar activities into one consultation . magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act . under this law , the corps must consult with the national marine fisheries service if a proposed federal action may adversely affect essential fish habitat that a regional fisheries management council has identified . national historic preservation act . under section 106 of the act , the corps must take into account the effects of shellfish aquaculture activities on historic properties and afford the advisory council on historic preservation a reasonable opportunity to comment on such activities . the corps must also consult with the relevant state or tribal historic preservation officer , as appropriate . the corps uses different types of general and individual permits to authorize a wide range of activities , including shellfish aquaculture activities , as shown in table 2 . in some cases , if an entity's shellfish aquaculture activities comply with the terms and conditions laid out in a general permit , then the entity may undertake the activities without written authorization from the corps . in such instances , according to its permitting guidance , the corps would consider those activities to be authorized under the specified general permit . in other cases , however , entities who wish to undertake shellfish aquaculture activities under a general permit may need to submit an application to the corps for written authorization to conduct such activities . for example , some terms and conditions may require entities to notify the corps if their proposed activities may affect areas inhabited by submerged aquatic vegetation or endangered species or their designated critical habitats .