develop a policy for system maintenance . develop procedures for the following 8 security control families: audit and accountability , identification and authentication , maintenance , media protection , physical and environmental protection , security planning , systems communication and protection , and system information and integrity . enhance procedures for the following 7 security control families: access control , awareness and training , security assessment and authorization , configuration management , program management , personnel security , and system and services acquisition . 6. review and update as needed per fda's frequency , the policies for the following 11 security control families: access control , audit and accountability , contingency planning , identification and authentication , incident response , media protection , physical and environmental protection , security planning , personnel security , system and services acquisition , and system and information integrity . develop and document a security plan for one system supporting fda's scientific research . update security plans to ensure the plans fully and accurately document the controls selected and intended for protecting each of the six systems . 9. review and approve security plans for the six systems reviewed at least annually . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption is the conversion of data into a form , called a cipher text , which cannot be easily understood . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . nist sp 800-53 states that agencies should use encryption to protect the confidentiality of remote access sessions and they should encrypt sessions between host systems . the nist standard for an encryption algorithm is federal information processing standard ( fips ) 140-2 . fda did not always ensure that sensitive data were effectively encrypted when transmitted or stored . for example , 59 network devices we reviewed had weak non - fips - compliant algorithms to encrypt user passwords . in addition , a web server supporting the receipt of industry submissions and a database server storing certificates to support secure connections for receiving submissions used non - fips - compliant algorithms to encrypt passwords . furthermore , the web server's password file was encrypted by an algorithm that was outdated and had been withdrawn by nist over 10 years ago . as a result of using weak encryption algorithms , fda is at increased risk that user passwords may be easier to crack and used by unauthorized individuals to gain access to systems and sensitive information . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , agencies need to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . agencies can accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail ( a log of system activity ) that is used to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor a user's activities .