this problem is about more than finances . it is also about maintaining an adequate safety net for american workers against loss of income from retirement , disability , or death ; social security provides a foundation of retirement income for millions of americans and has prevented many former workers and their families from living their retirement years in poverty . as the congress considers proposals to restore the long - term financial stability and viability of the social security system , it also needs to consider the impact of the potential changes on different types of beneficiaries . moreover , while addressing social security reform is important and will not be easy , medicare presents a much greater , more complex , and even more urgent fiscal challenge . to assist the congress in its deliberations , we have developed criteria for evaluating social security reform proposals . these criteria aim to balance financial and economic considerations with benefit adequacy and equity issues and the administrative challenges associated with various proposals . the use of these criteria can help facilitate fair consideration and informed debate of social security reform proposals . today the social security program faces not an immediate crisis but rather a long - range and more fundamental financing problem driven largely by known demographic trends . the lack of an immediate solvency crisis affects the nature of the challenge , but it does not eliminate the need for action . acting soon reduces the likelihood that the congress will have to choose between imposing severe benefit cuts and unfairly burdening future generations with the program's rising costs . acting soon would allow changes to be phased in so the individuals who are most likely to be affected , namely younger and future workers , will have time to adjust their retirement planning while helping to avoid related “expectation gaps.” since there is a great deal of confusion about social security's current financing arrangements and the nature of its long - term financing problem , i would like to spend some time describing the nature , timing , and extent of the financing problem . as you all know , social security has always been largely a pay - as - you - go system . this means that current workers' taxes pay current retirees' benefits . as a result , the relative numbers of workers and beneficiaries has a major impact on the program's financial condition . this ratio , however , is changing . in 1950 , before the social security system was mature , the ratio was 16.5 . in the 1960s , the ratio averaged 4.2:1 . today it is 3.4:1 and it is expected to drop to around 2:1 by 2030 . the retirement of the baby boom generation is not the only demographic challenge facing the system . people are retiring early and living longer . a falling fertility rate is the other principal factor underlying the growth in the elderly's share of the population . in the 1960s , the fertility rate was an average of 3 children per woman . today it is a little over 2 , and by 2030 it is expected to fall to 1.95 — a rate that is below replacement .