we did not alert retailers that we were visiting their stores or identify ourselves as government employees . during our visits , we engaged the retailers in conversation about the dtv transition and the subsidy program to determine whether the information they were providing to customers was accurate and whether individual stores had coupon - eligible converter boxes available . while not required to do so , some stores we visited had informational material available and others had signs describing the dtv transition and the subsidy program . millions of consumers have requested converter box coupons and most of the requested coupons have been issued . through august 2008 , households had requested approximately 26 million coupons . ntia had issued over 94 percent of all coupon requests , for more than 24million coupons . of those coupons issued , about 9.5 million ( 39 percent ) had been redeemed and 31 percent had expired . after an initial spike at the beginning of the program , coupon requests have remained steady and have averaged over 105,000 requests per day . a vast majority of the representatives were able to explain how to receive or apply for a coupon and the value of the coupon . although we could obtain information from the majority of the stores that we visited and that were listed as participating in the subsidy program , in a few instances , we were not able to ask questions and observe whether the information provided was accurate . in two instances , there was no retailer at the store location listed as a participating retailer on ntia's web site ( https: / / www.dtv2009.gov / vendorsearch.aspx ) . in another instance , the location listed was under construction and had not yet opened . in two additional instances , the locations listed were private residences — one was an in - home electronics store , and the other was a satellite television installer working from a house . we asked ntia how it ensured the accuracy of the list of participating retailers on its web site , and according to ntia , ensuring the accuracy of the list is the responsibility of the retailers . ntia said it provides a list of locations to each retailer prior to placing the list on the web site , and retailers can update addresses or add new listings as warranted . ntia estimates that it will see a large increase in the number of coupon requests in the first quarter of 2009 and our analysis confirms that , as the transition nears , a spike in coupon requests is likely . however , ntia has not developed a plan for managing that potential spike or sustained increase in coupon demand . we conducted a “mystery shopper” study — i.e. , discussing the transition with randomly selected retailers without identifying ourselves as government employees — to determine retailer preparedness for the converter box subsidy program including the level of retailer knowledge about the program and availability of converter boxes . as part of our work , we conducted a “mystery shopper” study by visiting 132 randomly selected retail locations in 12 cities across the united states that were listed as participating in the converter box subsidy program .