improving fuel economy . three efforts relating to automotive technology and two other elements are expected to improve fuel economy . the technology efforts include advances in hydrogen - based fuel cells and low - cost fuel cells . two of the five elements are mandatory . first , a regulation requiring the installation of tire pressure monitoring systems in cars and certain other vehicles was finalized in june 2002 and will be phased in between 2003 and 2006 . properly inflated tires improve fuel efficiency . second , a regulation requiring an increase in the fuel economy of light trucks , from the current 20.7 miles per gallon to 22.2 miles per gallon in 2007 , was finalized in april 2003 . promoting domestic carbon sequestration . four u.s. department of agriculture programs were identified as promoting carbon sequestration on farms , forests , and wetlands . among other things , these programs are intended to accelerate tree planting and converting cropland to grassland or forests . challenging business to reduce emissions . voluntary initiatives to reduce greenhouse gases were proposed for u.s. businesses . for major companies that agreed to establish individual goals for reducing their emissions , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) launched a new climate leaders program . in addition , certain companies in the aluminum , natural gas , semiconductor , and underground coal mining sectors have joined voluntary partnerships with epa to reduce their emissions . finally , certain agricultural companies have joined two voluntary partnerships with epa and the department of agriculture to reduce their emissions . the administration provided some information for all 30 of the initiative's elements , including , in some cases , estimates of previous or anticipated emission reductions . however , inconsistencies in the nature of this information make it difficult to determine how contributions from the individual elements would achieve the total reduction of about 100 million metric tons in 2012 . first , estimates were not provided for 19 the initiative's elements . second , for the 11 elements for which estimates were provided , we found that 8 were not clearly attributable to the initiative because the reductions ( 1 ) were related to an activity already included in ongoing programs or ( 2 ) were not above previous or current levels . we did find , however , that the estimated reductions for the remaining 3 elements appear attributable to the initiative . we have concerns about some of the 19 emission reduction elements for which the administration did not provide savings estimates . at least two of these elements seem unlikely to yield emissions savings by 2012 . for example , the april 2003 fact sheet listed hydrogen energy as an additional measure , even though it also stated a goal of commercializing hydrogen vehicles by 2020 , beyond the scope of the initiative . similarly , the same fact sheet listed a coal - fired , zero - emissions power plant as an additional measure , but described the project as a 10-year demonstration ; this means that the power plant would not finish its demonstration phase until the last year of the initiative , much less be commercialized by then .