gao - 12-878 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2012 . interior agreed with this recommendation . progress in talent management has been made on a number of fronts . however , our work had identified additional actions federal agencies can take to recruit , develop , and retain personnel with the skills essential to maintaining a workforce that will help agencies meet their vital missions . more than a decade ago , it was widely recognized that the federal hiring process was lengthy and cumbersome and hampered agencies' ability to hire the people they needed to achieve their goals and missions . the processes of that time failed to meet the needs of managers in filling positions with the right talent and also failed to meet the needs of applicants for a timely , efficient , transparent , and merit - based process . the processes were also hampered by narrow federal classification standards for defining federal occupations , the quality of certain applicant assessment tools , and time - consuming processes to evaluate applicants . both congress and opm have taken a series of important actions over the years to improve recruiting and hiring in the federal sector . for example , in 2004 congress provided agencies with hiring flexibilities that ( 1 ) permit agencies to appoint individuals to positions through a streamlined hiring process where there is a severe shortage of qualified candidates or a critical hiring need , and ( 2 ) allow agency managers more latitude in selecting among qualified candidates through category rating , an alternative to the traditional numerical rating procedure which limited selection to the top three ranked candidates . in addition , congress provided agencies with enhanced authority to pay recruitment bonuses and with the authority to credit relevant private sector experience when computing annual leave amounts . in 2005 , and again in 2008 , opm issued guidance on the use of hiring authorities and flexibilities , in 2006 developed the hiring toolkit to assist agency officials in determining the appropriate hiring flexibilities to use given their specific situations , and in 2008 launched an 80-day hiring model to help speed up the hiring process . also in 2008 , opm established standardized vacancy announcement templates for common occupations , such as contract specialist and accounting technician positions , in which agencies can insert summary information concerning their specific jobs prior to posting for public announcement . as mentioned earlier , in 2010 , opm launched the pathways program in order to make it easier to recruit and hire students and recent graduates . individual agencies have also taken actions to meet their specific needs for acquiring the necessary talent . for example , we have reported that the national aeronautics and space administration has used a combination of techniques to recruit workers with critical skills , including targeted recruitment activities , educational outreach programs , improved compensation and benefits packages , professional development programs , and streamlined hiring authorities.many challenges remain with federal recruiting and hiring , as noted earlier in discussing critical skills gaps .