border security . dhs's border security mission includes detecting and preventing terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the united states ; facilitating the orderly and efficient flow of legitimate trade and travel ; interdicting illegal drugs and other contraband ; apprehending individuals who are attempting to enter the united states illegally ; inspecting inbound and outbound people , vehicles , and cargo ; and enforcing laws of the united states at the border . dhs has made some progress in , for example , refining the screening of foreign visitors to the united states and providing training and personnel necessary to fulfill border security missions . in particular , as of december 2006 dhs had a pre - entry screening capability in place in overseas visa issuance offices and an entry identification capability at 115 airports , 14 seaports , and 154 of 170 land ports of entry . furthermore , in november 2007 we reported on traveler inspections at ports of entry and found that u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) had some success in identifying inadmissible aliens and other violators . acquisition management . dhs's acquisition management efforts include managing the use of contracts to acquire goods and services needed to fulfill or support the agency's missions , such as information systems , new technologies , aircraft , ships , and professional services . overall , dhs has made progress in implementing a strategic sourcing program to increase the effectiveness of its buying power and in creating a small business program . however , dhs's progress toward creating a unified acquisition organization has been hampered by various policy decisions . in september 2007 we reported on continued acquisition oversight issues at dhs , identifying that the department had not fully ensured proper oversight of its contractors providing services closely supporting inherently government functions . in addition , accountability and transparency are critical to the department effectively integrating its management functions and implementing its mission responsibilities . dhs has faced an enormous management challenge in its transformation efforts as it works to integrate 22 component agencies . each component agency brought differing missions , cultures , systems , and procedures that the new department had to efficiently and effectively integrate into a single , functioning unit . at the same time it has weathered these growing pains , dhs has had to fulfill its various homeland security and other missions . dhs has developed a strategic plan , is working to integrate some management functions , and has continued to form necessary partnerships to achieve mission success . nevertheless , in 2007 we reported that dhs's implementation and transformation remained high - risk because dhs had not yet developed a comprehensive management integration strategy and its management systems and functions⎯especially related to acquisition , financial , human capital , and information management⎯were not yet fully integrated and wholly operational . we identified that this array of management and programmatic challenges continued to limit dhs's ability to carry out its roles under the national strategy for homeland security in an effective , risk - based way .