attorneys . as shown in table 3 , contractors involved in 30 of the nlrb cases , 4 of the dol cases , and 1 of the doj cases were found to have violated one or more federal labor or employment laws by a federal court or adjudicated administrative decision . in total , 27 different federal contractors were involved in these 35 cases identified as having labor and employment law violations . the remaining cases were resolved with a wide range of outcomes , including consent agreements and orders , before a decision by a court or administrative adjudicator was reached as to whether a violation of law had occurred . the bureau of competition of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and doj's antitrust division enforce the federal antitrust laws . what far rule implementation issues were identified in our work in response to the first question ? to determine the extent of contractor violations , we gathered information on contractors that were awarded new federal contracts of at least $100,000 in fiscal year 2000 and federal enforcement agency cases closed during fiscal years 1997 through 1999 ( october 1996 through september 1999 ) . these were the types of contracts and cases that would have been covered by the far rule's contractor certification requirement had it been applied beginning with fiscal year 2000 , the last full fiscal year for which contractor data were available at the start of our work . we then matched the names of contractors listed in the federal procurement data system ( fpds ) — which is maintained by the general services administration ( gsa ) — shown as having new federal contracts awarded in fiscal year 2000 to names in enforcement agency cases closed during fiscal years 1997 to 1999 . these names were in the databases maintained by seven federal agencies responsible for enforcing or administering many federal environmental , labor and employment , antitrust , consumer protection , or tax laws . however , the name - matching process was sometimes imprecise because contractor names can vary widely due to such factors as spelling , name combinations , and parent / subsidiary relationships . nevertheless , this was generally the only viable method available for identifying contractors involved in these cases because , usually , common numeric identifiers were not available . therefore , due to name variations , we likely did not identify all of the contractors involved in the cases in the databases maintained by the enforcement agencies we examined . conversely , we found some false matches — companies with similar names involved in the cases but which were not the same companies as the contractors . where we detected false matches , we eliminated them . see appendix i for further information about the accuracy of the matches . when we matched a name associated with a closed case involving a federal enforcement agency with the name of a contractor , we reviewed the disposition of the case as characterized by the agency in its database .