this resulted in additional costs to the government . as we reported in january 2008 , our analysis of army data for a task order under one of these contracts in kuwait found that since may 2005 , the contractor worked a total of about 188,000 hours to repair equipment after the first failed government inspection , at an approximate cost to the government of $4.2 million . we were unable to calculate the total cost of the rework performed under the second equipment maintenance contract because , according to officials , information entered into the maintenance database that tracks equipment status and inspection results does not distinguish between the contractor's internal quality control inspections and government inspections prior to acceptance . dod's oversight of some of the contracts we reviewed has been inadequate because of a shortage of qualified oversight and contract administration personnel and because it did not maintain some contract files in accordance with applicable policy and guidance . we have previously reported that inadequate numbers of trained contract management and oversight staff have led to contracting challenges . we found that for five of the seven contracts we reviewed , dod did not have adequate numbers of qualified personnel at deployed locations to effectively manage and oversee the contracts . additionally , we found that for four of the contracts we reviewed , the contracting offices either did not maintain complete contract files documenting contract administration and oversight actions taken or did not follow quality assurance guidance . for the other two contracts we reviewed , authorized oversight positions were filled with personnel to properly oversee the contracts . having the right people with the right skills to oversee contractor performance is critical to ensuring that dod receives the best value for the billions of dollars spent each year on contractor - provided services supporting forces deployed in southwest asia and elsewhere . however , inadequate numbers of personnel to oversee and manage contracts is a long - standing problem that continues to hinder dod's management and oversight of contractors in deployed locations . in 2004 , we reported that dod did not always have sufficient contract oversight personnel in place to manage and oversee its logistics support contracts such as logcap and recommended that dod develop teams of subject matter experts to make periodic visits to deployed locations to judge , among other things , if its logistics support contracts were being used efficiently . dod concurred with — but did not implement — this recommendation . in addition , in 2005 we reported in our high - risk series that inadequate staffing contributed to contract management challenges in iraq . in 2006 , we reported that oversight personnel told us that dod does not have adequate personnel at deployed locations to effectively oversee and manage contractors . dod concurred with our assessment and noted that they were congressionally directed to undertake a review of the health of the acquisition work forces , including oversight personnel , and assess the department's ability to meet the oversight mission . this is the third report we have issued in response to this direction . in may 2007 , we issued a report that examined the trends in operation and maintenance costs for fiscal years 1995 through 2005 .