( app . ii provides more information on legal issues associated with visa revocations. ) according to justice and fbi officials , the fbi does not yet have a policy on how to use the visa revocation process in its counterterrorism efforts . the fbi has not developed such a policy because the visa revocation information state sends to the bureau does not indicate that the fbi may want to take follow - up action in these cases . for instance , the notice of visa revocation does not explicitly state that the reason for revocation is terrorism - related . state and ins had written policies that covered some aspects of visa revocations . state's policies and procedures , contained in the foreign affairs manual , specify when and for what reason a consular officer may or may not revoke a visa , including for terrorism - related reasons . the manual instructs consular officers to obtain a security advisory opinion from the department before determining that a visa holder is ineligible for a visa on terrorism grounds . in practice , according to state officials , this means that department officials at headquarters acting under the authority of the secretary of statenot the consular officers at overseas postsrevoke visas on the basis of terrorism concerns . state department officials told us that they follow specific , but unwritten , operating procedures when the department revokes visas , as described in more detail later in this report . ins has some general policies related to the posting of lookouts for inadmissible aliens and for the revocation of visas by immigration officers at ports of entry . however , these policies do not call for specific actions by appropriate ins personnel with regard to visas revoked by the state department . since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , state has constantly received new information on suspected terrorists from the intelligence community , law enforcement agencies , and overseas posts . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . in some cases , state received this information after it had already issued visas to the individuals in question ; the department would then revoke these visas . under the ina , the secretary of state has discretionary authority to revoke any visa that a consular officer has issued , including cases in which the secretary believes that the visa holder may be ineligible for a visa under the ina's terrorism provision . according to state department officials and documents , state revoked visas held by 240 individuals from september 11 , 2001 , through december 31 , 2002 , on terrorism grounds . all of these visas were revoked as a prudent measure under the secretary of state's discretionary authority because , as discussed earlier , state believed more research on the individuals was necessary before they should be allowed to enter the united states . appendix iii provides more information on these visas and the persons who held them .