pfoa . pfoa is a fluorinated organic chemical that has been used in generally the same products as pfos , including firefighting foam used by dod and civilian airports . according to epa , pfoa was voluntarily phased out by eight major companies in the manufacturing of their products at the end of 2015 . according to the epa , adverse health effects from exposure to pfoa are similar to those for pfos . see table 1 for details of the epa provisional health advisory that was issued in 2009 and the lifetime health advisory that was issued in 2016 , which superseded the provisional health advisory . perchlorate . perchlorate is commonly used in solid propellants , fireworks , matches , signal flares , and some fertilizers , and has been used by dod for rocket fuel and ammunition . epa published an interim health advisory for perchlorate in 2008 ; the interim health advisory level was set at 15 parts per billion . according to the health advisory , perchlorate can disrupt the functions of the thyroid gland . as of april 2017 , dod's list of emerging contaminants comprised 49 chemicals or substances . according to our analysis of epa documents , dod's list includes 21 contaminants that can be found in drinking water . of these 21 contaminants , 10 contaminants have been regulated by epa under the safe drinking water act , and 11 contaminants are currently unregulated but have an epa - issued drinking water health advisory . the other 28 dod - identified emerging contaminants do not have epa drinking water regulations or health advisories . in 2009 , dod issued a policy on the identification , assessment , and risk management of emerging contaminants that have the potential to impact dod . for the years we reviewed — fiscal years 2013 through 2015 — the military departments annually reported information internally to asd ( ei&e ) on compliance with epa and state health - based drinking water regulations , which indicate that drinking water quality at dod public water systems was similar to other systems in the united states . however , not all violations of health - based regulations were reported to asd ( ei&e ) during this time frame , as is required by dod policy . the military departments reported that a total of 77 military installations had at least one violation at some point from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 , but we found that at least 16 additional installations had violations that were reported to epa but were not internally reported to asd ( ei&e ) . dod also has not used available compliance data to identify why dod public water systems that provide dod - treated drinking water appear to have more violations of health - based regulations than dod systems that provide non - dod - treated drinking water . for the years we reviewed — fiscal years 2013 through 2015 — the military departments annually reported information to asd ( ei&e ) on compliance with and violations of epa and state health - based drinking water regulations at the dod public water systems that provide drinking water to military installations .