( recommendation 1 ) . such guidance is necessary to maintain consistency with federal internal control standards , which call for management to use quality information to achieve agency objectives and design control activities , such as accurate and timely recording of transactions , to achieve objectives and respond to risk . the department of the interior also provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout our report as appropriate . the principal deputy director of fws should develop guidance that clarifies how and when to record the date on which the agency determines the “adequacy and completeness” of an incidental take authorization application . ( recommendation 2 ) . the assistant administrator for fisheries of nmfs should analyze the agency's time frames for reviewing incidental harassment authorization applications — from the date the agency determines that an application is adequate and complete until the date an application is approved or denied — and compare the agency's review time frames to the statutory review time frame . ( recommendation 3 ) . the principal deputy director of fws should analyze the agency's time frames for reviewing incidental harassment authorization applications — from the date the agency determines that an application is adequate and complete until the date an application is approved or denied — and compare the agency's review time frames to the statutory review time frame . ( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a copy of this report to the departments of commerce and the interior for review and comment . the department of commerce provided comments on behalf of the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) . nmfs agreed with our recommendations but recommended changes to some of the terms used in our report and stated that our characterization of the statutory and mandated requirements did not fully describe the extent of review and analysis required during their review . while we believe that our description of the extent and complexity of nmfs' review and analysis , including the terms we use to describe nmfs' process , was sufficient for this report , we revised the report as appropriate . in its letter , nmfs acknowledged that it does not consistently record the date that an application is deemed ”adequate and complete,” and agreed with our recommendations , including describing the steps it plans to take to address them . the department of commerce also provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout our report as appropriate . the department of commerce's letter can be found in appendix ii . the department of the interior provided comments on behalf of the bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) and the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) . the fws partially concurred with our first recommendation and fully concurred with our second . regarding the first recommendation , fws noted that it plans to develop guidance for recording the “adequate and complete” date of incidental harassment authorization applications ; however , it did not indicate that it would develop such guidance for the other type of incidental take authorization — the incidental take regulations . we believe that fws should develop guidance for both . the department of the interior's letter can be found in appendix iii .