we agree . however , our recommendation calls for dod to establish more specific guidelines on when and what action should be taken in response to temporary retirees' failure to comply with tdrl requirements , and is intended to ensure equitable treatment in all cases of noncompliance across the services . dod noted that our recommendation to expand the use of nonmilitary physicians for conducting tdrl reexaminations should include a statement that nonmilitary physicians should be “trained in and will accept examinations of individuals using va - approved templates.” dod also indicated that “use of non - military physicians should also include specific reference to reexaminations at non - military and non - va facilities given training and qualification consistent with title 10 and title 38 , usc.” we believe that our recommendation falls within the services' current authority to use reports of medical examinations from nonmilitary physicians and facilities under dod instruction 1332.38 , which assigns the responsibility for assuring the adequacy of these examinations to mtfs . in addition , this instruction currently encourages physicians performing reexaminations for the tdrl to use va's physician's guide . our recommendation is not suggesting a change to the underlying guidelines prescribing the use of nonmilitary physicians ; rather , we are recommending that use of nonmilitary physicians should be expanded . in response to dod's comments , we have added the phrase “in accordance with dod guidance” to our recommendation . finally , dod concurred with our recommendations for ensuring that temporary retirees are provided easier access to military personnel who can answer their tdrl questions and to web - based tdrl information . it also commented that both are readily available to temporary retirees . while we acknowledge the services' current efforts in this area , they do not appear to be enough to meet the needs of temporary retirees . the results of our review of the accessibility of tdrl points of contact and web - based information , as well as temporary retirees' reports of difficulty accessing both , indicate a need for improvement in these areas . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of veterans affairs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bertonid@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix x . the objectives of our review were to examine ( 1 ) recent trends in the temporary disability retired list ( tdrl ) caseload size , ( 2 ) recent trends in the characteristics of servicemembers placed on the tdrl , ( 3 ) disability retirement outcomes for tdrl placements , ( 4 ) the adequacy of tdrl management , and ( 5 ) the adequacy of information provided to temporary retirees .