( app . i contains a summary evaluation of our analysis of the plan. ) transferring ssa's annual workload of appeals — about 122,000 claims in fiscal year 2003 — to hhs requires the development of many interrelated components . ssa also noted that it shared our concern that adequate planning needs to take place and agreed that detailed contingency planning is important . although ssa's comments focused on its continuing contribution to enhance hhs's understanding of the current medicare appeals process , it also emphasized that some elements of the plan are the sole responsibility of hhs . while we agree that hhs must ultimately assume full and complete responsibility for the appeals process , until the transition is complete , we believe that both agencies are accountable for ensuring that appeals are adjudicated promptly and competently , and for coordinating their efforts so that the transfer occurs on a smooth and timely basis . for example , deciding where aljs should be geographically located affects hiring and training plans and the need for office space . because the transfer date is approaching , many of these activities must be completed simultaneously so that hhs can ensure that service to appellants will not be disrupted . with the exception of the development of a case tracking system , the plan contains few milestones for completing tasks . although hhs indicated that much progress has been made in key areas , such as development of regulations and the assurance of alj independence , it provided no new information in support of these efforts . in addition , many other significant questions raised in our report , such as the geographic distribution of aljs , were not addressed in its comments . therefore , we continue to have significant concerns about the agencies' abilities to effectuate the transfer on a timely basis . both agencies also reported that they had identified a mechanism for hhs to continue to use ssa aljs to adjudicate medicare appeals after the statutory date of the transfer , if necessary . however , neither ssa nor hhs described this mechanism and we therefore were unable to evaluate it . consequently , we continue to believe that our evaluation of the evidence supports the report title . ssa's and hhs's comments are reprinted in appendixes ii and iii , respectively . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs , the commissioner of ssa , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 . an additional gao contact and other staff members who prepared this report are listed in appendix iv . based on our review of the plan and additional materials provided by the transfer team , we found that the plan to transfer the medicare appeals function from the social security administration to the department of health and human services is insufficient to ensure a smooth and timely transition .