we received 47 responses . this action would require legislation . for years , federal agencies have relied on beneficiaries to report their receipt of wc benefits . self - reporting has not been an entirely effective practice and ssa's experience demonstrates that program beneficiaries often do not report their wc benefits even when it is in their own interest to do so . moreover , federal agencies cannot provide proper stewardship over federal expenditures and assure that persons receive the benefits to which they are entitled in matters related to wc benefits without a reliable source of information to identify wc beneficiaries . ssa generally agreed that it needs to improve its administration of the wc offset provisions . table 1 summarizes the results of our comparison . with regard to our other recommendations , ssa raised several issues and concerns . given this potential interest , it might be possible to develop a voluntary wc beneficiary reporting process whereby wc benefit payers would periodically identify persons to whom they have paid either significant amounts of wc benefits or made payments for significant periods of time . in exchange , ssa could validate the name and ssns being used by the beneficiaries of participating wc insurers . although ssa does not validate identities for wc insurers , ssa provides a similar type of service to employers through its employee verification service ( evs ) . under evs , employers and third parties ( accountants , tax filing services , etc. ) are encouraged by ssa to send the names and ssns of their employees to ssa at any time throughout the year . ssa then matches the submitted name and ssn data to its records to identify whether the queried name and ssn match and the combination is a valid identifier . in response to the payment problems identified by the oig and oqa , ssa has begun a complete review of more than 61,000 cases involving di beneficiaries whose benefits are being offset for wc payments . after completing 60 percent of the benefit reviews , ssa has found payment errors in 52 percent of the cases examined . moreover , its review has shown that many beneficiaries fail to report changes in their wc benefits even when reporting would increase — often substantially — the amount of their di benefits . nearly 85 percent of the payment errors have been underpayments that occur when beneficiaries do not report the termination or reduction of their wc benefits . among the reviewed cases , ssa has found more than 200 beneficiaries who were underpaid by at least $30,000 each over the course of their eligibility . in addition to reconsidering its benefit payments in these cases , ssa has taken other actions to improve its administration of the wc offset , including sending mailers to remind beneficiaries to report changes in their wc benefits . the agency has also provided training on wc cases to its staff and revised its operating instructions . the agency is continuing a long - time effort to obtain on - line access to the databases of state wc agencies to improve its ability to identify wc beneficiaries .