iv. ) approximately 1 in 20 adults with smi are homeless ; they account for an estimated one - third of the approximately 600,000 homeless adults in the united states . at least half of homeless people with smi also have substance abuse disorders . mental illness in combination with substance abuse may predispose individuals to homelessness , as their conditions often lead to disruptive behavior , loss of social supports , financial problems , and an inability to maintain stable housing . the public mental hospital population declined . many people with smi returned to communities without adequate mental health services and some of these people became homeless . other major factors contributing to homelessness were unemployment , a decline in the supply of low - income housing , and alcohol and drug abuse . state mental health agencies ( smha ) have primary responsibility for administering the public mental health system , through their role as a purchaser , regulator , manager , and , at times , provider of mental health care . the public mental health system serves as a safety net for people who are poor or uninsured or whose private insurance benefits run out in the course of their serious mental illness . many people with smi are unemployed , and they are often poor and financially dependent on government support . smhas arrange for the delivery of services to more than 2 million people each year , most of whom suffer from a serious mental illness . services are delivered by state - operated or county - operated facilities , nonprofit organizations , and other private providers . the sources and amounts of public funds smhas administer vary from state to state but usually include state general revenues and federal funds . the federal funds that smhas administer generally include medicaid and medicare payments for services provided in state - owned or state - operated facilities and other medicaid payments when the state medicaid agency has authorized the smha to control all medicaid expenditures for mental health services . hcfa's medicaid and medicare programs pay for certain mental health services for eligible beneficiaries . states operate their own medicaid programs within broad federal requirements . medicaid pays for mandatory services , such as physician services , and optional benefits that states may choose to provide , such as rehabilitation and targeted case management . since medicaid is an entitlement program , states and the federal government are obligated to pay for all covered services that are provided to an eligible individual.each state program's federal and state funding share is determined through a statutory matching formula , with the federal share ranging from 50 to 80 percent . in the 1990s , state medicaid programs increasingly turned to capitated managed care plans to provide medical and behavioral health services as a way to control costs and improve services . twenty - two states have “carved out,” or separated , mental health services from physical health services in contracting with managed care plans , placing them under separate financing and administrative arrangements . some states create separate capitated arrangements and others use fee - for - service arrangements .