additionally , 10 u.s.c . these latter positions are not included in the service ceilings . also , certain gfo positions are exempt from the limitations , which allow the department to exceed statutory limits on the numbers of gfos . for example , gfos on terminal leave immediately prior to retirement are generally exempt from statutory limits . § 527 provides the president with authority to suspend the statutory limits on gfo numbers in time of war or national emergency . in the early days of the enlisted aide program , all commissioned officers were eligible to be assigned enlisted aides . in 1972 , there were 1,915 enlisted aides authorized . in 1974 , congress began to impose ceilings on the authorized number of enlisted aides , and in 1976 reduced the ceiling to its current level of 300 . following the congressionally imposed reduction in 1974 , dod eliminated the assignment of enlisted aides to officers below the rank of gfo . currently , enlisted aides are assigned to and support only authorized gfos , not spouses , other family members , or staff of the gfo . officers may also be detailed as officer aides to the personal staffs of gfos . enlisted aide programs in the military services differ somewhat in terms of eligibility , military occupational specialty , and training . however , enlisted aides in each of the military services must be volunteers . dod concurred , with comment , on our third recommendation , that it establish criteria for determining enlisted aide workload and include these criteria in relevant enlisted aide guidance . specifically , dod stated that the workload of an enlisted aide is unique to each position and area of responsibility , and that establishing a fixed set of workload criteria would significantly limit the flexibility of the department and “tremendously increase” the management investment associated with a discrete program comprising 300 or fewer personnel . as noted in our report , dod's enlisted aides instruction specifies military housing as the lone eligibility criterion for enlisted aide assignments and ties enlisted aide authorizations to the official duties of gfo positions , including representational duties . additionally , ousd p&r instructed the military services and the joint staff to cite , to the extent possible , the number of qualifying representational events and the size of military housing used for hosting qualifying representational events when developing their justifications for the june 2015 report . however , dod's instruction does not include criteria to make clear how factors such as the number of qualifying representational events and size of military housing translate into enlisted aide workload for the purpose of identifying enlisted aide requirements and informing authorization and assignment decisions . as a result , justifications for enlisted aide authorizations vary and are subjective , and it is unclear how duties and workload support enlisted aide assignments .