the omb circular no . a - 123 provides guidance to federal managers on improving the accountability and effectiveness of federal programs and operations by establishing , assessing , correcting , and reporting on internal control . appendix a of omb circular no . a - 123 provides a methodology to assess and report on agencies' internal controls over financial reporting . we also interviewed agency officials at the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ( ousd ( c ) ) fiar directorate's office , which developed the fiar guidance , and at the navy and air force to obtain explanations and clarifications as a result of our analysis of selected fips . to address the second objective , we selected fips for two assessable units ( navy civilian pay and air force military equipment ) that were scheduled to assert audit readiness in 2010 and were within wave 2 ( i.e. , statement of budgetary resources ) and wave 3 ( i.e. , existence and completeness of mission critical assets ) since these waves reflect dod's priority focus areas . population of transactions was not reconciled . the navy did not reconcile the population of transactions for civilian pay prior to conducting testing as required by the fiar guidance . specifically , the navy did not ensure that it selected samples from the complete population of payroll transactions recorded in the defense civilian pay system ( dcps ) because it did not reconcile all dcps data to the navy's general ledger systems . instead , it used a subset of the payroll transactions to conduct a reconciliation . the navy stated that the transactions excluded from the reconciliation were immaterial but the rationale and support for this conclusion was not documented in the fip at the time the navy concluded that civilian pay was audit - ready . in addition , the navy identified discrepancies during its efforts but did not clearly document what these discrepancies were or their resolution . for example , the navy documented in the fip that there were instances of missing data and high variances , but did not indicate the nature of these issues or how pervasive they were , the actions taken to resolve them , and / or whether the issues were resolved . in response to these concerns we raised , navy officials said that they subsequently performed a reconciliation using more recent payroll transactions that resulted in insignificant unreconciled discrepancies . the officials stated that they believed these results were sufficient to ensure that a complete population was identified and that they used this population to select a sample of transactions and are performing detailed testing . navy officials said that the results of this work will be included in the revised fip . in addition , the navy documented in the fip that it was unable to reconcile the payroll accounts in its general ledgers to the dod - wide general ledger that is used to generate the components' and department's financial statements .