that will be the first use of procurement funding for warrior . we believe that is a key point at which the army needs to demonstrate that the warrior program is knowledge - based and better aligned to meet program goals within available resources than it currently appears . we recommend that the army not approve long - lead items for warrior low - rate initial production until it can clearly demonstrate that the program is proceeding based on accumulated knowledge and not a predetermined schedule . in particular , we recommend that , prior to approving the warrior long - lead items for low - rate initial production , the secretary of the army require that critical warrior technologies are fully mature and demonstrated ; warrior design integration is complete and at least 90 percent of design drawings be completed and released to manufacturing ; and fully - integrated warrior developmental aircraft are fabricated and involved in development testing . dod provided us with written comments on a draft of this report . the comments are reprinted in appendix i. dod concurred with one part of our recommendation but not with the other two parts . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . dod concurred with the part of our recommendation that it should seek to have at least 90 percent of design drawings completed and released to manufacturing prior to procuring long - lead items for warrior's low - rate initial production . however , dod also said that the decision to procure long - lead items will not be based solely on the percentage of drawings completed , but also on the schedule impact of unreleased drawings . dod did not concur with the rest of our recommendation that , prior to approval of long - lead items for warrior's low - rate initial production , the secretary of the army needed to ensure ( a ) critical warrior technologies are fully mature and demonstrated and ( b ) fully - integrated warrior developmental aircraft are fabricated and involved in development testing . although dod agreed that two critical technologies are less mature than the others within the warrior system , it also stated that these technologies are at the correct levels to proceed with integration . the contract is a cost plus incentive fee contract with an award fee feature . it has a base value of about $194 million , with approximately another $15 million available to the contractor in the form of incentive fees , and about an additional $12 million available as award fees . the time line in figure 1 illustrates the sequence of past and planned events for the warrior program . the army plans for a full warrior system to entail 12 aircraft as well as 5 ground control stations , 5 ground data terminals , 1 satellite communication ground data terminal , 12 air data terminals / air data relays , 6 airborne satellite communication terminals , 2 tactical automatic take - off and landing systems , 2 portable ground control stations , 2 portable ground data terminals and associated ground support equipment .