a positive control environment is the foundation for the standards . management and employees should establish and maintain an environment throughout the organization that sets a positive and supportive attitude toward internal control and conscientious management . one factor is the integrity and ethical values maintained and demonstrated by management and staff . agency management plays a key role in providing leadership in this area , especially setting and maintaining the organization's ethical tone , providing guidance for proper behavior , removing temptations for unethical behavior , and providing discipline when appropriate . in addition to setting standards for internal control , gao participates in the setting of the federal government's accounting standards and is responsible for setting the generally accepted government auditing standards for auditors of federal programs and assistance . gao also assists congressional and executive branch decision makers by issuing guides and tools for effective public management . for example , in addition to setting standards for internal control , we have issued detailed guidance and management tools to assist agencies in maintaining or implementing effective internal control and , when needed , to help determine what , where , and how improvements can be made . we have also issued guidance for agencies to address the critical governmentwide high - risk challenge of computer security . this work draws on lessons from leading public and private organizations to show the congress and federal agencies the steps that can be taken to protect the integrity , confidentiality , and availability of the government's data and the systems it relies on . similarly , we have published guidance for the congress and managers on dealing with the other governmentwide high - risk issue — human capital . these guides on human capital are assisting managers in adopting a more strategic approach to the use of their organization's most important asset — its people . overall , gao has undertaken a major effort to identify ways agencies can effectively implement the statutory framework that the congress has put in place to create a more results - oriented and accountable federal government . gao has an investigations unit that focuses on investigating and exposing potential criminal misconduct and serious wrongdoing in programs that receive federal funds . the primary mission of this unit is to conduct investigations of alleged violations of federal criminal law and serious wrongdoing and to review law enforcement programs and operations , as requested by the congress and the comptroller general . through investigations , our special investigations team develops examples of misconduct and wrongdoing that illustrate program weaknesses , demonstrate potential for abuse , and provide supporting evidence for gao recommendations and congressional action . investigators often work directly with other gao teams on collaborative efforts that enhance the agency's overall ability to identify and report on wrongdoing . key issues in the investigations area are: fraudulent activity and regulatory noncompliance in federal unethical conduct by federal employees and government officials , as well fraud and misconduct in grant , loan , and entitlement programs ; adequacy of federal agencies' security systems , controls , and property as tested through proactive special operations ; and integrity of federal law enforcement and investigative programs .