we disagree . as we state in the report , incremental investment management practices are not only a best practice , but are also required by the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and specified in omb guidance and recently revised dod acquisition policy . therefore , dod's comments regarding incremental investment in sps are at odds with contemporary practices and operative federal requirements and guidance . additionally , the economic analysis that dod's comments refer to is not reliable for a number of reasons that are discussed in our report . specifically , this analysis treats sps as a single , monolithic system investment . experience has shown that such an all - or - nothing economic justification is too imprecise to use in making informed decisions on large investments that span many years . this kind of approach to justifying investment decisions has historically resulted in agencies investing huge sums of money in systems that do not provide commensurate benefits , and thus has been abandoned by successful organizations . further , the need to avoid this pitfall was a major impetus for the clinger - cohen act investment management reforms . dod's comments also promote continued spending on sps without sufficient awareness of progress against meaningful commitments , such as reliable data measuring and validating that return - on - investment projections are being met . in lieu of such measures , dod's comments emphasize standardization and fast deployment as core commitments . however , neither of these is an end in and of itself . unless sps provides dod with the capability to perform procurement and contracting functions better and / or cheaper , and does so to a degree that makes sps a more attractive investment relative to the department's other investment options , dod is not justified in investing further in sps . as our report demonstrates , and as discussed in comments 2 and 3 above , dod presently does not have the kind of reliable information it needs to know whether this investment is justified , and the information that is available raises serious questions about sps' acceptance by its user community and its business value . with regard to the timely fielding of sps , we note in our report that the program has already been delayed 3-1 / 2 years . in fact , delivery of version 4.1 of the software was 22 months overdue , and version 4.2 is already 5 months behind . while the impact of schedule delays and cost increases is a valid concern on any project , these factors are not the sole criteria . introducing the wrong system solution faster and cheaper is still introducing the wrong solution no matter how it is presented . it is thus critically important that investment decisions be based on an integrated understanding of cost , benefit , and risk .