we chose to present median values . financial data were available from snl financial for 440 of the 565 cpp institutions , and we accounted for the remaining 125 institutions using snl financial information for the holding company or its largest subsidiary . although this approach has limitations such as excluding other financial subsidiaries , we deemed it to be sufficient for the purpose of our work . all financial information reflects quarterly regulatory filings on december 31 , 2013 , unless otherwise noted . we downloaded all financial data from snl financial on march 4 , 2014 . finally , we leveraged our past reporting on the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) , as well as that of the special inspector general for tarp , as appropriate . we determined that the financial information used in this report , including cpp program data from treasury and financial data on institutions from snl financial , was sufficiently reliable to assess the condition and status of cpp and institutions that participated in the program . for example , we tested the office of financial stability's internal controls over financial reporting as they relate to our annual audit of the office's financial statements and found the information to be sufficiently reliable based on the results of our audits of fiscal years 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 financial statements for tarp . we have assessed the reliability of snl financial data — which are obtained from financial statements submitted to the banking regulators — as part of previous studies and found the data to be reliable for the purposes of our review . we verified that no changes had been made that would affect the data's reliability . we conducted this performance audit from december 2013 to april 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , karen tremba ( assistant director ) , emily chalmers , william chatlos , chris forys , matthew keeler , risto laboski , marc molino , and patricia moye made significant contributions to this report . treasury also emphasized its commitment to keeping the public informed of its progress in winding down cpp . we are sending copies of this report to the special inspector general for tarp , interested congressional committees and members , and treasury . the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact a. nicole clowers at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .