impact evaluation . this is a form of outcome evaluation that assesses the net effect of a program by comparing program outcomes with an estimate of what would have happened in the absence of the program . impact evaluation is used when external factors are known to influence the program's outcomes , in order to isolate the program's contribution to achievement of its objectives .  cost - benefit or cost - effectiveness analysis . is at least one evaluation specific to this implementing mechanism ongoing ?  has at least one evaluation covering , but broader than , this implementing mechanism been completed ? is at least one evaluation covering , but broader than , this implementing mechanism ongoing ? we also prompted the country or regional officials to provide additional information for each implementing mechanism , such as explanations for program activities that do not belong to the agency and identification of duplicate program activities . officials were instructed to either e - mail the completed surveys to gao or upload them to a website regularly used by ogac and country and regional teams for submitting and sharing planning and reporting documents . in some cases , we met with country or regional team officials via telephone , or corresponded via e - mail , to clarify the purpose of the survey , the questions themselves , and the evaluation document request as well as to correct anomalies and ask follow - up questions . one gao analyst also attended the may 2011 pepfar implementing agency annual meeting in johannesburg , south africa , to provide information about the survey and evaluation document request to pepfar country and regional team officials also attending the annual meeting . we received responses from all 31 pepfar countries and 3 regions with fiscal year 2010 operational plans . using a similar survey tool , we also conducted surveys of cdc and usaid headquarters officials regarding program activities managed by agency headquarters and listed in pepfar headquarters operational plans for 2008 through 2010 . to analyze country and regional teams' survey responses , we made the following assumptions regarding the survey responses: if officials did not provide a response to the question “is this one of your agency's fiscal year 2008-2010 country or regional operational plans program activities ? ” we included that implementing mechanism in the analysis . program activities with responses of “no” or “duplicate” were eliminated from the analysis . if officials did not respond to any of the four questions regarding ongoing or completed evaluations , we assumed that there were no ongoing or completed evaluations for that implementing mechanism . in addition , we reviewed narrative comments provided by country and regional team officials . we recognized that evaluations may not be appropriate for all implementing mechanisms ( such as those that provide funding for staffing costs ) . to the extent possible , we eliminated these implementing mechanisms from our analysis . based in part on our review of the narrative comments , we flagged and eliminated implementing mechanisms with evidence indicating that the implementing mechanism was either “to be determined” ( i.e.