internal evaluation . this evaluation process includes classroom observations and internal surveys . during classroom observations , evaluators observe classes to ensure that training is being delivered in the right sequence , among other things . evaluators use instructor performance checklists to capture information , such as how well the instructor introduces the course and presents course materials . an internal survey is conducted at the beginning of each course to determine the students' knowledge of course content prior to starting the course and again at the end of the course to determine if the objectives of the course have been met . questions on this survey focus on critical tasks for the job specialty that the course covers . students also have an opportunity to write in comments on the survey .  external evaluation . this process uses an external survey to determine if soldiers who attended a course can meet job performance requirements as a result of the training they received or if additional training is needed . the survey is sent to the soldier or the soldier's supervisor , usually no sooner than 6 months after the soldier completes the training course . external evaluations determine if the training the soldiers receive prepares them to meet the needs of the operational army . tradoc has taken a number of workforce management actions in order to execute its training mission . as discussed below , these actions include increasing student to instructor ratios , using contractors to augment military and army civilian instructors , and using doctrine and training developers as instructors . we found that there were mixed views about the impact of these actions on the quality of training from students and tradoc officials at various levels . on the one hand , in a 2010 memorandum , tradoc leadership raised concerns that the steps it had taken may be affecting tradoc's ability to carry out its core competencies , which include providing quality training . on the other hand , survey results from students indicated that they believed they received quality training . further , officials at tradoc headquarters and schools , including quality assurance personnel , as well as some students stated that they believe that quality training is typically being provided . tradoc has not established any metrics to measure the impact of its workforce management actions on training quality and without such metrics is unable to definitively determine what impact , if any , has occurred . at times , tradoc has accommodated increases in student workload by changing the student to instructor ratio for certain courses , increasing the number of students in the classroom without adding instructors . officials throughout tradoc expressed concerns that increasing student to instructor ratios from what is prescribed in course curricula would affect the quality of training because larger class sizes reduce the amount of one - on - one time that instructors can spend with students . for example , at the infantry school at fort benning , school officials stated that one of the mortar courses was designed to be taught with a student to instructor ratio of 8:1 but instead was taught with a ratio of 23:1 in order to meet the student workload .