ii ) . numerous academic studies empirically examined the effects of the regulatory reforms — namely nasd rule 2711 , nyse rule 472 , and the global settlement — on various aspects of recommendations and research issued by research analysts . we reviewed 10 of these studies.because the vast majority of the outstanding recommendations in mid - 2000 were buy recommendations ( in contrast to hold or sell ) , some market observers believed that sell - side equity analysts were issuing overly optimistic or positive recommendations to help their firms attract or retain investment banking business . ” financial management , vol . 36 , issue 4 ( 2007 ) . guan , yuyan , hai lu , and m.h . franco wong . “conflict - of - interest reforms and investment bank analysts' research biases.” journal of accounting , auditing & finance , ( 2011 ) : 1-28 . hovakimian , armen and ekkachai saenyasiri . “conflicts of interest and analyst behavior: evidence from recent changes in regulation.” financial analysts journal , vol . kadan , ohad , leonardo madureira , rong wang , and tzachi zach . “conflicts of interest and stock recommendations: the effects of the global settlement and related regulations.” the review of financial studies , vol . 22 , issue 10 ( 2009 ) : 4189-4217 . madureira , leonardo . conflicts of interest , regulations and stock recommendations , working paper , university of pennsylvania ( 2004 ) . analyzing the analysts after the global settlement , working paper , university of new mexico , ( 2005 ) . chen , chih - ying and peter f. chen . “nasd rule 2711 and changes in analysts' independence in making stock recommendations.” the accounting review , vol . clarke , jonathan e. , ajay khorana , ajay patel , and p. raghavendra rau . “independents' day ? analyst behavior surrounding the global settlement.” annals of finance , ( 2010 ) . cliff , michael t. , “do affiliated analysts mean what they say ? based on their review of broker - dealer examination reports dating to 2005 , sec staff told us that they identified a few examinations that found deficiencies related to the sro research analyst rules . according to the staff , these deficiencies included broker - dealers failing to disclose analyst conflicts in their research reports and failing to comply with requirements that restrict an analyst's public appearance . in addition to their findings from broker - dealer examinations , finra officials and sec staff said that the limited number of enforcement actions involving conflicts between equity research and investment banking suggests that the regulatory reforms have been effective . from 2005 through 2010 , finra took 10 enforcement actions against broker - dealers for violations of nasd rule 2711 that involved conflicts between research and investment banking . five of the enforcement actions were taken against global settlement firms and largely involved failures to adequately comply with disclosure requirements ( see fig . the other five enforcement actions were taken against nonglobal settlement firms: three for allowing investment banking personnel to influence analyst compensation and two for failing to comply with requirements to disclose the firm's compensation for investment banking services .