dpap was able to identify the number of reviews that it had conducted . we determined this information to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . the air force provided an approximate number of acquisitions that had been reviewed but could not identify the number of individual peer reviews conducted . the army did not provide any information on the specific number of reviews conducted . the navy provided information on the number of reviews it had conducted but could not specify how many had been conducted as of september 30 , 2009 . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . section 808 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( the act ) directs gao to report on the department of defense's ( dod ) implementation of its guidance and implementing instructions providing for periodic management reviews of contracts for services . in response to this mandate , we ( 1 ) assessed the extent to which dod's guidance addressed the act's requirements at the department level and how the guidance was implemented and ( 2 ) determined the status of actions taken by the military departments pursuant to dod's guidance . to do so , we reviewed dod's september 2008 and february 2009 guidance issued by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics' office of defense procurement and acquisition policy ( dpap ) . we compared the guidance and instructions to the requirements stipulated in section 808 of the act . the september 2008 guidance indicated that peer reviews were to be conducted for both supplies and services . as the act's requirements were specific to services acquisitions , we limited our analysis to services . we also obtained guidance and implementing instructions issued by the departments of the air force , army , and navy . we interviewed officials from dpap and the departments of the army , navy , and air force to gain further insight into how each organization developed its guidance and instructions . dod's september 2008 memorandum also indicated that defense agencies were required to develop their own guidance . while these were outside the scope of our review , dpap officials indicated that 13 of 17 defense agencies that dpap believed would be required to develop guidance had done so at the time of this review . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2009 through january 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .