do you have a cover letter ? do you need help preparing for an interview ? do you have the computer skills needed to complete online job applications ? despite past research identifying weaknesses in state profiling systems , dol has not systematically collected information on these systems , which limits its ability to oversee their performance . dol officials said that they communicate with states about their profiling practices and gather some profiling system information in the course of their periodic ui and resea reviews . however , dol technical staff do not review or maintain this profiling system information for oversight purposes , and dol does not have a systematic method of tracking state profiling practices across states . dol officials said that they view their primary role , related to profiling systems , as providing technical assistance ; however , by law , dol is also responsible for ensuring that states' profiling systems meet federal requirements . further , gao recommended in a 2007 report that dol take a more active role in ensuring profiling system accuracy , and federal internal control standards state that agencies should obtain timely and relevant data to conduct effective monitoring . without such data , dol's ability to effectively oversee state profiling practices is limited . in addition , dol provides technical assistance — which can range from answering specific questions to developing a new statistical profiling system on a state's behalf — to individual states only upon request , rather than identifying and providing assistance to states at higher risk of poor profiling system performance . this approach necessitates that states recognize when they need technical assistance and request it . however , states may not know that their profiling systems are performing poorly and may not request needed technical assistance as a result . for example , officials from four of our six selected states with statistical systems told us that they do not currently have a process to assess their systems' performance . as a result , these states may not be aware of potential issues they may need to address to improve their system performance . additionally , officials responsible for maintaining another selected state's profiling system had incorrectly identified the system type . as a result , officials may have difficulty identifying problems and seeking support . dol has an opportunity to use its new ui state self - assessment to systematically collect information that could inform its oversight of state profiling practices and technical assistance efforts . this questionnaire , which dol designed to help states self - identify and correct ui system weaknesses , covers 15 functional areas . self - assessment questions in one of these areas will collect some information on state profiling systems , such as system type and date of last update . however , as currently designed , the self - assessment will not solicit other information that could help dol identify states at risk of poor system performance . for example , it does not ask whether states have experienced challenges maintaining their systems ( for instance , due to staff turnover ) , or how states have assessed system performance .