figure 1 . dhs process for working with gao . in a memo that transmitted the above directive to senior managers in dhs components , the then - under secretary for management emphasized the importance of a positive working relationship between the two agencies . the memo stated that failure to meet or brief gao staffs in a timely manner , as well as being viewed as nonresponsive to gao document requests , could result in tense and acrimonious interactions . the under secretary also reminded senior officials that prompt and professional discharge of their responsibilities to gao requests could affect both dhs's funding and restrictions attached to that funding . in testimony before this committee and the house committee on appropriations , subcommittee on homeland security in february 2007 , we stated that dhs has not made its management or operational decisions transparent enough to allow congress to be sure that the department is effectively , efficiently , and economically using its billions of dollars of annual funding . we also noted that our work for congress to assess dhs's operations has been significantly hampered by long delays in obtaining access to program documents and officials . we emphasized that for congress , gao , and others to independently assess the department's efforts , dhs would need to become more transparent and minimize recurring delays in providing access to information on its programs and operations . at most federal agencies and in some cases within dhs , we obtain the information we need directly from program officials , often on the spot or very soon after making the request . for example , our work on the secure border initiative ( sbi ) has so far met with a very welcome degree of access to both dhs officials and documents . sbi is a comprehensive multiyear program established in november 2005 to secure u.s. borders and reduce illegal immigration . one element of sbi is sbinet , the program within the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) responsible for developing a comprehensive border protection system of tactical infrastructure , rapid response capability , and technology . the fiscal year 2007 department of homeland security appropriations act required that , before dhs could obligate $950 million of the $1.2 billion appropriated for sbinet , it had to prepare a plan for expending these funds , have it reviewed by gao , and then submit it to congress for approval . the plan was to be submitted within 60 days of the act's passage . cbp officials provided us office space at cbp headquarters , gave us access to all levels of sbinet management , and promptly provided us with all the documentation we requested , much of which was still in draft form and predecisional . dhs met the 60-day requirement when it submitted its plan to the appropriations committees on december 4 , 2006 . we met our responsibilities by being able to review the plan as it developed over the 60-day period , and to provide the results of our review to the house and senate appropriations committees on december 7 and 13 , 2006 , respectively .