certification requirements . the code requires that a defense business system program be reviewed and certified at least annually , on the basis of its compliance with the business enterprise architecture and appropriate business process reengineering . in addition , the code requires that the business system program be reviewed and certified on the basis of having valid , achievable requirements and a viable plan for implementing the requirements ; having an acquisition strategy designed to eliminate or reduce the need to tailor commercial off - the - shelf systems ; and being in compliance with the department's auditability requirements . dod instruction 5000.75: business system requirements and acquisitions assigns roles and responsibilities for managing defense business system investments . table 1 identifies the key entities and their responsibilities for managing defense business system investments . gao designated the department's business systems modernization efforts as high risk in 1995 and has continued to do so in the years since . in addition , since 2005 , we have issued 12 reports in which we assessed dod's actions to respond to the business system investment management requirements contained in u.s. code title 10 , section 2222 . these 12 reports , which are listed in appendix i , collectively contained 29 recommendations to help strengthen the department's management of its business systems . for example , in 2014 , we reported that dod had taken steps to comply with key provisions in the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 ; however , the department continued to face challenges in fully complying with the provisions and modernizing its business systems environment . as a result , we recommended that the department improve its business system certification and approval process . dod agreed with , and implemented this recommendation . in 2015 , we reported that dod had implemented 5 of the 16 recommendations made by gao since june 2011 to address each of the overarching provisions for improving business systems management described in the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 . the department had partially implemented the other 11 recommendations . we also reported that dod's business enterprise architecture and process reengineering efforts were not fully achieving the intended outcomes described in statute . thus , we made a recommendation aimed at ensuring that the department better achieve business process reengineering and enterprise architecture outcomes and benefits . dod agreed with this recommendation and took steps toward implementing it . in 2018 , we reported that dod had made progress in complying with most legislative provisions for managing its defense business systems , but that additional actions were needed . for example , the ndaa for fiscal year 2016 required dod and the military departments to issue guidance to address five requirements for reviewing and certifying the department's business systems . we reported that , while dod had issued guidance addressing all of the requirements , the military departments had shown mixed progress . accordingly , we recommended that the military departments issue guidance to address certifiying their business systems on the basis of the five requirements . while dod partially agreed with these recommendations , the military departments implemented them . as of june 2019 , the department had implemented 15 of the 29 recommendations contained in the 12 reports .