gao - 10-4 . washington , d.c.: october 15 , 2009 . dhs concurred with our recommendation . since that time , dhs has continued to make progress in completing some identified activities but has yet to do so for others . because the threats to federal information systems and critical infrastructure have persisted and grown , efforts have recently been undertaken by the executive branch to review the nation's cybersecurity strategy . as we previously stated , in january 2008 the comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative was established with its primary aim to improve federal agencies' efforts to protect against intrusion attempts and anticipate future threats . in february 2009 , president obama directed the national security council and homeland security council to conduct a comprehensive review to assess the united states' cybersecurity - related policies and structures . the resulting report , “cyberspace policy review: assuring a trusted and resilient information and communications infrastructure,” recommended , among other things , appointing an official in the white house to coordinate the nation's cybersecurity policies and activities , creating a new national cybersecurity strategy , and developing a framework for cyber research and development . we recently initiated a review to assess the progress made by the executive branch in implementing the policy's recommendations . we also testified in march 2009 on needed improvements to the nation's cybersecurity strategy . in preparation for that testimony , we obtained the views of experts ( by means of panel discussions ) on critical aspects of the strategy , including areas for improvement . the experts , who included former federal officials , academics , and private sector executives , highlighted 12 key improvements that are , in their view , essential to improving the strategy and our national cybersecurity posture . the key strategy improvements identified by cybersecurity experts are listed in table 3 . these recommended improvements to the national strategy are in large part consistent with our previous reports and extensive research and experience in this area . until they are addressed , our nation's most critical federal and private sector cyber infrastructure remain at unnecessary risk to attack from our adversaries . in summary , the threats to federal information systems are evolving and growing , and federal systems are not sufficiently protected to consistently thwart the threats . unintended incidents and attacks from individuals and groups with malicious intent , such as criminals , terrorists , and adversarial foreign nations , have the potential to cause significant damage to the ability of agencies to effectively perform their missions , deliver services to constituents , and account for their resources . to help in meeting these threats , opportunities exist to improve information security throughout the federal government . the white house , omb , and certain federal agencies have initiated efforts that are intended to strengthen the protection of federal information and information systems .