to be determined . mox services' design control procedures did not require that the method of design verification , or the results , be adequately documented when design verifications were performed . to be determined . mox services failed to provide a technical justification for an engineering change request . does your utility own any reactors that are compatible with areva fuel designs ? taking into account your current reactor fleet , what is your utility's current level of interest in participating in the mox fuel program ? ( choose one ) 4 . what kinds of reactors owned by your utility do you think would be the most likely candidates for mox fuel if your utility decided to participate in the mox fuel program ? please choose only one answer . how important is this factor in your assessment of your utility's current level of interest in participating in the mox fuel program ? if doe would sell mox fuel to your utility at a 15% discounted price relative to the market price for uranium fuel , what do you think your utility's level of interest in participating in the mox program would be ? september 11 , 2009 mox services failed to promptly identify , evaluate , correct , and document conditions adverse to quality , including incorrect placement of a floor and failure to document a rebar deficiency in the corrective action program . mox services conducted a root cause analysis for the conditions that led to each of the findings in nrc's september 11 , 2009 , inspection report and instituted actions , including improving communications between engineering , construction , and quality control personnel ; adopting checklists for changes ; and adding additional training for engineering personnel . nrc stated that the actions appeared adequate , and that it will verify implementation during later inspections . september 11 , 2009 mox services failed to perform quality - affecting activities in accordance with approved drawings and specifications . mox services conducted a root cause analysis for the conditions that led to each of the findings in nrc's september 11 , 2009 , inspection report and instituted actions , including improving communications between engineering , construction , and quality control personnel ; adopting checklists for changes ; and adding additional training for engineering personnel . nrc stated that the actions appeared adequate , and that it will verify implementation during later inspections . september 11 , 2009 mox services failed to provide and adequate documented justification for changes to final designs . mox services conducted a root cause analysis for the conditions that led to each of the findings in nrc's september 11 , 2009 , inspection report and instituted actions , including improving communications between engineering , construction , and quality control personnel ; adopting checklists for changes ; and adding additional training for engineering personnel . nrc stated that the actions appeared adequate , and that it will verify implementation during later inspections . mox services failed to correctly translate applicable requirements into design documents . mox services initiated corrective actions to address these issues .