guarantees . some stakeholders we interviewed mentioned loan guarantees as an option to improve access to agricultural credit on tribal lands . for instance , fca officials and farm credit council representatives told us they had spoken with leadership of the native american agriculture fund ( created as part of the keepseagle settlement ) regarding the potential establishment of a loan guarantee fund , such as a first - loss fund , which would step in to purchase a loan in default ( thus substantially reducing credit risk to the lender ) . in addition , three of the 11 fcs associations we queried identified guarantees as a possible way to increase fcs lending to indian tribes and their members on tribal lands . fcs associations still face challenges in using guarantees . with regard to the first - loss loan guarantee fund , fcs associations still must adhere to the fcs statutory requirement for a first - position lien on interests in real estate for long - term loans . according to an fca official , although the first - loss loan guarantee fund could mitigate repayment risk , a statutory change or clarification would be necessary for fcs associations to accept guarantees in lieu of real estate for long - term loans . and as noted earlier , fcs loans are statutorily ineligible for bia's loan guarantee program . two fcs associations noted that removal of this restriction could increase fcs lending on tribal lands . finally , fca officials stated that challenges fcs associations face in making loans involving tribal lands also can extend to farm service agency guarantees on those loans . in other words , to obtain such guarantees , fcs associations must navigate issues around land tenure , legal jurisdiction , and tribal laws . tribal options . in addition , stakeholders discussed the following tribal actions that could increase credit access for tribes and their members: representatives of two fcs associations noted that waivers of sovereign immunity ( limited to specific contracts ) by tribes may increase lending involving tribal lands , as it helps to enable lenders to enforce the terms of loans made to tribes . according to the office of the comptroller of the currency , some banks have negotiated limited waivers of sovereign immunity ( restricted to a specific transaction ) . as noted earlier , tribes may decide that waiving sovereign immunity is not in their best interest . in addition to the limited waivers of sovereign immunity , representatives of three fcs institutions stated that increased adoption of uniform commercial laws ( such as the uniform commercial code ) by tribes could increase lending involving tribal lands . one tribal economic development expert told us that tribes that adopted their own leasing regulations under the hearth act have seen substantially increased economic development . as noted earlier , the hearth act provides tribes with greater flexibility to enter into leases for agriculture or other purposes . once a tribe's leasing regulations have been approved by the secretary of the interior , tribes may negotiate and enter into agricultural leases with 25-year terms without further approval by the secretary .