( see app . i for additional information about our methodology. ) to describe the extent to which types of health care fraud schemes could have been affected by the use of smart card technology , we reviewed literature on the benefits , uses , technical capabilities , and potential effects of smart cards , including our march 2015 report on electronically readable cards , and analyzed data on health care fraud schemes from our review of court cases resolved in 2010 . our analysis of the potential effect of smart cards on the cases we reviewed is based on the assumption that the smart cards would have the capability to correctly identify both the beneficiary and provider at the point of care ( eg , physician office or hospital ) . we did not assume any other changes in information technology that some smart card advocates have suggested could accompany the adoption of smart cards in some circumstances . for this analysis , we first identified schemes that could be affected by the smart cards based on the nature of the scheme and the beneficiary and provider roles . we chose to use charging documents ( when available ) as these documents generally tend to provide a more complete description of all of the alleged fraud schemes compared to schemes that were adjudicated . we then determined the number and percentage of cases with these particular schemes . these cases represent a fraction of the potential fraud cases that could have occurred or that were identified by doj and hhs oig for possible investigation and prosecution . as a result , our findings are not generalizable to all fraud cases . fourth , our analysis of the potential effects of smart cards assumed a particular set of smart card characteristics — specifically , that the identity of both providers and beneficiaries would be verified — and our findings could be different if we had made different assumptions about the capabilities or implementation of smart cards . we believe our assumptions are reasonable given the challenges associated with implementing smart card technology . we conducted this performance audit from december 2014 to january 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . there are multiple statutes that concern health care fraud , including the following: the false claims act is often used by the federal government in health care fraud cases and prohibits certain actions , including the knowing presentation of a false claim for payment by the federal government . civil monetary penalty provisions of the social security act apply to certain activities , such as knowingly presenting a claim for medical services that is known to be false and fraudulent . in addition , the social security act also provides for criminal penalties for knowing and willful false statements in applications for payment .