mozambique . mcc determined that it had not updated formula links in its analytic spreadsheets for mozambique . correcting this error led mcc to revise the projected income increase upward by $4 million for 2015 and downward by $13 million for 2025 . in addition , mcc corrected both the formula and the data used to calculate the effect of this income increase on poverty in mozambique , presenting two alternative approaches for estimating poverty elasticity . in making these changes , mcc lowered the projected decline in the poverty rate as well as the number of persons likely to be lifted out of poverty because of the compact . for example , mcc originally projected a 7 percent reduction in mozambique's poverty rate in 2015 ; using the alternative approaches for estimating poverty elasticity , mcc projected a poverty rate reduction of either 0.6 percent or 2 percent in 2015 . likewise , mcc originally projected that 270,000 people would be lifted out of poverty in mozambique in 2015 ; using the alternative approaches , mcc projected that either 27,000 persons or 56,000 persons would be lifted out of poverty in 2015 . figure 7 summarizes mcc's original impact projections for mozambique and its revisions after correcting errors and presenting alternative approaches for estimating poverty elasticity . according to mcc officials , the revisions to its initial calculations of compact impact on income and poverty for armenia , el salvador , and mozambique would not have changed mcc's decision to recommend each compact to the mcc board . the officials emphasized that mcc's economic impact projections are one of many aspects of the due diligence process that inform its compact investment decisions . a senior official stated that mcc's compact - level analysis is separate from the decision about whether to invest in specific projects ; the two levels of analysis are connected but play different roles in mcc's decision making . mcc officials also told us they used conservative data and assumptions to project compacts' impact on income , growth , and poverty . however , future public statements would reflect mcc's corrections and revised analyses . in addition , mcc officials said that although lead economists independently review the economic projections performed by others on the transaction team for each country , calculations and assumptions performed by the lead economists for the compacts we reviewed did not undergo a final check for accuracy and validity . the officials stated that such a review might have caught the errors that mcc later identified and corrected . they further stated that , with fewer compacts undergoing due diligence in the future , mcc will have the staff capacity to ensure that such reviews are performed . mcc officials told us they have begun to implement this peer review for compacts currently under development . however , mcc has not documented its procedures for conducting these reviews , so it is unclear what criteria and level of detail the peer review includes . mcc used different methods to project the four compacts' impact on income and poverty , limiting the estimates' comparability and replicability . although the method chosen can affect the results , mcc has not provided preferred methods , or guidelines for selecting a method , for these calculations .