iii. ) ii ) . we also interviewed officials from acf , hrsa , opa , cdc , the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation ( aspe ) , and 10 states that received the largest share of federal funding for abstinence - only education through the state program in fiscal year 2005 . we also interviewed individuals from the national campaign to prevent teen pregnancy , the brookings institution , etr associates , the heritage foundation , and advocates for youth , and researchers from case western reserve university and columbia university to obtain general information regarding the state of the research on abstinence - until - marriage education . we focused our review on efforts to assess the scientific accuracy of materials and the effectiveness of the programs during fiscal year 2006 , and also reviewed the administration of the programs back to fiscal year 2001 . we also attended conferences organized by acf and opa to learn about training that is provided to grantees on scientific accuracy and program evaluations . to describe how hhs selected a contractor for the abstinence - until - marriage technical assistance contract that was awarded in september 2002 , we reviewed the request for proposals and other related contract documents . we also interviewed officials at hrsa , acf , and the national abstinence clearinghouse about the technical assistance contract . we performed our work from october 2005 through september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . recent statistics from cdc show that many high school students engage in sexual behavior that places them at risk for unintended pregnancy and stds . in 2005 , 46.8 percent of high school students reported that they have ever had sexual intercourse , with 14.3 percent of students reporting that they had had sexual intercourse with four or more persons . the likelihood of ever having sexual intercourse varied by grade , with the highest rate among 12th grade students ( 63.1 percent ) and the lowest rate among 9th grade students ( 34.3 percent ) . for example , while education materials may include information on failure rates associated with contraceptives or std infections , this information may be outdated or otherwise inaccurate or incomplete . cdc also has reported that the prevalence of certain stds — including the rate of chlamydia infection , the most frequently reported std in the united states — peaks in adolescence and young adulthood . according to cdc , in 2004 the chlamydia rates among adolescents 15 to 19 years old ( 1,579 cases per 100,000 adolescents ) and young adults 20 to 24 years old ( 1,660 cases per 100,000 ) were each more than twice the rates among all other age groups . hhs's current strategic plan includes the objectives to reduce the incidence of stds and unintended pregnancies and to promote family formation and healthy marriages . these two objectives support hhs's goals to reduce the major threats to the health and well - being of americans and to improve the stability and healthy development of american children and youth , respectively . as hhs noted in its written comments , we did not define the term scientific accuracy .