the agency agreed with these recommendations . as of october 2015 , the agency implemented 4 of these recommendations and is working on the remaining 8 recommendations . for example , noaa improved its geostationary satellite contingency plan and improved its risk management processes . also , while noaa has made progress by improving selected practices , it has not yet fully implemented our recommendation to address multiple weaknesses in its scheduling practices . for example , the agency included subcontractor activities in its core ground schedule , but has not yet provided details showing a realistic allocation of resources . we have ongoing efforts to assess the agency's progress in addressing the open recommendations . in addition to the geostationary satellite constellation , for over 40 years , the united states has operated two separate operational polar - orbiting meteorological satellite systems: the polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite series , which is managed by noaa , and the defense meteorological satellite program ( dmsp ) , which is managed by the air force . currently , there is one operational polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite ( called the suomi national polar - orbiting partnership , or s - npp ) and two operational dmsp satellites that are positioned so that they cross the equator in the early morning , midmorning , and early afternoon . in addition , the government relies on data from a european satellite , called the meteorological operational satellite , or metop . figure 2 illustrates the current operational polar satellite constellation . a may 1994 presidential decision directive required noaa and the department of defense ( dod ) to converge the two satellite programs into a single satellite program — the national polar - orbiting operational environment satellite system ( npoess ) — capable of satisfying both civilian and military requirements . however , in the years after the program was initiated , npoess encountered significant technical challenges in sensor development , program cost growth , and schedule delays . faced with costs that were expected to reach about $15 billion and launch schedules that were delayed by over 5 years , in february 2010 , the director of the office of science and technology policy announced that noaa and dod would no longer jointly procure npoess ; instead , each agency would plan and acquire its own satellite system . specifically , noaa would be responsible for the afternoon orbit , and dod would be responsible for the early morning orbit . when this decision was announced , noaa and nasa began planning for a new satellite program in the afternoon orbit — called jpss . in 2010 , noaa established a program office to guide the development and launch of the s - npp satellite as well as the two planned jpss satellites , known as jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 . noaa's current life cycle cost baseline for the jpss program is $11.3 billion through fiscal year 2025 . the current anticipated launch dates for jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 are march 2017 and december 2021 , respectively .