faa - 2006-25714 . achieve safe integration of civil uas into the national airspace . in process faa modernization and reform act of 2012 requirement status of action publish in the federal register a final rule to implement the recommendations of the comprehensive plan . develop and implement operational and certification requirements for public uas in national airspace . for further information on this testimony , please contact gerald l. dillingham , ph.d. , at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include brandon haller , assistant director ; melissa bodeau , daniel hoy , eric hudson , and bonnie pignatiello leer . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the research and development supporting integration . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . some of this research is being conducted by dod and nasa . until this research matures most uas operations will remain within visual line of sight of the uas operator . foreign countries are experiencing an increase in uas use , and some have begun to allow commercial entities to fly uass under limited circumstances . according to industry stakeholders , easier access to these countries airspace has drawn the attention of some u.s. companies that wish to test their uass without needing to adhere to faa's administrative requirements for flying uass at one of the domestically located test sites , or obtaining an faa coa . as we most recently reported in february 2014 , the 2012 act contained provisions designed to accelerate the integration of uas into the nas . these provisions outlined 17 date specific requirements and set deadlines for faa to achieve safe uas integration by september 2015 ( see app . while faa has completed several of these requirements , some key ones , including the publication of the final small uas rule , remain incomplete . as of december 2014 , faa had completed nine of the requirements , was in the process of addressing four , and had not yet made progress on four others . some stakeholders told us in interviews that faa's accomplishments to date are significant and were needed , but these stakeholders noted that the most important provisions of the 2012 act have been significantly delayed or are unlikely to be achieved by the mandated dates . both the faa and uas industry stakeholders have emphasized the importance of finalizing uas regulations as unauthorized uas operations in the national airspace continue to increase and present a safety risk to commercial and general aviation activities . before publication of a final rule governing small uas , faa must first issue a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) . as we previously reported , the small uas rule is expected to establish operating and performance standards for a uas weighing less than 55 pounds , operating under 400 feet , and within line of sight .