this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or others members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact andrew sherrill ( 202-512-7215 or sherrilla@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include laura heald ( assistant director ) , chris morehouse , jessica botsford , jean mcsween , and david chrisinger . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . another factor that facilitated collaboration was the use of leveraged resources . all of the boards and their partners we spoke with launched or sustained their initiatives by leveraging resources in addition to or in lieu of wia funds . in some cases , partners were able to use initial support , such as discretionary grants , to attract additional resources . for example , in golden , colorado , the board leveraged a labor discretionary grant of slightly more than $285,000 to generate an additional $441,000 from other partners . in addition to public funds , in all cases that we reviewed , employers demonstrated their support by contributing cash or in - kind contributions . in all cases , boards and their partners provided employer - responsive services to actively involve employers and keep them engaged in the collaborative process . some boards and their partners employed staff with industry - specific knowledge to better understand and communicate with employers . in other initiatives , boards and partners gained employers' confidence in the collaboration by tailoring services such as jobseeker assessment and screening services to address specific employers' needs . for example , a sector - based center in chicago , illinois , worked closely with employers to review and validate employers' own assessment tools , or develop new ones , and administer them on behalf of the employers , which saved employers time in the hiring process . boards and their partners also strengthened collaborative ties with employers by making training services more relevant and useful to them . in some cases , employers provided direct input into training curricula . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in summary , workforce board officials and their partners in the 14 initiatives cited a range of factors that facilitated building innovative collaborations . almost all of the collaborations grew out of efforts to address urgent workforce needs of multiple employers in a specific sector , rather than focusing on individual employers . the partners in these initiatives made extra effort to engage employers so they could tailor services such as jobseeker assessment , screening , and training to address specific employer needs .