law no . 109-188 , as amended ) with specific eligibility requirements that must be verified by the state workforce agencies before a certification can be issued to an employer or his representatives . participating employers and their representatives must file their certification requests using internal revenue service form 8850 and eta form 9061 or 9062 within 28 days after the employment - start day of the new hires . this timeliness requirement cannot be waived and must be met before a state can issue a certification for eligible target group members . the workforce recruitment program is a recruitment and referral program that connects federal and private sector employers nationwide with highly motivated postsecondary students and recent graduates with disabilities who are eager to prove their abilities in the workplace through summer or permanent jobs . the workforce recruitment program for college students with disabilities serves individuals who have disabilities , are enrolled at an accredited institution of higher learning on a substantially full - time basis ( unless the severity of the disability precludes the student from taking a substantially full - time load ) to seek a degree or are enrolled at such an institution as a degree - seeking student taking less than a substantially full - time load in the enrollment period immediately prior to graduation or have graduated with a degree from such an institution within the past year , and are u.s. citizens . our objectives were to examine: ( 1 ) to what extent do federal programs that support employment for people with disabilities provide similar services to similar populations and ( 2 ) to what extent has the effectiveness of programs that support employment for people with disabilities been measured ? the interim results for this report were included in our february 2012 report on duplication and overlap in government programs . we determined that programs included in the scope of our work should meet two sets of criteria . specifically , they should: ( 1 ) be targeted to people with disabilities or their employers and ( 2 ) have provided specific employment and training services in fiscal year 2010 . see figure 7 for a detailed description of both sets of criteria . the vision of tses is that all veterans challenged with physical or mental illness can obtain meaningful competitive employment in the community , working in jobs of their choice , while receiving necessary and appropriate support services . the goal of tses is to provide a continuum of therapeutic and skill development services for veterans who have difficulty obtaining or maintaining stable employment patterns due to mental illnesses or physical impairments co - occurring with mental illnesses . the objectives of tses are to provide an opportunity for work hardening and skill development services to eligible veterans regardless of diagnosis , disability , or treatment goals ; collaborate with veterans and their primary treatment team to assure each veteran has the support necessary to achieve his or her vocational goals ; ensure access to all components in the continuum of tses services as the veteran's needs change over the course of treatment , rehabilitation , and recovery .