( recommendation 3 ) . this process can be accomplished through training and meetings . specifically , the coso framework states that training should enable individuals to develop competencies appropriate for assigned roles and responsibilities , among other things , and that active forms of communication such as face - to - face meetings are often more effective than passive forms such as broadcast e - mails and intranet postings . to communicate how its procedures should be correctly implemented , usps has developed both initial and on - going training for employees . usps officials stated that new employees are formally trained in scanning procedures when they start their employment . for example , carriers are trained how to use usps's electronic scanning devices , when to scan competitive items , the correct codes to use for different delivery situations ( i.e. , signature required , vacation holds , how to code where a package was left at a delivery address ) . any new procedures can be introduced through presentations given by managers during meetings , as described below . required regular meetings may be tracked by usps management to ensure they are completed . some district officials we spoke with stated that they certify that their employees have received required training and send that certification to area and usps headquarters officials . additional training also helps usps reinforce correct scanning procedures . when scanning procedures are not being followed or scanning goals are not met at a post office , usps officials stated that reminders of the correct procedures designed to reinforce usps's scanning procedures are presented to employees through presentations , posters , job aids , and additional documents such as carriers' handbooks . for example , the representative of the major mailer we spoke with that had 8 to 10 percent of competitive products not scanned to the final delivery address stated that training was needed for both new and experienced carriers to reinforce that they should scan items at the delivery address . to further ensure the accurate scanning of competitive products , usps reported that it holds internal and external meetings . specifically , these meetings are designed to: reinforce procedures: post office managers can use stand - up talks — weekly meetings between management and employees at the post office — to discuss scanning issues with employees and opportunities to address those issues . for example , the postmaster at one post office we visited stated that this post office reinforces the standard work procedures designed to improve the scanning performance of employees during these meetings . carriers and clerks can ask questions and learn why they are asked to do something or how to do a specific task , allowing for additional training and reinforcement of procedures . for example , we reviewed a handout developed by usps headquarters to provide managers with talking points for service talks . this handout provided information on carriers delivering and scanning accurately and instructions on scanning at point of delivery on rural routes . introduce new procedures: usps officials told us that post office managers use stand - up talks to introduce new procedures and processes with carriers and clerks .