sba has not yet issued an updated drp . while sba has taken some steps toward implementing the act , the agency still needs to take additional steps to completely address 8 provisions . according to sba officials , the agency has not yet completely addressed some provisions that require new regulations because to do so , the agency must make extensive changes to current programs or implement new programs – – such as the immediate and expedited disaster assistance programs – – to satisfy requirements of the act . these programs , which require participation of private lenders , would be designed to provide businesses with access to short - term loans while they are waiting for long - term assistance . moreover , as required by the act , sba has not issued an update of its comprehensive drp that reflects recent changes resulting from the act's requirements , as well as sba's own reform efforts . delays in updates to the drp limit the agency's ability to adequately prepare for and respond to disasters . also , sba has not fully addressed the requirement for providing region - specific marketing and outreach and ensuring the information is made available to sbdcs and other local resources . we consistently heard from regional entities , such as sbdcs and emergency management groups , about the need for more up - front information on sba's disaster loan program and their expected roles and responsibilities in disaster response efforts . by taking such actions , sba could leverage the efforts and capacity of sbdcs , as well as state and local emergency management agencies , and ensure that it and they will be better prepared for future events , especially in disaster - prone areas . furthermore , the act established multiple new reporting requirements and while sba has addressed some of these , the agency has failed to comply with the act and issue a first annual report on disaster assistance – – which was due in november 2008 . specifically , the act requires that sba report annually on the total number of sba disaster staff , major changes to the disaster loan program ( such as changes to technology or staff responsibilities ) , a description of the number and dollar amount of disaster loans made during the year , and sba's plans for preparing and responding to possible future disasters . failure to produce annual reports on schedule can lead to a lack of transparency on the agency's progress in reforming the program . mximm disaster lomont increased from $1.5 to $2 million . my statement today summarizes our report released at this hearing . this report focuses on ( 1 ) the extent to which sba addressed the requirements of the act , and ( 2 ) how sba's response , following the major disasters of 2008 , aligned with key components of its june 2007 drp .