borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . border patrol: goals and measures not yet in place to inform border security status and resource needs . gao - 13-330t . washington , d.c.: february 26 , 2013 . border patrol: key elements of new strategic plan not yet in place to inform border security status and resource needs . gao - 13-25 . washington , d.c.: december 10 , 2012 . dhs concurred with this recommendation . in april 2013 , cbp reported to us that it is working to complete a training needs assessment , but has faced challenges in completing such an assessment because of personnel and budget issues , including retirements , attrition , loss of contract support , sequestration , and continuing resolutions . cbp plans to develop a final report on a training needs assessment by august 2013 outlining findings , conclusions , and recommendations from its analysis . illegal cross - border activity remains a significant threat to federal lands protected by doi and usda law enforcement personnel on the southwest and northern borders and can cause damage to natural , historic , and cultural resources , as well as put agency personnel and the visiting public at risk . we reported in november 2010 that information sharing and communication among dhs , doi , and usda law enforcement officials had increased in recent years . for example , interagency forums were used to exchange information about border issues , and interagency liaisons facilitated exchange of operational statistics . federal agencies also established interagency agreements to strengthen coordination of border security efforts . however , we reported in november 2010 that gaps remained in implementing interagency agreements to ensure law enforcement officials had access to daily threat information to better ensure officer safety and an efficient law enforcement response to illegal activity . for example , border patrol officials in the tucson sector did not consult with federal land management agencies before discontinuing dissemination of daily situation reports that federal land law enforcement officials relied on for a common awareness of the types and locations of illegal activities observed on federal borderlands . further , in border patrol's spokane sector , on the northern border , coordination of intelligence information was particularly important because of sparse law enforcement presence and technical challenges that reduced border patrol's ability to fully assess cross - border threats , such as air smuggling of high - potency marijuana . we recommended that dhs , doi , and usda provide oversight and accountability as needed to further implement interagency agreements for coordinating information and integrating operations . these agencies agreed with our recommendations , and in january 2011 , cbp issued a memorandum to all border patrol division chiefs and chief patrol agents emphasizing the importance of usda and doi partnerships to address border security threats on federal lands . while this is a positive step , to fully satisfy the intent of our recommendation , dhs would need to take further action to monitor and uphold implementation of the existing interagency agreements to enhance border security on federal lands .