we also interviewed state officials . to understand the specialty employment ( h - 1b ) and change - of - status processes , we met with officials from the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) . they described the process and procedures for obtaining an h - 1b petition and for changing immigration status while in the united states . to determine the number and nature of deemed export license applications approved by commerce , we obtained and analyzed information included in commerce's licensing database for fiscal year 2001 . the data were extracted based on the date of final action on each license . we analyzed the data to determine the number of applications that commerce approved , rejected , or returned without action . we also determined which countries and technologies were included in the approved applications . all of our analyses were dependent on the reliability of commerce's licensing database . we did not attempt to independently verify the accuracy of the database or the data that it contains . to review commerce's efforts to detect unlicensed deemed exports , we relied on ins data on h - 1b applications granted in fiscal year 2001 . we developed this data by asking ins to determine the number of changes - of - status to h - 1b that involved ( 1 ) occupational codes related to science and technology and ( 2 ) countries of concern . we did not independently confirm the accuracy of ins data . although we recognize that foreign nationals with immigration classifications other than h - 1b may be subject to the deemed export licensing requirements , we did not attempt to incorporate other classifications into our analysis . we also identified and interviewed 15 firms that employed foreign nationals but did not have a deemed export license . to better understand the commerce program for detecting unlicensed deemed exports , we reviewed commerce program guidance . we also interviewed commerce officials associated with the review effort . to evaluate commerce's efforts to ensure compliance with approved licenses , we obtained copies of the standard conditions from both commerce and the department of defense ( dod ) and reviewed license conditions as recorded in commerce's licensing database . we also interviewed officials of 11 firms that have received deemed export licenses and met with commerce licensing and enforcement officials . to obtain detailed information on enforcement activities , we interviewed special agents of all eight commerce enforcement field offices . to better understand the rationale for the conditions , we spoke with officials at dod and the department of state , including analysts at the defense intelligence agency and policy officials from the defense technology security agency . we conducted our review from november 2001 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following are gao's comments on the department of commerce's letter dated august 19 , 2002 . we have modified our report to reflect commerce's comment . our draft report's statement that a deemed export license typically covers one to five individuals was based on an estimate provided to us by the head of commerce's deemed export licensing unit .