it does not , however , have to be so . we added management of interagency contracting — the use of one agency's contract by another agency or the provision of contracting assistance and support by another agency — to our high - risk list in 2005 . interagency contracts can leverage the government's buying power and provide a simplified and expedited method of procurement . however , the rapid growth in use of such contracts , combined with the limited expertise of some agencies in their use and recent problems related to their management , causes some concern . for example , in july 2005 , we reported that the use of franchise funds — government - run , fee - for - service organizations providing a portfolio of services , including contracting services — at the departments of the interior and the treasury have not always resulted in fair and reasonable prices for the government . we have also found that agencies often do not have visibility into and effective oversight of their interagency contracts . last year , for instance , we reported that while dhs spending through interagency contracting totaled billions of dollars annually , and increased by 73 percent in the past year , the department did not systematically monitor its use of these contracts to ensure desired outcomes . undefinitized contract actions . dod's use of undefinitized contract actions can also carry risk to the government and potentially waste taxpayer dollars . these agreements allow contractors to begin work before reaching final agreement on contract terms and are sometimes used by agencies to rapidly fill urgent needs . in june 2007 , we reported that dod did not meet the definitization time frame requirement of 180 days after award on 60 percent of the 77 undefinitized contract actions we reviewed . in june 2004 , we found that during iraqi reconstruction efforts , when requirements were not clear , dod often entered into contract arrangements that introduced risks . we reported that dod authorized contractors to begin work before key terms and conditions , such as the projected costs of the work to be performed , were fully defined . in september 2006 , we reported that , under this approach , dod contracting officials were less likely to remove costs questioned by the defense contract audit agency auditors if the contractor had incurred these costs before reaching agreement on the work's scope and price . in one case , the defense contract audit agency questioned $84 million in an audit of a task order for an oil mission . this remains an issue . for example , we reported just this year that the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is missing key elements of effective investment management , such as procedures for implementing project - specific investment management policies , as well as policies and procedures for portfolio - based investment management . further , it has yet to fully implement either project - or portfolio - level investment control practices . we noted that all told , this means dhs lacks the complete institutional capability needed to ensure that it is investing in it projects that best support its strategic mission needs .