we disagree . we believe that it is important to place our discussion of income eligibility requirements in the context of other key eligibility requirements to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the conditions under which individuals may qualify for farm program payments . finally , usda sought more information about the individual cases we cite in this report of individuals whose agi apparently exceeds the eligibility requirements . however , internal revenue code section 6103 prohibits us from disclosing any additional information . usda also provided technical corrections , which we have incorporated into this report as appropriate . usda's written comments and our responses are presented in appendix ii . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or shamesl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . at the request of the ranking member of the senate committee on finance , we reviewed the farm service agency's ( fsa ) implementation of adjusted gross income ( agi ) provisions under the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( 2002 farm bill ) to identify potentially improper payments to individuals with high incomes . in this context , we were asked to evaluate ( 1 ) how effectively the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) implemented provisions under the 2002 farm bill that prohibited payments to individuals whose 3-year average agi exceeded $2.5 million and who derived less than 75 percent of that income from farming , ranching , or forestry operations ; ( 2 ) the potential impact of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008's ( 2008 farm bill ) agi provisions on individuals who receive farm program payments ; and ( 3 ) the distribution of income for individuals receiving farm program payments compared with all tax filers . to evaluate how effectively usda implemented the 2002 farm bill provisions that prohibit payments to individuals who do not meet the agi provisions , we reviewed guidance that usda field offices use to determine farm program payment eligibility , including relevant statutes and regulations and agency policy , such as the fsa handbook on payment limitations , 1-pl ( revision 1 ) , as well as relevant studies prepared by usda's office of inspector general and the congressional research service and our own past reports .