ii ) . in addition , alternate survey measures show lower satisfaction rates than those reported by dod . using dod's measure , we found an overall satisfaction rate of about 67 percent since the inception of ides . michele grgich ( assistant director ) , daniel concepcion , melissa jaynes , and greg whitney made significant contributions to all aspects of this report . also contributing to this report were bonnie anderson , james bennett , mark bird , joanna chan , brenda farrell , jamila jones kennedy , douglas sloane , almeta spencer , vanessa taylor , jeffrey tessin , roger thomas , walter vance , kathleen van gelder , and sonya vartivarian . military disability system: preliminary observations on efforts to improve performance . gao - 12-718t ( washington , d.c.: may 23 , 2012 ) . military and veterans disability system: worldwide deployment of integrated system warrants careful monitoring . gao - 11-633t ( washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2011 ) . military and veterans disability system: pilot has achieved some goals , but further planning and monitoring needed . gao - 11-69 ( washington , d.c.: december 6 , 2010 ) . military and veterans disability system: preliminary observations on evaluation and planned expansion of dod / va pilot . gao - 11-191t ( washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2010 ) . veterans' disability benefits: further evaluation of ongoing initiatives could help identify effective approaches for improving claims processing . gao - 10-213 ( washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 ) . recovering servicemembers: dod and va have jointly developed the majority of required policies but challenges remain . gao - 09-728 ( washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2009 ) . recovering servicemembers: dod and va have made progress to jointly develop required policies but additional challenges remain . gao - 09-540t ( washington , d.c.: april 29 , 2009 ) . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of veterans affairs , and other interested parties . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or at bertonid@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . in conducting our review of the integrated disability evaluation system ( ides ) , our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which the departments of defense ( dod ) and veterans affairs ( va ) are meeting ides performance goals , and ( 2 ) steps dod and va are taking to improve ides performance . we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 to august 2012 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .