ii. ) regarding trends , blm reports that it had backlogs of acres needing reforestation and growth enhancement treatments in western oregon in 1993 , but that such needs decreased until 2002 when the backlogs were eliminated . since then , blm reports that it has kept pace with these needs . according to blm officials , the backlogs — defined by blm as needs delayed 5 years or more — developed mainly because blm was harvesting large volumes of timber , which created reforestation needs . the backlogs were eliminated through a combination of factors , including reduced harvest levels , increased funding , and management actions taken by blm . agency officials believe that because they are keeping pace with their current reforestation and growth enhancement needs , they are minimizing any potential adverse effects that could result from carrying a backlog of unattended needs . blm is required to administer its western oregon lands in accordance with the oregon and california grant lands act of 1937 . the act called for permanent forest production and protection of watersheds , among other things , on blm's western oregon lands . it also established an initial upper limit of 500 million board feet of timber that could be sold annually from these lands and directed blm to adjust the limit , based on the capacity of the land . accordingly , blm has adjusted the limit several times — to 1,185 million board feet per year in 1983 , 211 million board feet per year in 1995 with the advent of the northwest forest plan , and 203 million board feet per year in 1999 , where it remains today . to fund reforestation and growth enhancement work , blm relies mainly on funds it has allocated for its reforestation and growth enhancement program — about $25 million in 2004 . in addition , a small portion of such work is funded through other sources , such as appropriations allocated for wildland fire rehabilitation and the forest ecosystem health recovery fund . for the 10-year period between 1995 and 2004 , blm reports that its annual reforestation and growth enhancement needs on its western oregon lands generally decreased until 2002 , after which annual treatments kept pace with such needs , as shown in figure 8 . a 1994 interior inspector general report found that at the end of fiscal year 1993 , blm had a backlog of over 50,000 acres of reforestation needs and over 220,000 acres of growth enhancement needs . according to a blm official , after the backlogs were identified , needs generally decreased ( for reasons noted in the following section ) until both backlogs were eliminated in 2002 . since 2002 , blm has kept pace with its reforestation and growth enhancement needs on its western oregon lands , agency officials said . blm's past backlogs developed primarily because timber harvests on its western oregon lands had risen sharply , causing related reforestation and growth enhancement needs to increase , while funding allocated to address the needs decreased rather than increasing in step with the needs .