streptogramins . the united states , canada , and south korea allow the use of virginiamycin , an antibiotic from this class , for growth promotion , but the eu and new zealand do not . the united states is conducting a risk assessment on the use of virginiamycin for growth promotion and disease prevention . as of april 2003 , australia permitted virginiamycin for growth promotion , but the australian agency that regulates antibiotic use in animals has recommended that approval of this use be withdrawn . appendix v lists antibiotics — including antibiotics from the above classes — that are frequently used in u.s. animal production . with regard to the availability of antibiotics to livestock and poultry producers , public health experts advocate requiring a veterinarian's prescription for the sale of antibiotics . they believe that this requirement may help reduce inappropriate antibiotic use that could contribute to the emergence of antibiotic - resistant bacteria in animals and the human health risk associated with these resistant bacteria . the united states and canada permit many antibiotics to be sold over the counter , without a veterinarian's prescription , while the eu countries and new zealand are more restrictive regarding over - the - counter sales . the united states and canada generally allow older antibiotics , such as sulfamethazine , to be sold over the counter , but they require a prescription for newer antibiotics , such as fluoroquinolones . in addition , with regard to the availability of antibiotics from antibiotic classes that are important in human medicine , the united states and canada allow livestock and poultry producers to purchase several antibiotics over the counter , including penicillins , tetracyclines , tylosin , and virginiamycin . however , canada is considering changing its rules to require prescriptions for antibiotics used in animals for all antibiotic uses except growth promotion . in contrast , the eu countries and new zealand are more restrictive regarding over - the - counter sales of antibiotics for use in animals . unlike the united states and canada , the eu does not allow penicillins , tetracyclines , tylosin , and virginiamycin to be sold over the counter and will end all over - the - counter sales by 2006 . denmark , an eu member , already prohibits all over - the - counter sales . similarly , new zealand requires producers to have a veterinarian's prescription for antibiotics that it has determined are associated with the development of resistant bacteria in humans . appendix iv contains additional information on the key u.s. trading partners and competitors discussed in this section , including , as previously mentioned , their systems for collecting data on antibiotic use . to date , antibiotic resistance associated with use in animals has not been a significant factor affecting u.s. trade in meat products , according to officials of usda's foreign agricultural service , the office of the u.s. trade representative , the u.s. meat export federation , and the u.s. poultry and egg export council . however , the presence of antibiotic residues in meat has had some impact on trade . in particular , russia has previously banned u.s. poultry because of the presence of tetracycline residues .