capacities . consulting firms have different capacities — some are small businesses while others are global enterprises — and each firm has different capabilities and expertise . according to air force data , for example , the firms charging the lowest average hourly fee at the managerial level have only six air force family housing privatization projects between them . however , air force officials told us they believe these firms are small businesses operating at capacity and cannot take on another project , despite having lower fees than some of the other consulting firms . even though these factors limit a comparative evaluation of consultant fees , service officials told us they believe that their particular consultant fees are fair and reasonable because they ( 1 ) awarded their consultant contracts competitively ; ( 2 ) examined consulting rates published by the general services administration , particularly those in its management , organizational , and business improvement services schedule , to assist in determining if the rates were reasonable ; and ( 3 ) selected consultants through “best value” determinations . in striving to obtain best value , service officials said that the services select firms offering the most advantageous deal to the government and that cost is only one of several evaluation considerations . past performance and the capability to perform the proposed work , among other considerations , are evaluated alongside fee considerations in assessing contract awards . as a result , service officials said that they have contracted with firms that provide the best value to the government based on their needs . the military housing privatization program was established for a faster creation of quality housing for military servicemembers and their families . as such , the secretary of defense has directed the military services to increase their use of privatization and eliminate their inadequate housing inventory , moving the completion date for the privatization up from 2010 to 2007 . however , until the number of renovated or newly constructed housing units under privatization are routinely tracked and reported to congress , it will be difficult to adequately assess the impact of the privatization program . further , as the program progresses and additional privatized units are expected to be under contract , more complete and informative data on the number of privatized housing units that have been renovated or newly constructed will become increasingly important to decision makers . such data are needed to determine how quickly the privatization program is creating adequate family housing and improving the living conditions of servicemembers and their families . until osd provides a common definition of the types of cost to be included in determining privatization support costs , including consultant costs , the military services will continue to budget inconsistently for privatization support costs and osd will continue to use inconsistent data from the services to report consultant costs in its quarterly housing privatization report to congress . similarly , without an osd determination of whether portfolio management costs are costs that should be included as consultant costs , the services will continue to provide osd with inconsistent data on consultant costs for its quarterly report to congress .