external leads . irs partners with financial institutions and other external parties to obtain information about emerging idt refund trends and fraudulent returns that have passed through irs detection systems . in august 2014 , we reported that irs provides limited feedback to external parties on idt external leads they submit and offers external parties limited general information on idt refund fraud trends and recommended that irs provide actionable feedback to all lead generating third parties . in november 2015 , irs reported that it had developed a database to track leads submitted by financial institutions and the results of those leads . irs also stated that it had held two sessions with financial institutions to provide feedback on external leads provided to irs . in december 2015 , irs officials stated that the agency sent a customer satisfaction survey asking financial institutions for feedback on the external leads process and was considering other ways to provide feedback to financial institutions . in april 2016 , irs officials stated they plan to analyze preliminary survey results by mid - april 2016 . additionally , irs officials reported that the agency shared information with financial institutions in march 2016 and plans to do so on a quarterly basis , with the next information sharing session scheduled in june 2016 . irs and industry partners have characterized that returns processing and refund issuance during this filing season has been generally smooth . through april 1 , 2016 , irs had processed about 95 million returns and issued 76 million refunds totaling about $215 billion . while irs experienced a major system failure in february that halted returns processing for about a day , the agency reported that it had minimal effect on overall processing of returns and refunds . in addition to filing returns , many taxpayers often call irs for assistance . irs's telephone service has generally improved in 2016 over last year . from january 1 through march 19 , 2016 irs received about 35.4 million calls to its automated and live assistor telephone lines , about a 2 percent decrease compared to the same period last year . of the 13.4 million calls seeking live assistance , irs had answered 9.1 million calls — a 75 percent increase over the 5.2 million calls answered during the same period last year . irs anticipated that 65 percent of callers seeking live assistance would receive it this filing season , which runs through april 18 , and 47 percent of callers would receive live assistance through the entire 2016 fiscal year . as of march 19 , 2016 , 75 percent of callers had received live assistance , an increase from 38 percent during the same period last year . further , the average wait time to speak to an assistor also decreased from 24 to 9 minutes . as we reported in march 2016 , however , irs's telephone level of service for the full fiscal year has yet to reach the levels it had achieved in earlier years . irs attributed this year's service improvement to a number of factors .