split purchases . using data mining techniques , we identified purchases that appeared to have been split into two or more transactions by cardholders to circumvent their single transaction limit . we requested supporting documentation for a statistically determined sample of 213 out of 1,854 potentially split purchases we identified . of these 213 , we identified 29 actual split purchases for which we received and examined documentation that confirmed that the purchases were split into two or more transactions . based on these results , we estimate that almost $1.3 million of the total fiscal year 2001 purchase card transactions were split transactions . for example , a cardholder with a single purchase limit of $2,500 purchased 13 toner cartridges totaling $3,918 . the cardholder had the vendor split the purchase between two invoices to avoid exceeding her single purchase limit . in another example , the cardholder purchased $36,984 of safety equipment for rescue workers . the cardholder had the vendor separate the total charge into three charges to circumvent her single transaction limit of $25,000 . the projected amount of split transactions may have been higher had we received all documentation requested . however , for 59 of the 213 sampled transactions , we could not determine whether they were split transactions because cardholders did not provide documentation through the apc to enable us to assess them . the purpose of the single purchase limit is to require that purchases above established limits be subject to additional controls to ensure that they are properly reviewed and approved before the agency obligates funds . by failing to monitor transactions , these limits may be circumvented and the forest service will have less control over the expenditure of its resources . duplicate transactions . using data mining techniques , we identified individual purchases that appeared to have been charged twice to cardholder's accounts . we requested supporting documentation for a statistically determined sample of 230 of the 8,659 potentially duplicate transactions we identified . of these 230 , we identified 6 actual duplicate transactions . based on these results , we estimate that $177,187 of the total fiscal year 2001 purchase card transactions were duplicate transactions . the projected amount of duplicate transactions may have been higher had we received all documentation requested . however , for 30 of the 230 sampled transactions , we could not determine whether they were duplicate transactions because cardholders did not provide documentation through the apc to enable us to assess them . supervisory review of the documentation supporting the cardholder's transactions reduces the risk that duplicate charges would go undetected and result in financial losses to the government . in addition , an effective monitoring program at the apc / lapc level would help flag these types of improper transactions . we also identified a transaction totaling $3,750 for 39 “web of life” costumes , including animals and nature themes , to be used in education programs . however , forest service policy does not support the purchase of these costumes and the cardholder's statement does not establish sufficient government need for the costumes to support regional programs . in addition , we identified a $7,500 purchase of a hand - stitched “salmon tent” from evelyn roth festival arts .