this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the committee might have . for further information on this testimony , please contract jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included triana bash , carmen donohue , janet frisch , patty hsieh , steve martin , tim schindler , sharon silas , pamela vines , and alwynne wilbur . how will the federal government's support of small community air service be affected ? the congress has long recognized that many small communities have difficulty attracting and maintaining scheduled air service . now , as airlines continue to reduce capacity , small communities will potentially see even further reductions in service . this will increase the pressure on the federal government to preserve and enhance air service to these communities . there are two main programs that provide federal assistance to small communities: the essential air service ( eas ) program , which provides subsidies to commercial air carriers to serve the nation's smallest communities , and the small community air service development pilot program , which provides grants to small communities to enhance their air service . as we reported in august , the number of communities that qualify for eas - subsidized service has grown over the last year , and there are clear indications that that number will continue to grow . federal awards under the program have increased from just over $40 million in 1999 to an estimated $97 million in fiscal year 2002 . as carriers continue to drop service in some markets , more communities will become eligible for subsidized eas service . in 2002 , nearly 180 communities requested over $142.5 million in grants under the small community air service development pilot program . dot awarded the total $20 million available to 40 communities in 38 states to assist them in developing or enhancing their air service . the grants will be used for a variety of programs , including financial incentives to carriers to encourage either new or expanded air service , marketing campaigns to educate travelers about local air service , and support of alternative transportation . we are currently studying efforts to enhance air service in small communities , and expect to report on these programs early next year . how will future international developments affect established agreements between the us and eu member states ? how will the carriers' reactions to current financial pressures affect the industry's competitive landscape ? there is a new aviation business reality that has increased the airlines' financial pressures and which ultimately will be felt by u.s. consumers . increased federal security requirements , which are part of this new reality , are adding to the cost of competing in the industry . the cost of these policies will most likely be borne both by industry , through higher operational costs , and the consumer , through higher fares . in the current pricing environment , carriers may not be able to pass on these costs to consumers , and thus may be bearing their full impact during the short run .