deductible . the funds' beneficiaries are not responsible for an annual deductible . beginning with the first covered service used , the funds pay all but the copayment . in contrast , the average annual deductible for workers in large manufacturing companies is more than $260 for individuals and more than $615 for families . cap on beneficiary out - of - pocket expenses . the funds' beneficiaries are responsible for copayments on each service used , up to an annual amount of $100 per family , excluding prescription drugs . additional out - of - pocket expenses for covered prescription drugs are capped at $50 per family per year . the total cap of $150 is substantially less than the median cap of over $1,750 in plans offered to other unionized hourly workers . snf coverage . the funds' beneficiaries are eligible for snf care with no cost - sharing requirement and no limit on the number of covered days . in contrast , most employer - sponsored retiree plans do not offer snf care . those that do typically restrict the number of days covered , require cost sharing , or both . outpatient prescription drug benefit . the funds' beneficiaries pay a $5 copayment per prescription and their annual out - of - pocket costs for covered prescription drugs are capped at $50 . in contrast , many plans offered by manufacturing companies do not have deductibles but require beneficiaries to pay higher cost sharing requirements with no cap on out - of - pocket costs . ( see table 2. ) some plans require beneficiaries to pay 20 percent of the cost of each prescription while others use multitiered copayment schedules that may , for example , require $5 for generic drugs , $10 to $15 for brand name drugs included in the health plan's formulary , and $20 or more for nonformulary brand name drugs . furthermore , 14 of the 17 companies we contacted that cover prescription drugs do not cap retirees' out - of - pocket costs for outpatient prescription drugs . however , the funds' prescription drug benefit is more restrictive than those of some other retiree benefit plans , in that it generally limits coverage to generic versions of prescription drugs when generic versions are available . the funds pay the entire cost of a drug , with the exception of the copayment , if a beneficiary uses a generic version of a prescription drug when one is available , unless his or her physician submits a written justification specifying that a particular brand is necessary . if the request is approved , the beneficiary is not charged an additional amount for the brand name product . typically , about 40 such requests are received each month and about 30 percent of them are approved . without approval , the funds' beneficiaries who use brand name drugs instead of generic equivalents , or who use off - formulary brand names instead of ones included on the formulary , must pay the full difference in price between the preferred and nonpreferred drug . this amount does not count toward the beneficiary's $50 annual cap on prescription drug expenditures .