training environment . however , the air force has not yet identified an organization to perform this oversight . without a dedicated organization with responsibility and accountability to integrate virtual training efforts , the air force may continue to face challenges in managing and integrating its virtual training efforts , including interoperability issues that lead to diminished training quality , fewer training opportunities due to lengthy preparation times , and increased costs . the air force is currently pursuing a number of individual initiatives to enhance its virtual training capabilities . among these initiatives are the following: air mobility command is planning to create and staff a distributed training center at scott air force base in december 2012 . the training center is initially planned to provide the integration capability needed for transport aircraft simulators to conduct distributed mission operations on a daily , consistent basis and will also provide the ability for these simulators to participate in distributed mission operations center events . air mobility command also has plans to expand the center's capability to include integration of tanker simulators to train air refueling virtually . the distributed training operations center has increased its capabilities in response to increased user requirements and mission requests by adding personnel and expanding event availability . we are reporting separately on the other services . for this review , we to address these objectives , we met with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , joint staff , office of the secretary of the air force , headquarters air force , and several air force major commands , and visited virtual training facilities . our review focused primarily on virtual training systems for manned aircraft from combat air forces , mobility air forces , and special operations forces . to determine how the air force determines the mix of live and virtual training , we analyzed air force studies and assessments of virtual training technologies and capabilities . we also interviewed officials from several major commands and obtained and analyzed training - requirement instructions for combat , mobility , and special operations aircraft . to determine the extent to which the air force has developed an overarching organizational framework to guide , oversee , and integrate its virtual training efforts , we met with officials from the above organizations as well as officials from joint and coalition warfighting , joint training integration and evaluation center , navy air warfare center , and the four primary centers that facilitate distributed mission operations . to determine the extent to which the air force considered costs related to virtual training in estimating potential savings from its training efficiency initiative , we obtained and analyzed the air force efficiency calculation and compared it with cost - saving estimating best practices . we also interviewed officials from the air force defense contracting management organization and headquarters air force budget office , as well as officials from the major commands listed above . more - detailed information about our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .