claims . drawback specialists explained that drawback claims from new claimants are subject to a full desk review . the specialists will request supporting documentation to ensure that the appropriate statutory and regulatory requirements are met . they also determine drawback due on the basis of the completed drawback claim , the applicable general manufacturing drawback ruling or specific manufacturing drawback ruling , and any other relevant evidence or information . according to cbp , the time it takes a drawback specialist to conduct a full desk review varies by claim , based on the nature of the claim and the experience of the drawback specialist . b . substitution manufacturing drawback may be claimed on exported or destroyed articles that have been manufactured or produced in the united states using domestic merchandise substituted for imported duty - paid merchandise meeting the statutory criteria , where the articles have not been used in the united states . as a result , domestic producers can select the most advantageous sources for their raw materials and components without regard to duties , saving them production costs . for example , a claimant could claim a drawback refund on exported pants made in the united states using domestic fabric substituted for imported foreign fabric . ( see fig . direct identification unused merchandise drawback may be claimed on imported merchandise that was exported or destroyed under cbp supervision , without having been used within the united states . for example , a claimant could claim a drawback refund on unused imported designer dresses upon their destruction . ( see fig . b . substitution unused merchandise drawback may be claimed on goods that were exported or destroyed under cbp supervision , without being used , and were substituted for imported merchandise meeting the appropriate criteria . for example , a claimant could claim a drawback refund on exported cars substituted for imported foreign - made cars . ( see fig . rejected merchandise drawback may be claimed upon the exportation or destruction under cbp supervision of imported duty - paid merchandise entered or withdrawn for consumption , provided it meets the statutory criteria ( i.e. , not conforming to sample or specifications , shipped without consent , determined to be defective at the time of import , or ultimately sold at retail and returned ) . for example , a claimant could claim a drawback refund on foreign fabric it imported but returned to the seller because the fabric did not conform to the specification of the claimant's order . ( see fig . during calendar years 2009 through august 21 , 2019 , the total amount of drawback refunds claimed ranged from $631.6 million to $1.4 billion . the amount of drawback refunds claimed varied from year to year , but generally rose between 2011 and 2016 . overall , in dollar terms , substitution unused merchandise drawback remained the largest category of drawback refund , as shown in table 1 . as originally enacted in 1789 , the drawback program was limited to duties paid on certain imported merchandise if the merchandise was exported within a year . in the 1930s , drawback claimants could use substituted merchandise for imported merchandise in specified circumstances .