implemented . in september 2015 , irs provided us with a document detailing the costs and benefits of w - 2 acceleration . the document discussed the irs systems and work processes that will need to be adjusted to accommodate earlier , prerefund matching of w - 2s ; the time frames for when these changes could be made ; potential impacts on taxpayers , irs , and other parties ; and what other changes will be needed ( such as delaying refunds ) to ensure irs can match tax returns to w - 2 data before issuing refunds . met . ” or “which of the following is your previous address ? ” if filers pass knowledge - based remote authentication , then irs releases those filers' returns for further processing before issuing refunds . if filers cannot pass , irs will not issue a refund unless those filers pass in - person authentication or irs receives information return documents from third parties , such as w - 2s , that match filers' return data . officials stated that tpp authentication poses a challenge to irs because it must authenticate almost all taxpayers in the program remotely . according to a united states digital service ( usds ) report , it is costly for fraudsters to attempt in - person authentication at scale because it requires human interaction . as a result , when compared to in - person authentication , fraudsters are incentivized to remotely authenticate because it allows for multiple attempts , allowing the fraudster more opportunity to access the taxpayers' information more quickly and easily respond to authentication questions . irs has conducted research both to evaluate the effectiveness of existing tpp authentication procedures and to identify options for strengthening those procedures . based on research efforts , irs made improvements to its phone authentication options for filing season 2015 . for example , irs created a more challenging high risk authentication ( hra ) quiz , which requires taxpayers to recall information from past tax filings . prior to the 2015 filing season , irs's hra quizzes sometimes included simulated questions where irs effectively had no data available to support correct answers other than “none of the above.” for example , a simulated question might ask a filer to identify the date of birth of a dependent even though that filer had no dependent . for the 2015 filing season , irs eliminated these questions from hra quizzes . irs analysis has shown that simulated questions are easier to pass than questions based on taxpayer data . in addition , irs required some respondents to answer a higher proportion of hra questions correctly in the 2015 filing season . of the about 1.6 million returns selected for tpp processing in filing season 2015 , irs estimated that it potentially paid about $30 million to idt fraudsters who filed about 7,200 returns that passed tpp authentication . however , our analysis indicates that irs underestimated how many fraudulent idt returns passed tpp authentication . in developing its estimates , irs first compared tpp selections to information returns provided by third parties , such as w - 2s . irs next identified which tpp selections passed authentication but had large mismatches with information returns .