iv ) . labor agreed with our recommendation . specifically , labor's response noted that the department has already begun assessing lessons learned from the implementation of its green jobs grants . what has labor done to assist and monitor its green jobs grantees ? in addition , the recovery act requires that gao conduct bimonthly reviews of how the act's funds are used by recipients . as part of this review , we examined the use of recovery act funds along with other federal funding . to address the first research question on the objectives and coordination of labor's green jobs efforts , we compiled an inventory of labor's green jobs efforts by requesting information from 14 different offices across labor . these 14 offices were selected based on the likelihood of their administering a green jobs effort or program . we asked these offices to list two separate sets of efforts: ( 1 ) efforts where federal funds were appropriated or allocated specifically for green jobs activities and , ( 2 ) efforts where federal funds were not specifically appropriated or allocated for green jobs activities , but where the office sought to incorporate green elements into either an existing program or ongoing activity . we gathered additional information on these efforts through two follow - up questionnaires and received fully completed questionnaires for nearly all efforts . because the majority of recovery act funding for green jobs efforts was directed toward training programs , we focused much of our review on four grant programs — the three green jobs training programs funded by the recovery act ( energy training partnership grants , pathways out of poverty grants , and state energy sector partnership and training grants ) as well as the newer green jobs innovation fund . to describe the characteristics of the 103 green jobs training grantees of these four grant programs , we also collected data from the department on the characteristics of green jobs grantees , including grantee location and organizational type . to better understand the type of green jobs training grantees provided , how grantees aligned their training to meet green jobs needs , and what challenges , if any , they faced in implementing their programs , we interviewed 11 out of the 103 green jobs training grantees and analyzed data provided by labor . we interviewed grantees in states that had a relatively high number of labor green jobs grant recipients , states where grantees or sub - grantees received gjif funds , and states in different geographic regions.information about the types of green jobs training that were funded by labor's green jobs training grants and the outcomes of grantees' programs , including green job placement . we specifically asked grantees about any challenges they may have encountered as they developed and implemented their program , including whether they experienced challenges placing participants into green jobs . we cannot generalize our findings beyond the interviews we conducted .