( see table 1. ) a wide disparity exists between the level of resources cms expends to support and oversee states' fraud and abuse control activities and the amount of federal dollars at stake in medicaid benefit payments . in addition , cms's organizational placement of staff and lack of strategic planning suggest a limited commitment to improving states' medicaid fraud and abuse control efforts . the resources cms devotes to working with states to fight medicaid fraud and abuse do not appear to be commensurate with the size of the program's financial risk . in fiscal year 2005 , cms's medicaid staff resources allocated to supporting or overseeing states' anti - fraud and abuse operations was an estimated 8.1 ftes — 3.6 ftes at headquarters and 4.5 ftes in the regional offices . specifically , the expansion of the medi - medi data match project has been slow , leaving potentially millions of dollars in cost avoidance and cost savings unrealized . this project enables claims data analysts to detect patterns that may not be evident when providers' billings for either medicare or medicaid are viewed in isolation . for example , by combining data from each program , analysts can identify “time bandits,” or providers who bill for more than 24 hours in a single day . staff at headquarters are engaged in arranging and conducting the on - site compliance reviews of states' fraud and abuse control efforts and in information - sharing activities . staff at the regional offices also participate in the state compliance reviews and respond to state inquiries . canvassing the 10 regional cms offices , we found that 7 regions each have a fraction of an fte and the rest each have less than 2 ftes devoted to providing assistance on fraud and abuse issues . for example , region iv — which covers eight states and accounted for $33 billion of federal funds for medicaid benefits in fiscal year 2004 — reported having 1 fte devoted to medicaid fraud and abuse control activities . ( see table 2. ) for fiscal year 2006 , cms's budget has no line item devoted to medicaid fraud and abuse control activities . the project to estimate payment error rates known as pam / perm ( required by statute ) and the medi - medi pilot project ( with benefits accruing to both programs ) are financed through a statutorily established fund — the health care fraud and abuse control ( hcfac ) account . ( see table 3. ) the hcfac monies from which these two projects are largely financed are known as “wedge” funds . as cms's distribution of these funds varies from year to year , the level of support for fraud and abuse control initiatives is uncertain and depends on the priorities set by the agency . for example , fiscal year 2005 funds allocated from the hcfac account for pam / perm and medi - medi were less than half the funds allocated in fiscal year 2004 . in contrast , medicare fraud and abuse control activities at cms are financed primarily through earmarked funds from another hcfac component — the medicare integrity program . cms's medicaid compliance reviews are funded through a different source — hhs's budget appropriation .