we disagree . we believe that the congressionally required annual ifar , in fact , would be an appropriate vehicle for reporting on usaid's and other u.s. agencies' implementation of our first recommendation . public law 480 , section 407 ( f ) ( codified at 7 u.s.c . 1736a ( f ) ) requires that the president prepare an annual report that “shall include . .an assessment of the progress toward achieving food security in each country receiving food assistance from the united states government.” this report is intended to contain a discussion of food security efforts by u.s. agencies . in addition , usda stated that our report was timely and provided useful information and recommendations . noting its participation in an interagency food aid policy coordinating process , usda reaffirmed its commitment to using its full range of authorities and programs to address the need for and improve the effectiveness of global food assistance and development . although we recognize that an interagency food assistance policy council provides a forum for the discussion and coordination of u.s. food aid programs , a similar forum to address food security issues had not been established until may 2008 following the release of a draft of this report . finally , although usda administers food assistance programs , including food aid programs for development , we note that these are not included in ieha . state identified additional issues for consideration , which we have addressed as appropriate . specifically , state disagreed with our statement that u.s. agencies had made no significant effort to coordinate their food security programs , citing its ongoing coordination with usaid and usda on food security issues . for example , state indicated that several of its offices and bureaus — such as as the office of the director of foreign assistance ; the bureaus of population , refugees , and migration ; economic , energy , and business affairs ; african affairs ; international organization affairs , and others — work closely with usaid and usda to coordinate food security issues . however , as we noted in this report , these efforts , to date , have been focused primarily on food aid , as opposed to food security , and there is no comprehensive u.s. governmentwide strategy for addressing food insecurity in sub - saharan africa . treasury generally concurred with our findings and provided additional comments for consideration , which we have addressed as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested members of congress ; the administrator of usaid ; and the secretaries of agriculture , state , and the treasury . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix x .