iii . component program ( s ) the five dhs components selected for our review have all participated in the ldp department - wide programs . in particular , according to ldp office and component data and officials , all five components have programs in place , as required by dhs , intended to meet the cornerstone program requirements . for instance , data from the selected components demonstrate that the fundamentals of dhs leadership courses they delivered — one of four program segments of the cornerstone program — from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year 2013 had more than 3,600 participants . according to the ldp manager , the ldp office has sought to avoid duplication of effort and costs in components' implementation of the cornerstone program . for example , the ldp office coordinated the development of instructional materials for all components to use to meet requirements for the understanding the dhs leadership commitment segment of the cornerstone program , which is for individuals considering the supervisory path . in addition , information that a dhs working group collected from components during initial development of the cornerstone program indicated that most components could utilize existing programs to help meet program requirements . to what extent does dhs have documented processes to evaluate training and development programs and reliably capture costs ? what leader development programs has dhs implemented , what are stakeholders' perspectives on them , and to what extent does dhs measure program performance ? to understand training programs at dhs , we obtained information from the dhs office of the chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , and five selected components: the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , and the u.s. coast guard . we selected these components to represent different dhs mission areas , workforce sizes , training costs , and number of career senior executive service ( ses ) personnel . to further our understanding of training at the component level , we also interviewed training officials at each of the selected components and identified these individuals based on their knowledge , experience , and leadership roles . the perspectives of dhs ochco and the selected components provided are not generalizable to all training programs at dhs , but provided helpful insights into the selected components' specific training and development programs at dhs . to address the first question regarding the extent to which dhs has documented processes to evaluate its training and development programs , we reviewed documented policies and procedures related to the evaluation of training programs for the five selected dhs components , as well as completed training evaluations . we also conducted semistructured interviews with officials responsible for conducting training evaluation at each of the five components to understand the evaluation process that each component follows and how evaluation feedback is used . we then assessed the documented processes from each of the selected components against attributes of training evaluation processes identified by opm , dhs , and gao to determine the extent to which the documents include select attributes of evaluation processes .