the navy addressed some , but not all , of our recommendations . now , as the program embarks on its most challenging phase — shipboard testing — additional cost increases in excess of the $2.3 billion since 2009 appear likely . to manage this risk , the navy is creating a cost buffer by deferring construction work and installation of mission - related systems to the post - delivery period . this strategy may provide a funding cushion in the near term , but it may not be sufficient to cover all potential cost increases . after raising the cost cap several times , the navy is now managing the cost cap by reducing the scope of the delivered ship and is considering paying for the deferred scope through a budget account normally used for post - delivery activities . this contradicts the purpose of the congressional cost cap , which is to hold the navy accountable for the total cost estimate for buying a deployable ship . further , after an investment of at least $12.9 billion , cvn 78 may not achieve improved operational performance over the nimitz class of aircraft carriers as promised for some time to come . reliability shortfalls and development uncertainties in key ford - class systems will prevent the ship from demonstrating its required sortie generation rate before initial deployments . personnel accommodation restrictions resulting from the ship's design has the potential of causing operational limitations that the navy will have to manage closely — a constraint that does not exist in the nimitz class . we previously recommended re - assessing these requirements ; the navy agreed that such an analysis is appropriate , but one that it would not pursue until the conclusion of operational testing . as we previously concluded , waiting until this point would be too late to make effective tradeoffs among cost , schedule , and performance for follow - on ships . as the navy prepares to award the detail design and construction contract for the next ford - class ship , cvn 79 , it is clear that achieving the cost cap will be challenging . while the navy and the shipbuilder are working to reduce costs , the navy's ability to achieve the congressional cost cap relies , in part , on deferring planned capability improvements until later maintenance periods . from an accountability and oversight standpoint , it would be preferable to keep the scope of the delivered ship constant — an essential component of a baseline — and raise the cost cap accordingly . the legislated cost cap for ford - class aircraft carrier construction provides a limit on procurement funds . however , the legislation also provides for adjustments to the cost cap . to understand the true cost of each ford - class ship , congress should consider revising the cost cap legislation to ensure that all work included in the initial ship cost estimate that is deferred to post - delivery and outfitting account is counted against the cost cap . if warranted , the navy would be required to seek statutory authority to increase the cap . we are not making any new recommendations , but our recommendations from our september 2013 report remain valid .