gao - 09-654r . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2009 . influenza pandemic: opportunities exist to address critical infrastructure protection challenges that require federal and private sector coordination . gao - 08-36 . how has the 2009 nipp changed compared to the 2006 nipp and what process was used to identify and incorporate these changes ? how have dhs and ssas addressed the concept of critical infrastructure resiliency as part of their national cikr and sector - specific planning efforts ? to describe the changes dhs has made to the nipp since it was first published in 2006 and the process used to identify and incorporate these changes , we compared the 2006 and 2009 versions of the nipp and reviewed the changes that have occurred . we also interviewed dhs nipp program management office ( pmo ) officials responsible for developing and coordinating the nipp revisions to discuss the process they used to identify potential revisions and why changes were made . we analyzed dhs's 2006 and 2009 ssp guidance that supports the nipp to determine what changes were made in the 2009 guidance which is designed to help ensure that ssas develop ssps consistent with the 2009 nipp . furthermore , we interviewed nipp pmo officials about their efforts to work with ssas in developing plans and reports based on the guidance provided and asked ssas about the process they used to address changes to the nipp in their ssps . we also interviewed ssa representatives for all 18 critical infrastructure sectors and asked them how they planned to address the changes to the nipp in their 2010 ssps . to determine how dhs and the ssas have addressed the concept of critical infrastructure resiliency as part of their national cikr protection planning efforts , we collected and analyzed documentary and testimonial evidence from dhs and ssas . specifically , we reviewed the 2006 and 2009 nipp and the nipp implementation guides to compare how often and in what context the concept of resiliency was used between those dates of publication . we limited our analysis to how often and where resiliency - related terms — resilience , resiliency , resilient , and continuity ( business or operational continuity ) — were used in the plans and corresponding guidance . in commenting on our approach , dhs said this is a reasonable set of terms for our analysis . we also reviewed the sector - specific planning documents ( eg , ssps ) of the sectors that were issued based on the 2006 nipp implementation guide and assessed how the concept of resiliency was addressed by the individual sectors . finally , we interviewed ssa officials for all 18 sectors to determine how they plan to address the concept of resiliency in their 2010 ssps . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 through february 2010 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives .