such controls include logical and physical security controls . logical security control measures involve the use of computer hardware and security software programs to prevent or detect unauthorized access by requiring users to input unique user identifications ( id ) , passwords , or other identifiers that are linked to predetermined access privileges . logical security controls restrict the access of legitimate users to the specific systems , programs , and files they need to conduct their work and prevent unauthorized users from gaining access to computing resources . physical security controls include locks , guards , badges , alarms , and similar measures ( used alone or in combination ) that help to safeguard computer facilities and resources from intentional or unintentional loss or impairment by limiting access to the buildings and rooms where they are housed . our review of fms's access controls identified a number of weaknesses at all of the sites we visited . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the department of the treasury . the comments are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section of this report and reprinted in appendix ii . we limited our work at another data center to a follow - up review of the status of weaknesses discussed in our fiscal year 1999 report . we limited our testing of fms's entity - wide security program to a comparison of fms's information security manuals with our executive guide on information security management . we performed a full - scope application control review of one key fms financial application to determine whether the application is designed to ensure that access privileges ( 1 ) establish individual accountability and proper segregation of duties , ( 2 ) limit the processing privileges of individuals , and ( 3 ) prevent and detect inappropriate or unauthorized activities ; data are authorized , converted to an automated format , and entered into the application accurately , completely , and promptly ; data are properly processed by the computer and files are updated erroneous data are captured , reported , investigated , and corrected ; and files and reports generated by the application represent transactions that actually occur and accurately reflect the results of processing , and reports are controlled and distributed to the authorized users . we limited our work over another seven key financial applications to a follow - up review of the status of weaknesses discussed in our fiscal year 1999 report . to evaluate the general and application controls , we identified and reviewed fms's information system general and application control policies and procedures ; observed controls in operation ; conducted tests of controls , which included selecting items using a method in which the results are not projectable to the population ; and held discussions with officials at selected fms data centers to determine whether controls were in place , adequately designed , and operating effectively . we performed network vulnerability assessment testing at three data centers . through our network security vulnerability assessments , we attempted to access sensitive data and programs . these attempts were performed with the knowledge and cooperation of appropriate fms officials .