voluntary compliance goal . a long - term , quantitative goal for improving voluntary compliance may provide irs with a concrete target the agency can use in fulfilling its mission . without a quantitative goal , it will be more difficult for irs to determine the success of its strategies , adjust its approach when necessary , and remain focused on results , especially since factors that affect compliance change over time . analyzing employment tax nrp study results . developing and documenting plans to assess its nrp employment tax study results would help irs ( 1 ) identify areas of noncompliance , ( 2 ) devise actions to address such noncompliance , and ( 3 ) update its employment tax gap estimate . without completed analysis of the nrp employment tax study results , irs risks using outdated data to make decisions about compliance and areas of the tax gap to pursue . leveraging the return review program . irs's return review program ( rrp ) is a tool to detect and select potentially fraudulent returns to prevent the issuance of invalid refunds . evaluating the costs and benefits of expanding rrp to analyze individual returns not claiming refunds could support other enforcement activities by streamlining the detection and treatment of other types of noncompliance and fraud . given that the tax gap has been a persistent issue , reducing it will also require targeted legislative actions , such as those we highlighted in our 2019 high - risk update . additional third - party information reporting . expanding third - party information reporting to irs could increase voluntary tax compliance . for example , reporting could be required for certain payments that rental real estate owners make to service providers , such as contractors who perform repairs on their rental properties , and for payments that businesses make to corporations for services . enhanced electronic filing . requiring additional taxpayers to electronically file tax and information returns could help irs improve compliance in a resource - efficient way . for example , expanding the mandate for corporations to electronically file their tax returns could help irs reduce return processing costs , select the most productive tax returns to examine , and examine fewer compliant taxpayers . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . math error authority . providing irs with authority — with appropriate safeguards — to correct math errors and to correct errors in cases where information provided by a taxpayer does not match information in government databases , among other things , could help irs correct errors and avoid burdensome audits and taxpayer penalties . strategy for using compliance data . developing and documenting a strategy that outlines how irs will use data to update compliance strategies could help address the tax gap . for example , a strategy that outlines how irs plans to use nrp data to update compliance programs and approaches would help irs determine resource trade - offs and more fully leverage the investment it makes in compliance research , while providing congress with a better understanding of the merits of the research it is being asked to fund .