fps also has about 15,000 contract guards . fps inspectors are primarily responsible for responding to incidents and demonstrations , completing bsas for numerous buildings , serving as contracting officer technical representatives ( cotr ) for collecting and reviewing time cards for guards , and participating in tenant agencies' bsc meetings . fps police officers are primarily responsible for responding to criminal incidents , assisting in the monitoring of contract guards , and responding to demonstrations at gsa facilities and conducting basic criminal investigations . fps physical security specialists , who do not have law enforcement authority , are responsible for participating in tenant agencies' bsc meetings , and assisting in the monitoring of contract guard services . special agents are the lead entity within fps for gathering intelligence for criminal and antiterrorist activities , and planning and conducting investigations relating to alleged or suspected violations of criminal laws against gsa facilities and their occupants . according to fps , its 15,000 contract guards are used primarily to monitor facilities through fixed post assignments and access control . according to fps policy documents , contract guards may detain individuals who are being seriously disruptive , violent , or suspected of committing a crime at a gsa facility , but do not have arrest authority . see appendix i for further details about our methodology . as the primary federal agency that is responsible for protecting and securing gsa facilities and federal employees across the country , fps has the authority to enforce federal laws and regulations aimed at protecting federally owned and leased properties and the persons on such property and , among other things , to conduct investigations related to offenses against the property and persons on the property . to protect the over 1 million federal employees and about 9,000 gsa facilities from the risk of terrorist and criminal attacks , in fiscal year 2007 , fps had about 1,100 employees , of which 541 , or almost 50 percent , were inspectors , as shown in figure 1 . fps provides law enforcement and physical security services to its customers . law enforcement services provided by fps include proactive patrol and responding to incidents in or around gsa facilities . physical security services provided by fps include the completion of bsas , oversight of contract guards , participation in bsc meetings , and the recommendation of security countermeasures . the level of physical protection services fps provides at each of the approximately 9,000 facilities varies depending on the facility's security level . to determine a facility's security level , fps uses the department of justice's ( doj ) vulnerability assessment guidelines , which are summarized below . a level i facility has 10 or fewer federal employees , 2,500 or fewer square feet of office space , and a low volume of public contact or contact with only a small segment of the population . a typical level i facility is a small storefront - type operation , such as a military recruiting office . a level ii facility has between 11 and 150 federal employees ; more than 2,500 to 80,000 square feet ; a moderate volume of public contact ; and federal activities that are routine in nature , similar to commercial activities .