epa did not modify the debris regulations . in 2003 , epa collaborated with the association of state and territorial solid waste management officials and the northeast waste management officials' association to discuss potential mismanagement of mercury - contaminated debris . based on those discussions , epa issued a debris memorandum in october 2003 to state waste managers that provided guidance for managing mercury - contaminated debris . n. process residuals ( for example , smelter slag ) q2 . assume that the items listed below are different types of mercury - containing hazardous waste ( d009 , u151 ) . does your state allow treatment and / or disposal of the following wastes using hazardous debris or hazardous waste treatment standards ? if there are others types of mercury - containing hazardous debris treated and / or disposed in your state , please provide a brief description in the box below . does your state collect data on hazardous waste more frequently than required for epa's biennial hazardous waste report ? ( percent ) ( percent ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) . ( percent ) ( percent ) . during the past 5 years has your landfill accepted any hazardous mercury - containing waste ( d009 , k071 , k106 , u151 , p065 , p092 ) ? ( please check one. ) yes please continue to question 2 on the next page . no you do not need to complete additional questions . please fax this page to: 202-512-2502 or 202-512-2514 . attention: diana cheng . for your convenience , a fax cover sheet is on the last page . assume that the items listed below are different types of mercury - containing hazardous waste ( d009 , u151 ) and that these wastes were received from facilities that generated 1,000 kg or more of hazardous waste per month . would your facility treat and / or dispose of any of the following wastes according to alternative debris treatment standards ? ( please check one answer in each row. ) would this waste be treated and / or disposed of according to alternative debris treatment standards ? d. intact drums with at least 75% of their original volume f. intact fluorescent light bulbs g. ruptured fluorescent light bulbs i. ruptured batteries with particle size exceeding 60 mm ruptured batteries with particle size less than or equal j. k. other intact devices ( for example , thermometer , regulator ) l. other ruptured devices with particle size exceeding 60 mm ( for example , regulator ) m. other ruptured devices with particle size less than or equal to 60 mm ( for example , thermometer ) n. process residuals ( for example , smelter slag ) 3 . in the space below , please add any comments you wish to make concerning your answers in question 2 . 11 respondents provided comments . during the past 5 years , has your landfill had any instances where you refused to accept mercury - containing debris ? yes please go to question 5 no please go to “instructions for returning” at the bottom of this page .