data are not complete . finally , the information that fims should maintain is not always recorded . for example , the system does not contain records for all of the facilities for which em completed d&d from 2003 through 2013 . according to federal regulations , agencies must certify the accuracy of real property information submitted to gsa for the annual real property inventory program ; however , according to doe officials , fims does not contain records for all facilities . for example , recent validation efforts found that inventories of facilities were incomplete . specifically , in 2014 , doe identified facilities at the hanford and savannah river sites — both of which em is responsible for disposing of incomplete information in their entirety — which were missing from fims.about real property holdings impedes doe's ability to manage its portfolio at a site and agency - wide level . em maintains a separate database with information on facilities for which it has completed d&d and for which it is currently responsible . the integrated planning , accountability , and budgeting system ( ipabs ) is em's system for tracking and maintaining information about its activities . according to em officials , ipabs is a project management system that tracks work — including d&d — and provides the data for em's annual performance metrics . data in ipabs are tracked by project units , which summarize of the major characteristics of a cleanup project , including key performance , scope , and cost information . one project unit may include the d&d of one or more facilities on a site , or it may describe non - facility projects , such as the remediation of groundwater . for performance management purposes , ipabs notes how many facilities are in each project unit and when those project units are completed . according to an em official , ipabs is the most accurate source of information on the number of facilities em has completed . however , neither doe nor em officials can use ipabs data to gain further insight into the facilities that require d&d or to oversee the property - disposal process because the system does not provide information at a sufficiently granular level to provide a basis for real property decision making . specifically , ipabs does not contain facility - level information ; it does not track the status of work at individual facilities , nor does it maintain information on an individual facility's end - state or expected end - state . this is because ipabs is a project management system and not a property management system . as a result , em could not tell us definitively how many of the facilities for which it completed d&d from 2003 through 2013 had been demolished , entombed , or made available for reuse . data are not timely . ettp can be accessed via a public road . ( see appendix iii for information on completed land transfers identified by em ) . limitations in its data on facilities that are undergoing or have completed d&d may impede doe's ability to effectively manage its real property assets , including their disposal .