the revocation notifications did not include most of this information . our analysis shows that thirty individuals with revoked visas have entered the united states and may still remain in the country . twenty - nine of these individuals entered before state revoked their visas . an additional person who may still be in the country entered after his visa was revoked . moreover , state did not attempt to make other contact with the fbi that would indicate any urgency in the matter . the weaknesses i have outlined above resulted from the u.s. government's limited policy guidance on the visa revocation process . our analysis indicates that the u.s. government has no specific policy on the use of visa revocations as an antiterrorism tool and no written procedures to guide state in notifying the relevant agencies of visa revocations on terrorism grounds . state and ins have written procedures that guide some types of visa revocations ; however , neither they nor the fbi has written internal procedures for notifying their appropriate personnel to take specific actions on visas revoked by state department headquarters officials , as was the case for all the revoked visas covered in our review . state used the visa issuance process to fully screen these individuals and determined that they did not pose a security threat . the ins and the fbi did not routinely attempt to investigate or locate any of the individuals whose visas were revoked and who may be in the country . due to congressional interest in specific cases , ins investigators located four of the persons in the united states but did not attempt to locate other revoked visa holders who may have entered the country . ins officials told us that they generally do not investigate these cases because it would be challenging to remove these individuals unless they were in violation of their immigration status even if the agency could locate them . a visa revocation by itself is not a stated grounds for removal under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . investigators from ins's national security unit said they could investigate individuals to determine if they were violating the terms of their admission , for example by overstaying the amount of time they were granted to remain in the united states , but they believed that under the ina , the visa revocation itself does not affect the alien's legal status in the united states — even though the revocation was for terrorism reasons . they and other homeland security officials raised a number of legal issues associated with removing an individual from the country after the person's visa has been revoked . our report discusses these issues in detail . fbi officials told us that they did not routinely attempt to investigate and locate individuals with revoked visas who may have entered the united states . they said that state's method of notifying them did not clearly indicate that visas had been revoked because the visa holder may pose terrorism concerns . further , the notifications were sent as “information only” and did not request specific follow - up action by the fbi .