asps cost significantly more than pvts . dndo's latest unit cost estimate ( including deployment costs ) is about $800,000 for the standard cargo version of the asp and about $425,000 for the pvt standard cargo portal . due to concerns about the performance and higher cost of asps relative to pvts , the congress has required that the secretary of homeland security submit a report certifying that asps will provide a significant increase in operational effectiveness . prior to primary and secondary deployment of the asps , the secretary must submit separate and distinct certifications that address the unique requirements for operational effectiveness of each type of deployment . our prior work on dndo's efforts to develop and procure asps raised a number of serious concerns . in march 2006 , we reported on , among other things , dndo's efforts to develop asps ; we recommended that dhs analyze the benefits and costs of deploying asps to determine whether any additional detection capability provided by asps is worth the additional cost . in october 2006 , we concluded that dndo's cost - benefit analysis did not provide a sound basis for its decision to purchase and deploy asps at an estimated cost at that time of $1.2 billion — for example , because dndo relied on assumptions of the anticipated performance level of asps instead of actual test data . we also reported that dndo did not assess the likelihood that asps would either misidentify or fail to detect nuclear or radiological material ; rather , it focused its analysis on reducing the time necessary to screen traffic at ports of entry and the impact of any delays on commerce . we recommended , in part , that dndo conduct further testing before spending additional funds to purchase asps . similarly , in september 2007 , we testified that dndo's testing of asps at the department of energy's ( doe ) nevada test site did not represent an objective or rigorous assessment because dndo used biased test methods that enhanced the apparent performance of the asps and did not test the limitations of the asps' detection capabilities . the test schedule leading up to certification is highly compressed and is running at least 8 weeks behind the schedule dndo provided to us in may 2008 , leaving limited time for analysis and review of test results . key phases of the test schedule include system qualification , followed by testing at pacific northwest national laboratory to demonstrate that asps are ready to be integrated into the interdiction systems at u.s. ports of entry and concurrent testing at nevada test site to compare the asp performance in detecting and identifying threats with that of current generation equipment . according to dndo , the systems qualification and performance tests have been completed , but only after being delayed due to problems with system qualification . the final two phases , field validation at four ports of entry operated by cbp and operational testing at one port of entry , have not yet started . field validation was to have started yesterday — september 24 — but as with integration and performance testing this phase has also been delayed , and cbp has not yet indicated when it will begin .