pub . 111-352 , 124 stat . if interagency funding is needed and permitted , is there a means to track funds in a standardized manner ? how will the collaborative mechanism be staffed ? are there incentives available to encourage staff or agencies to have participating agencies developed online tools or other resources participate ? if relevant , do agencies have compatible technological systems ? that facilitate joint interactions ? collaborating agencies should identify the human , information technology , physical , and financial resources needed to initiate or sustain their collaborative effort . gprama amends the government performance and results act of 1993 , pub . 103-62 , 107 stat . multiple organizations , and facilitating future actions to reduce duplication , overlap , and fragmentation . gprama requires the office of management and budget ( omb ) to coordinate with agencies to establish outcome - oriented federal government priority goals — otherwise referred to as crosscutting goals — covering a limited number of policy areas as well as goals to improve management across the federal government . it also requires that omb — with the agencies — develop a federal government performance plan that defines the level of performance to be achieved toward the crosscutting goals . these new requirements provide additional opportunities for collaboration across federal agencies . at your request , in this report we are identifying the range of mechanisms that the federal government uses to lead and implement interagency collaboration , as well as issues to consider when implementing these mechanisms . to examine these topics , we conducted a literature review on interagency collaborative mechanisms , interviewed 13 academic and practitioner experts in the field of collaboration , and reviewed their work . we also conducted a detailed analysis of 45 of our prior reports that we selected , from more than 300 reports that we published between 2005 and 2012 that examined aspects of collaboration within the federal government . we selected reports that contained in - depth discussions of collaborative mechanisms . in addition , we ensured that the reports in our selection covered a broad range of issues across the federal government , such as homeland security , agriculture , and health , as well as a range of collaborative mechanisms . for a more detailed discussion on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted our work from july 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this report . in 2005 , we reported on key practices to enhance and sustain interagency collaboration . in our report , we broadly defined collaboration as any joint activity that is intended to produce more public value than could be produced when the agencies act alone .