, is the information accurate ? ; ( 3 ) timeliness ( i.e. , is information received in a timely manner ? , is information received in a timely manner ? ; ( 4 ) completeness ( i.e. , does the information contain all the necessary details ? to what extent has dhs identified goals for sharing security - related information with public transit agencies and developed measures to gauge its progress in meeting those goals ? to identify the mechanisms established or funded by the federal government to serve as primary information sources for public transit agencies , we reviewed and assessed relevant documentation , such as the homeland security information network ( hsin ) program management plan and dhs's information sharing strategy . we interviewed officials from dhs components including the office of infrastructure protection ( ip ) within the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of intelligence and analysis ( i&a ) , the u.s. coast guard , and tsa , as well as officials from fta and the fbi to discuss the mechanisms they use to share security - related information with public transit agencies . we also conducted site visits , or held teleconferences , with security and management officials from a nonprobability sample of 27 public transit agencies across the nation to determine which mechanisms are most routinely used by these agencies to obtain security - related information . these transit agencies were selected to reflect broad representation in size , location , transportation mode , and law enforcement presence and represent about 63 percent of the nation's total public transit ridership based on information we obtained from fta's national transit database . because we selected a nonprobability sample of transit agencies to interview , the information obtained cannot be generalized to all transit agencies . however , the interviews provided illustrative examples of the perspectives of various transit agencies about federal government information - sharing mechanisms and corroborated information we gathered through other means . to assess the extent to which public transit agencies are satisfied with federal efforts to share quality security - related information and related opportunities for improvement , in march and april 2010 , we surveyed 96 of the 694 u.s. public transit agencies on their satisfaction with information - sharing efforts . the 96 public transit agencies surveyed represent about 91 percent of total 2008 ridership . for the purposes of this survey , we defined the six aspects of quality security - related information as ( 1 ) relevance ( i.e. , is the information sufficiently relevant to be of value to a public transit agency ? ; ( 2 ) validity ( i.e. ; ( 5 ) actionability ( i.e. , would the information allow a public transit agency to change its security posture , if such a change was warranted ? ; and ( 6 ) access / ease of use ( i.e. , is information available through this mechanism easy to obtain ? ) out of the original population of 96 transit agencies , we received completed questionnaires from 80 respondents — a response rate of 83 percent ; however , not all respondents provided answers to every question .