i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have at this time . it also includes selective updates we obtained in february 2020 . i will discuss steps dhs has taken to ( 1 ) identify and address barriers to eeo in its workforce , ( 2 ) identify and address eeo program deficiencies , ( 3 ) address areas of noncompliance in its eeo program identified by eeoc , and ( 4 ) oversee and support components' eeo programs . for the report , we reviewed dhs's and its components' policies , procedures , practices , and reports for their eeo programs for fiscal years 2014 through 2018 ; interviewed dhs and its component eeo officials ; and assessed dhs employee survey results . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact yvonne d. jones at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or jonesy@gao.gov , or christopher p. currie at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include clifton g. douglas , jr. ( assistant director ) , luis e. rodriguez ( analyst - in - charge ) , andrew howard , kate lenane , steven putansu , and rachel whitaker . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . further , dhs officials told us that minority representation was up 3 percent and female representation was up 2 percent from 2015 to february 2019 . we also reviewed eeoc's feedback on dhs's and its components' eeo programs , and interviewed eeoc officials . our report contains a more detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology . for the updates , we reviewed documentation from dhs and interviewed office for civil rights and civil liberties ( crcl ) officials on the actions dhs has taken to implement the recommendations from our july 2019 report . we also added information from dhs's fiscal year 2018 md - 715 report to reflect the most current fiscal year data and status of the department's eeo efforts . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dhs reports some improvements in employee engagement and representation of minorities and women . dhs's employee engagement scores in the federal employee viewpoint survey increased from 54 percent in 2014 to 62 percent in 2019 . in addition , our review of dhs's workforce data from fiscal years 2014 through 2017 showed that every minority group as well as individuals with disabilities and individuals with targeted disabilities had been trending in a positive direction since fiscal year 2014 . according to eeoc , one important tool in examining the fairness and inclusiveness of an agency's recruitment efforts is applicant flow data . eeoc guidance states that having department - wide applicant flow data could aid in analyzing differences in selection rates among different groups for a particular job .