these are described in table 4 . the survey questions underlying uncomfortably cold periods and heating equipment breakdowns were only asked of respondents who occupied their unit in the winter prior to the survey year , so our main analysis of rental unit quality only considered cash - rent housing units occupied by households since the prior winter , while the analysis of unit completeness considered all cash - rent units . see table 5 for the distributions of the completeness and quality variables in 2017 . we used each set of variables to construct two indexes , one of unit completeness ( an indicator ) and one of unit quality ( a continuous measure ) . we collapsed the continuous quality index into three categories ( no quality issues , less substantial quality issues , and substantial quality issues ) to facilitate a summary of rental housing quality trends . to determine rental unit completeness , we first summed the number of missing components contained in the nine completeness components for each rental unit in the surveys . we obtained an estimate of cronbach's alpha associated with this sum of 0.40 , which was low enough to suggest that a simple indicator would be a more appropriate summary measure . we therefore determined that each of the nine completeness components was essential for us to consider a unit livable , and assigned a completeness score to each rental unit based on the absence of any of them . the resulting index therefore measured incompleteness , where a score of 1 indicated that a unit was missing one or more of the essential components . see table 6 for the distribution of the completeness index in the survey years between 2001 and 2017 . for inference that is robust to non - normal distributions of the latent continuous variables . finally , we obtained quality score estimates by empirical bayes , which selects the mode of the posterior distribution ğ‘ğ‘ ( ğœ‚ğœ‚Ì‚|ğ‘¦ğ‘¦ğ‘–ğ‘– ) evaluated at the estimates of the model's parameters . note that because all quality variables increased in the presence or number of issues , the quality index correspondingly increased in poor quality . we first estimated two variants of the factor model , one accounting for the sample weights assigned to units in each survey ( our preferred specification ) , and one that did not account for these weights . the robust root mean square error of approximation from the latter of 0.020 suggested that our single factor model provided an appropriate representation of the ahs data . estimates of the polychoric correlation matrix and of the factor loadings are reported in tables 7 and 8 respectively . we assessed stability by estimating the model on each ahs year separately and broadly found that factor loadings estimates varied little over time . given the estimates from our preferred specification , which accounts for the survey design , we then relied on empirical bayes estimation to assign a quality score to each unit for which responses to all 13 quality variables were observed . the full distributions of the resulting quality index in the survey years between 2001 and 2017 are reported in figure 15 .