gao - 13-466r . washington , d.c.: february 25 , 2013 . biological laboratories: design and implementation considerations for safety reporting systems . gao - 10-850 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2010 . developed by the funding or regulatory agencies . in 2013 , we reported that another challenge of this fragmented oversight is the potential duplication and overlap of inspection activities in the regulation of high - containment laboratories . we recommended that cdc and aphis work with the internal inspectors for department of defense and department of homeland security to coordinate inspections and ensure the application of consistent inspection standards . according to most experts that we have spoken to in the course of our work , a baseline risk is associated with any high - containment laboratory . although technology and improved scientific practice guidance have reduced the risk in high - containment laboratories , the risk is not zero ( as illustrated by the recent incidents and others during the past decade ) . according to cdc officials , the risks from accidental exposure or release can never be completely eliminated and even laboratories within sophisticated biological research programs — including those most extensively regulated — has and will continue to have safety failures . many experts agree that as the number of high - containment laboratories has increased , so the overall risk of an accidental or deliberate release of a dangerous pathogen will also increase . oversight is critical in improving biosafety and ensuring that high - containment laboratories comply with regulations . however , our work has found that aspects of the current oversight programs provided by dsat and aphis depend on entities' monitoring themselves and reporting incidents to the regulators . for example , with respect to a certification that a select agent had been rendered sterile ( that is , noninfectious ) , dsat officials told us , citing the june 2014 updated guidance , that “the burden of validating non - viability and non - functionality remains on the individual or entity possessing the select agent , toxin , or regulated nucleic acid.” while dsat does not approve each entity's scientific procedure , dsat strongly recommends that “an entity maintain information on file in support of the method used for rendering a select agent non - viable . so that the entity is able to demonstrate that the agent . is no longer subject to the select agent regulations.” biosafety select agent regulations and oversight critically rely on laboratories promptly reporting any incidents that may expose employees or the public to infectious pathogens . although laboratories have been reasonably conscientious about reporting such incidents , there is evidence that not all have been reported promptly . the june 2014 incident in which live anthrax bacteria were transferred from a bsl - 3 contained environment to lower - level ( bsl - 2 ) containment laboratories at cdc in atlanta resulted in the potential exposure of tens of workers to the highly virulent ames strain of anthrax .