community care . this program office is responsible for overseeing all vha community care programs and business processes , such as determining veterans' eligibility to receive health care benefits and purchasing care from non - va providers . specifically , it is structured around six functional areas: eligibility , referral and authorization , a tiered network of community providers , care coordination , provider payment , and customer service . as previously mentioned , an independent assessment recently noted that vha and oi&t faced a number of challenges in collaborating to execute health it improvements and developing new and modernized capabilities . specifically , in response to the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( choice act ) , the assessment was released in september 2015 , stating that vha and oi&t did not collaborate effectively . the assessment found that vha and oi&t often did not agree on priorities for executing their strategic plans and have struggled to identify , prioritize , and translate clinical goals and strategic initiatives reflected in the department's overarching planning documents into buildable , testable health it requirements that resulted in measurable health care outcomes for the veteran . in addition , the report stated that va's ability to deliver new capabilities for vista had stalled and as a result the va health care system was in danger of becoming obsolete . the choice act also established the commission on care ( the commission ) . strategic sourcing . this function is responsible for establishing an approach to fulfilling the department's requirements with vendors that provide solutions to those requirements , managing vendor selection , tracking vendor performance and contract deliverables , and sharing insights on new technologies and capabilities to improve the workforce knowledge base . the va under secretary for health is the head of vha and is supported by the principal deputy under secretary for health , four deputy under secretaries for health , and nine assistant deputy under secretaries for health . among these , the deputy under secretary for health for policy and services oversees the work of the assistant deputy under secretary for health for the office of informatics and information governance within vha . the strategic investment management office , a division of the office of informatics and information governance , was established to support the it needs of vha by providing information on health - related information systems that senior managers need to make sound decisions . there are four organizational services within this office: business architecture , investment governance services , open source management , and requirements development and management . among other things , this office advocates for vha's it needs within the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution process and coordinates with vha business owners and other va organizations to support , document , analyze , and evaluate clinical and business needs and requirements for it development . the strategic investment management office works closely with business owners and program offices within vha to assist with the it governance and budgeting processes , it needs identification , requirements development , and investment oversight .