iii ) . dod provided technical comments during the course of the engagement , and these were incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , and appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5257 or merrittz@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the extent to which the navy's report addressed the house armed services committee's direction , we analyzed house report 112- 78 to identify each element of the committee's direction for the navy report . we developed an evaluation tool based on house report 112-78 to assess the extent to which the navy's report addressed these elements . using scorecard methodologies , two gao analysts independently evaluated the navy report against the elements specified in the house report . the analysts rated compliance for each element as “addressed,” “partially addressed,” or “not addressed.” we considered the element to be addressed in the report when the navy explicitly addressed all parts set forth in the element . we considered the element partially addressed in the report when the navy addressed at least one or more parts of the element , but not all parts of the element . we considered the element not addressed by the navy when the report did not explicitly address any part of the element . after the two analysts had completed their independent analyses , they compared the two sets of observations and discussed and reconciled any differences . the final assessment reflected our consensus . we also interviewed navy subject matter experts to obtain additional information and corroborate the statements made in the navy report , and we obtained the officials' opinions of our assessments . we interviewed officials from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy for ships , naval sea systems command , and the naval surface warfare center . to determine the extent to which the findings in the navy's study are supported by the data and information examined , we reviewed the study and obtained information on the objectives , scope , and methodology officials used to conduct it . we evaluated the navy study's business case analysis using criteria found in the dod product support business case analysis guidebook , which provides standards for the department of defense's ( dod ) business case analysis process as well as generally acceptable economic methodologies . we reviewed the navy's study to determine the extent to which the navy incorporated elements of the dod guidebook into the planning , design , and execution of the study . we also obtained and analyzed key data sources , such as maintenance cost savings inputs and boat lift cost data , for information included in the study .