iv ) . major differences between a nonrandomly selected study population and a broader population of interest to policymakers should raise questions about the applicability of the study's results for that broader population . for example , an intervention to improve care coordination for patients with diabetes might be implemented and assessed in a few academic medical centers . in that situation , the representativeness of the study population for all patients with diabetes could come into question on at least two counts — the kind of care provided in an academic medical center might well differ from that usually provided by community - based providers and the patients treated by academic medical centers might have a higher level of severity than diabetics treated elsewhere . if patients in the study received a different overall set of services , that could affect the impact of the intervention on those patients even if the intervention itself were implemented the same way for the two populations . respondents typically reported that a combination of additional factors along with leadership support significantly facilitated implementation of their intervention . the 92 respondents who reported leadership support as having significantly facilitated implementation , reported , on average , another three factors as having significantly facilitated implementation . of the 86 respondents who reported at least one factor in addition to leadership support as significantly facilitating implementation , more than half reported staff resources ( 60 ) , organizational culture ( 55 ) , and the availability of other tools ( 50 ) , respectively , as having significantly facilitated implementation . nearly half ( 42 ) reported that financial resources , in addition to leadership , significantly facilitated implementation . just six respondents reported leadership support and no other factor as having significantly facilitated implementation . in contrast to the five factors that a clear majority of respondents reported having facilitated implementation of their intervention , respondents were more divided on how health it affected implementation , as shown in table 4 . health it had the highest number of respondents , compared to the other factors , that reported the factor impeded implementation of their intervention . further , a substantial group of respondents reported that health it was not a factor . on the other hand , nearly half of respondents reported that health it either significantly or somewhat facilitated implementation of their intervention . respondents frequently explained that health it facilitated implementation of their intervention by enhancing the exchange of information and communication across providers or organizations , facilitating the collection of data or the evaluation of the intervention and improving the efficiency and productivity of staff . of those who reported that health it impeded implementation , respondents commonly cited the limited functional capacity of existing systems or the lack of interoperability across settings as impediments to successful implementation . other respondents explained that the general lack of health it altogether acted as a barrier that impeded implementation . variation in the role of health it across different types of interventions does not appear to explain the mixed assessment of this factor ; as respondents for each of the intervention types included in our sample — with two exceptions — were similarly divided on how health it affected implementation .