dioxin . the dioxin assessment is an example of an iris assessment that has been , and will likely continue to be , a political as well as a scientific issue . new research to close data gaps . gaps ? ye , there is interest in conducting research to close data gaps . is the chemical mission critical ? this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . darker shaded boxes are additional steps under epa's changes to its assessment process and indicate where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for mission - critical chemicals . lighter shaded boxes with dotted lines indicate steps where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for all chemicals . white boxes with heavy lines indicate steps where potentially affected federal agencies already had an opportunity for input . often the byproducts of combustion and other industrial processes , complex mixtures of dioxins enter the food chain and human diet through emissions into the air that settle on soil , plants , and water . epa's initial dioxin assessment , published in 1985 , focused on the dioxin tcdd ( 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - p - dioxin ) because animal studies in the 1970s showed it to be the most potent cancer - causing chemical studied to date . several years later , epa decided to conduct a reassessment of dioxin because of major advances that had occurred in the scientific understanding of dioxin toxicity and significant new studies on dioxins' potential adverse health effects . initially started in 1991 , this assessment has involved repeated literature searches and peer reviews . for example , a draft of the updated assessment was reviewed by a scientific peer review panel in 1995 , and three panels reviewed key segments of later versions of the draft in 1997 and 2000 . in 2002 , epa officials said that the assessment would conclude that dioxin may adversely affect human health at lower exposure levels than had previously been thought and that most exposure to dioxins occurs from eating such american dietary staples as meats , fish , and dairy products , which contain minute traces of dioxins . these foods contain dioxins because animals eat plants and commercial feed and drink water contaminated with dioxins , which then accumulate in animals' fatty tissue . it is clear that epa's dioxin risk assessment could have a potentially significant impact on consumers and on the food and agriculture industries . as epa moved closer to finalizing the assessment , in 2003 the agency was directed in a congressional appropriations conference committee report to not issue the assessment until it had been reviewed by the national academies . the national academies provided epa with a report in july 2006 .