ii ) . we also received oral comments from individuals at five organizations representing manufacturers of radioactive sources used in brachytherapy and providers of brachytherapy . these included the coalition for the advancement of brachytherapy , which represents manufacturers of radioactive sources ; the association of community cancer centers ( accc ) , which represents hospitals that provide cancer treatment ; and three organizations representing physicians and others involved in providing brachytherapy: the american college of radiation oncology ( acro ) , the american brachytherapy society ( abs ) , and the american society for therapeutic radiation and oncology ( astro ) . we also received technical comments from cms and the external reviewers , which we incorporated as appropriate . in reviewing our draft report , cms stated that it appreciated our analysis and will consider our recommendations on iodine , palladium , and iridium as it develops payment policy for 2007 . cms also noted that we did not make recommendations on payment for other radioactive sources associated with brachytherapy that may be separately payable in 2007 . as stated in our draft report , we examined how payment amounts for iodine , palladium , and iridium could be determined . in 2002 , these three sources were billed on 98 percent of the claims for radioactive sources associated with brachytherapy . medicare pays for seven other radioactive sources used in brachytherapy — gold - 198 , low - dose iridium , yttrium - 90 , cesium - 131 , liquid iodine - 125 , ytterbium - 169 , and linear palladium - 102 . we did not examine how payment for those sources could be determined because sufficient data on those sources were not available in the 2002 claims used to construct the sample of hospitals for our survey . medicare did not pay for cesium - 131 , ytterbium - 169 , and linear palladium - 102 in 2002 , and gold - 198 , low - dose iridium , liquid iodine - 125 , and yttrium - 90 together appeared on 2 percent of the approximately 22,000 claims for radioactive sources in that year . although we did not examine how payment amounts could be determined for these seven sources , the analytical framework we used may apply to them as well . comments from external reviewers representing manufacturers of radioactive sources and providers of brachytherapy centered on three different areas: our recommendation to pay prospectively for iodine and palladium sources ; our recommendation that cms evaluate the unit cost of iridium ; and payment for radioactive sources other than iodine , palladium , and iridium . i for more information on our hospital survey. ) we also interviewed representatives from a trade association of radioactive source manufacturers , six radioactive source manufacturers , three associations representing physicians and other health professionals involved in brachytherapy , an association of cancer hospitals , and seven individual hospitals . to examine how payment amounts for iodine , palladium , and iridium sources used in brachytherapy could be determined , we conducted a survey of purchase prices paid by 121 hospitals from july 1 , 2003 , through june 30 , 2004 .