iii ) . see appendix iv for the methods used to provide english language instruction among the local grantees we visited that receive funds from these various labor funding streams . additionally , within education , english language instruction is also allowed as remedial or developmental education within , for example , the pell grant program and certain higher education act of 1965 programs . education and hhs manage certain programs , such as even start and head start , that , while they serve children , may also reach adults through their family literacy activities , and these activities may include english language instruction . in addition , certain of education's other programs , such as those targeting after - school programs and migrant education , may also reach adults and include english language learning opportunities . in recent years , education and labor have developed some special initiatives that involve english language learning as a distinct focus ( see table 1 ) . specifically , education supported the development of a new distance learning web site for english language learners , known as usa learns , which became available in november 2008 . through its career connections demonstration , education addressed the needs of high - skilled english learners , who participated in the funded projects along with other adult education students , by providing access to occupational training and english language learning opportunities . education also plans to study those english language learners who are transitioning to adult basic education and adult secondary education programs in order to prepare for postsecondary education and the workforce — through an initiative known as transitioning english language learners ( tell ) . for its part , labor has undertaken a multifaceted initiative ( the limited english proficiency and hispanic worker initiative ) that relies , in part , on the nation's workforce centers , also known as one - stop career centers ( one - stops ) . labor developed tools to help one - stops serve limited english clients: that is , it recalculated census bureau data on the limited english population by local workforce area and issued guidance for identifying this population's needs . as part of this initiative , labor issued several grants for english language learning in a workforce setting . in san diego , for example , workforce - oriented english language instruction was provided to the new and existing employees of a large shipbuilder . finally , labor's new americans grants supported english language instruction at one - stops and promoted referrals to adult education state grant programs . beyond these initiatives , federal agencies have also provided technical assistance related to english language learning in administering their standing grant programs , and , in labor's case , regarding one of its special initiatives . for example , within the adult education state grant program , education has monitored states' procedures for assessing english language learners' proficiency and for reporting data on their gains , and has also provided training on using data for program improvement . education has also disseminated information on 3 states' approaches to performance - based funding .