most committees have now completed this review . however , the review of the executive committee's charter has not yet been finalized . regarding our recommendations , both the board and the smithsonian stressed the importance of enhancing relationships with stakeholders and agreed that these relationships and related communication can be improved . the board and the smithsonian underscored that they are working together to enhance these relationships and communication — particularly with advisory boards . in addition , the smithsonian provided examples of recent efforts to enhance communication with stakeholders . although all recommendations are directed at the board , the smithsonian noted its role in helping the board implement the recommendations related to improving stakeholder relationships and ensuring that sound governance is a priority in smithsonian operations . the board highlighted the importance of making the selection process for nonregents transparent and holding all regents accountable for their performance . the board's comments to our report can be found in appendix iii and the smithsonian's comments to our report can be found in appendix iv . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committee . we are also sending this report to the chair of the smithsonian institution's board of regents and the acting secretary of the smithsonian institution . we will make copies available upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no cost on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . for example , one option under consideration is to look to first recruit nonregent expertise from the advisory boards within the smithsonian before looking outside the institution . in addition , the governance and nominating committee is still considering whether and how nonregents should take on leadership roles in the committees . the board has decided that no major structural changes should be made to the board's composition . many have suggested that the board's composition contributed to governance breakdowns because of concerns about a lack of engagement of some regents and concerns of whether the board is large enough to house the diversity of skills and expertise needed to effectively carry out its oversight activities . the boardsource report reinforced these concerns and found that the statutorily required structure and composition of the board can , in fact , create limitations for the board with regard to evenly spreading its workload , and adding a diversity of skills and expertise . furthermore , the board has no authority in recruiting and appointing congressional and ex - officio regents , which can limit its ability to add needed expertise within its current structure . our analysis of the criteria developed for citizen regents finds that the criteria are consistent with current accepted practices , and include such things as whether individuals can serve in leadership roles , whether they have well - rounded experience in multiple fields , and whether they have specific expertise needed on the board and are appropriate for the smithsonian's specific needs . appendix i contains more information about our scope and methodology . the smithsonian institution is a unique and complex organization . congress created the smithsonian in 1846 as an independent trust establishment of the united states .