see app . vi for a full breakdown of cases by issue code for fiscal years 2002 through 2006. ) furthermore , the percentage of each type of issue , in terms of total caseload , varied over time . data on taxpayer issues showed the following: the growth in caseload was distributed across many issues with 7 issues increasing by more than 1,000 cases in fiscal year 2005 and 17 doing so in fiscal year 2006 . ( see app . vii for a breakdown of issues that increased by more than 1,000 cases in fiscal years 2005 and 2006. ) each week , the staff then sends a list of scored issues to the director of immediate interventions indicating which issues met or exceeded the current threshold for converting an issue into a systemic advocacy project . this threshold can change depending on available resources to work on systemic advocacy projects . the director of immediate interventions , director of advocacy projects , and the systemic advocacy portfolio managers review the issues and decide which will become systemic advocacy projects . an example of a systemic advocacy project was the tip compliance project . the project stemmed from complaints from taxpayers and practitioners about the manner in which irs was conducting tip compliance examinations . problems included , among others , inconsistent requirements for substantiating income , insistence that original tip diaries be sent to irs , and refusal to provide detail supporting any irs adjustments . the issue potentially affected a high number of taxpayers ; was geographically national in scope ; had high congressional , external stakeholder , and media interest ; involved significant efforts by taxpayers to resolve the issue ; and affected the equitable treatment of taxpayers , among other things , according to the scoring sheet used to rank the issue . tas worked with wage and investment ( w&i ) and small business / self employed ( sb / se ) staff involved in the examinations . tas was able to resolve some of the issues at lower levels of w&i and sb / se . for other issues , tas submitted an advocacy proposal to the management of the employment tax group within sb / se . these sb / se officials agreed to correct the issues tas raised . tas is monitoring these cases to make sure the problems are not experienced by other taxpayers . the national taxpayer advocate is required to prepare an annual report that describes the taxpayer advocate service's activities for the previous year that shall contain full and substantive analysis , in addition to statistical information , and shall 1 . identify the initiatives the office of the taxpayer advocate has taken on improving taxpayer services and internal revenue service responsiveness . contain recommendations received from individuals with the authority to issue taxpayer assistance orders under section 7811 . contain a summary of at least 20 of the most serious problems encountered by taxpayers , including a description of the nature of such problems . contain an inventory of the items described in 1 , 2 , and 3 for which action has been taken and the result of such action .