only two companies submitted bids . mms attributed the lack of interest to the delivery points for the oil being at market centers onshore rather than offshore near the lease . during the second sale , which commenced in october 2001 , mms offered and awarded approximately 48,000 barrels of oil from six major pipeline systems . nearly all of the oil consisted of two types , referred to as the mars and eugene grades , produced in water depths up to about 4,000 feet . the delivery point for the oil was offshore near the lease , and competition was robust . mms terminated the gulf rik oil pilots after the second sale when ordered by a presidential directive to transfer oil from these properties to the spr . as of july 2003 , mms had not evaluated the revenue impacts of either sale . because of the larger amount of oil sold during the second sale , we chose to analyze this sale and estimated that mms received about $7.2 million less in revenues than it would have received had it accepted cash royalty payments — a 5.5 percent loss on sales of about $131 million . we selected 13 of the 26 leases included in the second sale that collectively accounted for about 89 percent of the oil offered and sold . for the 16-month period prior to the start of the second oil sale , we compared the average monthly sales price for oil from each lease to the price as prescribed by mms's oil valuation regulations for sales between affiliated parties ( transactions not at arm's - length ) . we then computed a weighted average difference in the monthly prices for the entire 16-month period and assumed that this weighted average difference would have persisted over the 6-month rik sales period had royalties been paid in cash . a detailed explanation of our analysis appears in appendix i . because revenue from rik sales and from cash sales can differ considerably in any given month , a longer period of evaluation is needed to determine whether a specific type of rik sales can generate at least as much royalty revenue as cash sales . the reason that rik and cash sales revenues differ month to month is that they are generally based on different sets of market prices . for example , the formula that mms used to award rik bids in the second gulf of mexico sale differs from the formula prescribed in the oil valuation regulations primarily in two ways: ( 1 ) the bidding formula relies on prices from a period that is almost a month earlier than that prescribed by the oil valuation regulations , thereby creating a timing difference and ( 2 ) the bidding formula relied on an adjustment to nymex futures price , referred to as “the roll.” the roll is an adjustment that compensates for differences in oil futures prices for subsequent months . if futures prices for the next three trade months trend downward , the roll is a positive adjustment . if futures prices trend upward for the next three trade months , the roll is a negative number .