annual reviews . the annual reviews apply to all business system investments and are intended to determine whether the investment is meeting its milestones and addressing its irb certification conditions . tiers 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 business system investments are annually reviewed at two levels — the component and the irbs . at the component level , program managers update information on all tiers of system investments that are identified in their component's data repository . for tiers 1 through 3 systems that are in development or being modernized , information is updated on cost , milestones , and risk variances and actions or issues related to certification conditions . the component precertification authority then verifies and submits the information for these business system investments for the irb in an annual letter . the letter addresses system compliance with the bea and etp and includes investment cost , schedule , and performance information . irbs annually review tiers 1 , 2 , and 3 business system development or modernization investments . examples of their architecture limitations are discussed below . none of the military departments had fully defined its “as is” and “to be” architecture environments and associated transition plans . this is important because without a full understanding of architecture - based capability gaps , the departments would not have an adequate basis for defining and sequencing its ongoing and planned business system investments . none of the military departments had fully addressed security as part of its respective “as is” and “to be” environments . this is important because security is relevant and essential to every aspect of an organization's operations , and therefore the nature and substance of institutionalized security requirements , controls , and standards should be embedded throughout the architecture , and reflected in each system investment . none of the military departments was using an iv&v agent to help ensure the quality of its architecture products . iv&v is a proven means for obtaining unbiased insight into such essential architecture qualities as completeness , understandability , usability , and consistency . none of the military departments had established a committee or group with representation from across the enterprise to direct , oversee , and approve its architecture . this is significant because the architecture is a corporate asset that needs to be enterprisewide in scope and endorsed by senior leadership if it is to be leveraged for optimizing operational and technology change . none of the military departments could demonstrate that its it investments were actually in compliance with its architectures . this is relevant because the benefits from using an architecture , such as improved information sharing , increased consolidation , enhanced productivity , and lower costs , cannot be fully realized unless individual investments are actually in compliance with , among other things , architectural rules and standards . to address these limitations , we have made recommendations aimed at improving the management and content of these architectures . dod agreed with our recommendations . examples of these improvements and remaining issues are summarized below . the latest version includes performance metrics for the business capabilities within enterprise priority areas , including actual performance relative to performance targets that are to be met .