npac program areas . within the npac program , two program areas pursue technology development projects: international nuclear safeguards ( safeguards ) , among other things , develops technologies to detect and deter undeclared nuclear materials and activities . examples of projects that advanced technologies include projects in which nnsa scientists built instrument hardware , made progress in developing new technology combinations or applications , developed an algorithm or model to further data analysis , or made scientific advances that improved nonproliferation analysis and operations . some of the projects in our sample that have resulted in technologies being advanced have not resulted in technologies being transitioned to end users ( 55 of 88 such projects ) . according to nnsa officials and scientists we interviewed , technology transition has not occurred on these projects for a variety of reasons , including: the technology is not developed enough to be transitioned . for example , a dnn r&d proliferation detection project developed a technology to provide new capabilities in imaging gamma rays . the imager is a laboratory prototype and needs further development , according to a scientist we interviewed at oak ridge national laboratory . the project has not connected with an end user who wants to receive the technology . for example , a dnn r&d proliferation detection project developed a hand - held fast - neutron generator , but nnsa has yet to find an end user interested in the technology , according to the manager of the nuclear threat reduction program at lawrence livermore national laboratory . the project developed a technology to meet a future nonproliferation need rather than an existing requirement . for example , a project within the npac verification program developed a fast - neutron imaging technology that could be used in stockpile warhead verification , should a future arms control agreement call for warhead inspections . the technology currently is not being used in a verification context , but nnsa officials said it is in use at nnsa sites to compile benchmark data on nuclear weapons ; these data may later be used in verification and other national security missions . we determined that 33 of the 91 projects in our sample resulted in technologies that were transitioned to end users . these 33 projects include 17 projects that resulted in deployed technologies , since a technology is transitioned to an end user before it is deployed . for the remaining 16 projects , we found that either the technologies had not been deployed by an end user ( 13 of the 16 ) or we could not confirm with end users that the technologies had been deployed ( 3 of the 16 ) . specifically: we counted 13 of the 16 projects and their resulting technologies as transitioned but not deployed because the end users need to take certain steps before the technologies can be deployed , according to nnsa and end user agency officials . for example , one dnn r&d nuclear detonation detection project transitioned an instrument to a dod end user . however , the instrument has not been deployed because dod needs to find funds to further develop the technology , which , according to dod officials , was at a low level of technology readiness when transitioned .