pub . the expanator temet itemize $41,082,00 for the preideticandidte nomiee protectio ppa . rec . oligations connectio with reidetil candidte omiee rotectiod wi the inaugutio of the preideand vice preidet , i the ret case , o janu 20 , 2009 . letter from uderecret of managemet , departmet of homeland ecrit , to the cirman , subcommittee o homelansecrit , committee o s approritions , uited ste snate , june 30 , 2009 ( rromming notifictio ) . sused baance from another usss ppa to over [] hortfll iunding thi fias result of the rotective effort for o june 30 , 2009 , moth fter it reidetil candidte omiee rotectioded , dhs otified the subcommittee homelansecrit of the housansnate approritions committee tht usssd expded $,100,000 more thanee degnated for the preideticandidte nomiee protectio ppa . rromminotifictio . dhsxped tht uss “c the 2008 preidticapagn.” id . t issue here i whether ( 1 ) dhs and usss violted ectio 03 ( ) , and ( 2 ) if o , io of ectio 03 ( ) constitte violtio of the atideficie act . sectio 03 ( ) o june 30 , 2009 , dhs otified the housansnate subcommittee homel secrit of reromming of $.1 millio to cover hortfll i the usss preideticandidte capagn protectio ppa . sectio 03 ( ) reqire the secret of homelansecrit to rovide - day dvance otifictio of roed ppa rerommingscess of $ millio . a oted above , the 2008 reidetil cpagn officillded o janua 20 , 2009 , anll usssligations for candida protectioeerred by tht time . neverth th preideticandidte nomiee protectio ppa . eless , moth elapsed etwee e ed of the cpagn anotifictio of the $.1 millio reromming for the while it i uncler from the docmetio rovided to us by usss and dhs whe usssceeded the ectio 03 ( ) $ millio threhold , the threhold hd to hve eeceeded by the inaugutio janua 20 , 2009 , wheandidte ro eded . according to dhs , usss used moun from it ntionaspecisecrit eve ppa to cover itandidte rotectioligations tht eceeded the ome fil managemet issu , usss doe ot ct idedetl of it pareag , dhs . meeting etwee dhs directorte of managemet , bet and finance , and gao , jan. 12 , 2010 . dhs reqire it comagcie , iclding usss , to submit writte reromming reqt to the dhs directorte of managemet , bet and finance . dhs submit ll reromming otifictions reqired under ectio 03 ( ) to the housansnate approritions committee . id . $41 millio itemized i the expanator temet for the reidetil candidte rotectio ppa . rromming notifictio . however , ectio 03 ( ) specificll rovide tho fun re ilable throug rerommingcess of $ milli o unless housansnate approritions committee re otified 1ays dvance of the reromming . sce dhsiled to otif the approritions commi 1ays dvance of the oligatio of the rerommed fun , and usssrred oligationscess of t c violted ectio he $ millio threhold more thanays rior to ngressionaotifictio of the reromming , we coclde tht dhs and usss ( ) .