while these efforts are valuable , testing has not been the primary focus . this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards . the national mall in washington , d.c. , is one of the most recognizable landscapes in the united states and serves as both the public setting for our nation's capital as well as home to some of the most visited museums in the world . according to these officials , they participate in the mall security working group and have collaborated with other entities to share practices for implementing testing . to that end , the rmp requires that risk management decisions be documented . in addition , we have previously reported that risk management , as it pertains to facility protection , relies heavily on having accurate and timely information . documentation is also a necessary part of an effective internal control system , and federal internal control standards state that federal entities should complete and document corrective actions to remediate internal control deficiencies on a timely basis . without documentation , decision makers may not effectively understand the rationale behind decisions — or , in the case of risk management — make important security - related decisions and direct resources to address unmitigated risks . during the initial inquiries of our work conducting the sensitive aspects of this review , officials told us that due to a lack of complete documentation they had limited institutional knowledge of the national gallery's risk management decisions as they relate to physical security . because of a lack of documentation , we received inconsistent or incomplete information throughout that review . while national gallery officials agreed to address concerns we raised to them , we believe there is an opportunity for the national gallery to address gaps in its institutional knowledge and help ensure more informed decision - making — specifically , by developing a process to document its risk management decisions . interior , the smithsonian , and the national gallery each collect information on various aspects of the performance of their physical security programs ; however , each is at a different stage of developing goals and linking performance measures to these goals . along the national mall are numerous monuments and memorials to our nation's history and heritage . according to the park service , approximately 24-million people visit the national mall each year . various federal entities are responsible for the physical security of the national mall which includes conducting risk assessments of the national mall's assets and implementing measures to protect those assets , employees , and the visiting public . the open spaces of the national mall , along with the washington monument and the jefferson and lincoln memorials , are administered and maintained by interior's park service and patrolled by the park police . the park police is responsible for protecting the three icons as well as the other monuments and memorials , and park police officers have law enforcement jurisdiction on the national mall and its environs . one of the park police's specialized units is its icon protection unit , which is comprised of personnel who possess specialized training and knowledge of the icons .