( see fig . in addition , in 2004 , ferc reported that price index publishers have submitted information showing that the volume and number of transactions have increased significantly since 2002 and is influenced by at least two factors . first , companies that had been reporting transactions began reporting more transactions to publishers of price indices . second , companies that had not been reporting had begun reporting transactions to publishers of price indices . furthermore , many of the companies reporting in 2004 are among the industry's larger and more active participants . ( 2 ) have federal efforts improved industry stakeholders' confidence in these price indices ? to answer these questions , we reviewed federal reports documenting efforts to improve price transparency and examined literature on price transparency in the natural gas and electricity markets . in addition , we interviewed officials at ferc , representatives of relevant trade associations , and experts . we examined ferc survey data and assessed its reliability by reviewing existing information about the data , interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and examining comments by the entities surveyed . we conducted our work from june 2005 to november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the natural gas and electricity industries perform three primary functions in delivering energy to consumers: ( 1 ) producing the basic energy commodity , ( 2 ) transporting the commodity through pipelines or over power lines , and ( 3 ) distributing the commodity to the final consumer . historically , many local utilities in the electricity sector built their own systems of power plants and electricity transmission and distribution lines to serve the needs of all consumers in their local areas . similarly , natural gas companies built networks of pipelines to deliver natural gas from areas where it was produced to the markets where local distribution companies served all local customers . these local monopolies were overseen by regulators , who restricted the entry of new companies and also approved investments , approved prices paid by customers , and determined profits of these utilities . however , due to rising electricity prices and technological , economic , and policy developments beginning in the 1970s , the electricity and natural gas industries have restructured from a regulated environment to one that places greater reliance on competition to determine entry , investment , prices , and profits . the passage of the natural gas policy act of 1978 , the natural gas wellhead decontrol act of 1989 , and subsequent ferc orders in 1985 and 1992 opened access to pipelines and required pipeline companies to completely separate transportation , storage , and sales services , all of which facilitated the shift of natural gas to more competitive markets . similarly , the 1978 passage of the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 and the 1992 passage of the energy policy act facilitated restructuring in the electricity industry .