somalia . since 1969 , somalia has endured political instability and civil conflict , and is the third largest source of refugees , after syria and afghanistan . according to a 2017 state report , somalia remained a safe haven for terrorists who used their relative freedom of movement to obtain resources and funds to recruit fighters , and plan and mount operations within somalia and neighboring countries . somalia has an estimated population of over 11 million people , of which about half the population live on less than $1.90 per day , and roughly 82,000 somalis reside in the united states . haiti . currently the poorest country in the western hemisphere , haiti has experienced political instability for most of its history . customer due diligence . these procedures enable banks to predict , with relative certainty , the types of transactions in which a customer is likely to engage , which assists banks in determining when transactions are potentially suspicious . banks must document their process for performing customer due diligence . enhanced due diligence . customers who banks determine may pose a higher risk for money laundering or terrorist financing are subject to these procedures . enhanced due diligence for higher - risk customers helps banks understand these customers' anticipated transactions and implement an appropriate suspicious activity monitoring system . banks review higher - risk customers and their transactions more closely at account opening and more frequently throughout the term of their relationship with the bank . suspicious activity monitoring . banks and money transmitters must also have policies and procedures in place to monitor and identify unusual activity . they generally use two types of monitoring systems to identify or alert staff of unusual activity: manual transaction monitoring systems , which involve manual review of transaction summary reports to identify suspicious transactions , and automated monitoring systems that use computer algorithms to identify patterns of unusual activity . large - volume banks typically use automated monitoring systems . banks and money transmitters also must comply with certain reporting requirements , including: currency transaction report . banks and money transmitters must electronically file this type of report for each transaction in currency — such as a deposit , withdrawal , exchange , or other payment or transfer — of more than $10,000 . recent efforts to collect international remittance data from banks and credit unions do not include transfers these institutions make on behalf of money transmitters . since these data collection efforts are designed to protect u.s. consumers , the remittance data that banks and credit unions report are limited to remittances individual consumers send directly through these institutions . additionally , a few state regulators recently began requiring money transmitters to report remittance data by destination country , but these data do not distinguish money transmitters' use of banking and non - banking channels to transfer funds . finally , while treasury has a long - standing effort to collect information on travelers transporting cash from u.s. ports of exit , this information does not to identify cash transported for remittances .