ii ) . the agency acknowledged that our report identified many of the challenges state medicaid agencies face in attempting to ensure that medicaid is the payer of last resort . cms concurred with both recommendations and said that the agency planned to issue a decision with respect to the effective implementation date of , and the entities covered under , the deficit reduction act . cms also provided technical comments , including a comment that the report should clarify discussions regarding the provision of both coverage and eligibility data . we clarified our text to indicate that in this report we refer collectively to the process of determining the eligibility period and the services that are covered as “verifying health coverage.” we made a corresponding clarification to our recommendation . such savings can be substantial . states reported savings of nearly $5.5 billion in fiscal year 2004 from ensuring that private third parties paid before medicaid . in administering their medicaid programs , states are required to take reasonable measures to identify other sources of health coverage that medicaid beneficiaries may have and to ensure that such parties pay to the extent of their liability . states have considerable flexibility in designing and operating their medicaid programs , although they must comply with federal requirements . states can typically avoid paying claims for medicaid beneficiaries when they have verified that other coverage is available — for this purpose , knowing which services are covered and the eligibility period for the other coverage is critical — or they can seek reimbursement from third parties for previously paid claims for which the third party is legally liable . in the early 1990s , we reported certain problems that hindered states' ability to ensure that beneficiaries' other health care resources paid before medicaid . some third parties , for example , avoided paying costs for medicaid beneficiaries by taking actions that significantly limited states' ability to recover the costs . in response to our earlier recommendations , congress passed legislation in 1993 to help strengthen states' ability to collect from responsible third parties . recently , however , members of congress have become aware that states are experiencing difficulties with their third - party efforts . in february 2006 , congress passed the deficit reduction act of 2005 , which contained some provisions related to medicaid third - party liability . because of your interest that medicaid not pay for costs that are the responsibility of third parties , you asked us to review states' efforts to ensure that medicaid is the payer of last resort . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the extent to which medicaid beneficiaries have private health coverage and ( 2 ) problems affecting states' ability to ensure that medicaid is the payer of last resort , including the extent to which the deficit reduction act of 2005 might address these problems . to determine the extent to which medicaid beneficiaries nationwide and in individual states have private health coverage , we analyzed data from the only national data source containing this information , the current population survey ( cps ) conducted by the u.s. census bureau . cps is designed to represent a cross section of the nation's civilian noninstitutionalized population .