parm did not comply with this requirement . instead , parm provided the top - five contracts by dollar value for each program , but these entries did not include procurement quantity information for the programs . some programs did report total procurement quantities , but did not link these units to a schedule . parm officials noted that certain programs are not well - suited for reporting procurement quantities , such as it programs . however , in such cases , the casr should explain why no procurement quantities were listed . a third requirement was the reason for any significant changes in a program's acquisition cost , quantity , or schedule from the prior annual casr . parm officials interpreted these changes to only be those that resulted in the submission of a new acquisition program baseline . according to dhs acquisition policy , programs need to submit new baselines when they breach defined cost , schedule , and performance parameters defined in their original baseline . we found a number of problems with the data . for example , as of september 2013 , three programs we reviewed did not enter expenditure data , the amount the programs actually spent , in nprs for fiscal year 2013 as required , and two of these programs did not enter historical expenditure data at all . when we compared programs' entries of expenditure data over time , we found additional discrepancies . as an example , the u.s. coast guard's fast response cutter program's expenditure entries in nprs increased by more than $340 million from september 2013 to march 2014 , even though both of these entries were supposed to reflect fiscal year 2013 expenditures . a u.s. coast guard official stated that this increase was due to a correction in the program's reported expenditures , to account for all funds spent in fiscal year 2013 regardless of when those funds were received . the official noted that the program's entry from september 2013 reflected only funds received in fiscal year 2013 . however , the reason for this change was not documented in nprs . in another example , the u.s . citizenship and immigration service's verification modernization program's entries for total historical expenditures through fiscal year 2012 decreased by almost $240 million when comparing these data from september 2013 and march 2014 . figure 3 shows the differences in reported expenditure data in nprs for the fast response cutter and verification modernization programs . large nprs discrepancies such as these call into question the reliability of the underlying data and whether dhs management has the information it needs to provide oversight of major acquisition programs . parm officials have acknowledged ongoing issues with the data reported in nprs and noted that they are working to improve its quality . for example , parm provides a working group to the components to express their views on the nprs system and its processes . see appendix i for a more complete description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from march 2014 to march 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .