gao - 12-108 . as we reported in 2012 , 13 agencies administered 209 stem education programs in fiscal year 2010 . nsf and the department of education programs accounted for over half of this funding . almost a third of the programs had obligations of $1 million or less , with five programs having obligations of more than $100 million each . beyond the 209 programs identified in our review , federal agencies carried out other activities that contribute to the overall federal stem education effort . having multiple agencies , with varying expertise , involved in delivering stem education has both advantages and disadvantages . agencies reported that they developed the majority ( 130 ) of these programs through their general statutory authority and that congress specifically directed agencies to create 59 of these programs . the number of programs each agency administered ranged from 3 to 46 with three agencies — the department of health and human services , the department of energy , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) — administering more than half of all programs — 112 of 209 . ( see fig . 1 ) agencies obligated over $3 billion to stem education programs in fiscal year 2010 , ranging from $15,000 to hundreds of millions of dollars per program . on the one hand , it could allow agencies to tailor programs to suit their specific missions and needs to attract new employees to their workforce . on the other hand , it could make it challenging to develop a coherent federal approach to educating stem students and creating a workforce with stem skills . further , it could make it difficult to identify gaps and allocate resources across the federal government . as we reported in 2012 , and as figure 2 illustrates , in fiscal year 2010 , 83 percent of stem education programs overlapped to some degree with another program in that they offered at least one similar service to at least one similar target group in at least one similar stem field to achieve at least one similar objective . these programs ranged from being narrowly focused on a specific group or field of study to offering a range of services to students and teachers across stem fields . this complicated patchwork of overlapping programs has largely resulted from federal efforts to both create and expand programs across many agencies in an effort to improve stem education and increase the number of students going into stem fields . program officials reported that approximately one - third of stem education programs funded in fiscal year 2010 were first funded between 2005 and 2010 . we believe the creation of new programs during that time frame may have contributed to overlap and , ultimately , to inefficiencies in how stem programs across the federal government are focused and delivered . overlap among stem education programs is not new . in 2007 , the academic competitiveness council ( acc ) identified extensive overlap among stem education programs , and , in 2009 , we identified overlap among teacher quality programs , which include several programs focused on stem education .