the gifts were not used for renovations to the quarters . the navy acknowledges receiving about $59,780 in nonmonetary gifts provided by various donors as furnishings to help decorate the home of the superintendent of the naval academy . however , similar to the marine corps , the navy did not properly accept and account for about $3,970 of the gifts in the property records . the army properly accepted $50,000 in furnishings from the army war college foundation for the home of the commandant of the army war college at carlisle barracks . dod and the military services could lose visibility over spending to maintain and repair an increasing number of privatized general and flag officer housing units because there is no consistent dod - wide policy requiring review of maintenance and repair projects over certain dollar thresholds . likewise , the navy and the marine corps have developed draft guidance for internally reviewing annual operating budgets for privatized housing that would require approval by navy or marine corps headquarters officials for costs that exceed $50,000 in one year for any house . the army has no plans to issue additional guidance regarding costs to maintain and repair privatized housing . according to army officials , annual operating budgets for privatized housing are reviewed by headquarters officials , which they believe will provide adequate visibility over renovations to privatized housing . we agree that reviewing annual budgets provides visibility over renovation costs but question its ability to provide oversight where renovation costs for selected residences are higher than the norm . the services' procedures to develop cost estimates for renovation to general and flag officer quarters generally produce budget estimates that are consistent with the projects' actual costs . however , marine corps officials approved costly customer - requested changes based on personal preferences notwithstanding guidance in handbooks discouraging the approval of such requests . the marine corps failed to follow established guidance and procedures and properly accept and account for gifts , especially nonmonetary gifts , used to help renovate and furnish the home of the commandants . thus , they have no assurance that the nonmonetary gifts remain in their possession . finally , dod and the military services could lose visibility over renovations to general and flag office quarters that are privatized . while some services are taking some steps to ensure that renovation projects over certain dollar thresholds are reviewed internally , there is no consistent dod - wide guidance . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following three actions: direct the secretary of the navy to ( 1 ) reemphasize the importance of limiting customer - driven changes to renovation projects for general and flag officer housing and ( 2 ) properly account for all gifts accepted and used to help renovate the home of commandants of the marine corps . furthermore , we are recommending the secretary of defense direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics to ensure the standardization and periodic review of the expenditure levels for individual privatized units on a programmatic basis , to include general and flag officer quarters , with periodic reports to the office of the secretary of defense .