gao - 09-326sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2009 . discusses the department of defense's joint tactical radio system — handheld , manpack , small form fit and warfighter information network — tactical programs . our analysis is presented in table 6 . additional details on the 16 case studies are provided in appendix ii . eleven programs are expected to incur a cost overrun at contract completion . in particular , two programs ( i.e. , the james webb space telescope and veterans health information systems and technology architecture — foundations modernization programs ) will likely experience a combined overrun of $798.7 million , which accounts for about 80 percent of our total projection . with timely and effective action taken by program and executive management , it is possible to reverse negative performance trends so that the projected cost overruns at completion may be reduced . to get such results , management at all levels could be strengthened , including contractor management , program office management , and executive - level management . for example , programs could strengthen program office controls and contractor oversight by obtaining earned value data weekly ( instead of monthly ) so that they can make decisions with immediate and greater impact . additionally , key risks could be elevated to the program level and , if necessary , to the executive level to ensure that appropriate mitigation plans are in place and that they are tracked to closure . key agencies have taken a number of important steps to improve the management of major acquisitions through the implementation of evm . specifically , the agencies have established evm policies and require their major system acquisition programs to use evm . however , none of the eight agencies that we reviewed have comprehensive evm policies . most of these policies omit or lack sufficient guidance on the type of work structure needed to effectively use evm data and on the training requirements for all relevant personnel . without comprehensive policies , it will be difficult for the agencies to gain the full benefits of evm . few of our 16 case study programs had fully implemented evm capabilities , raising concerns that programs cannot efficiently produce reliable estimates of cost at completion . many of these weaknesses found on these programs can be traced back to inadequate agency evm policies and raise questions concerning the agencies' enforcement of the policies already established , including the completion of the integrated baseline reviews and system surveillance . until agencies expand and enforce their evm policies , it will be difficult for them to optimize the effectiveness of this management tool , and they will face an increased risk that managers are not getting the information they need to effectively manage the programs . in addition to concerns about their implementation of evm , the programs' earned value data show trends toward cost overruns that are likely to collectively total about $3 billion . without timely and aggressive management action , this projected overrun will be realized , resulting in the expenditure of over $1 billion more than currently planned .