recommendation 17 . ensure that the executive steering committee is effectively monitoring the transformation program's performance and progress toward a predefined cost and schedule and relying on complete and accurate program data to review the performance of the transformation program against stated expectations . direct the department's chief information officer to use accurate and reliable information , such as operational assessments of the new architecture and cost and schedule parameters approved by the under secretary of management . complete planning for software releases prior to initiating development and ensure software meets business expectations prior to deployment . consistently implement the principles of the framework adopted for agile software 21 . define and consistently execute appropriate roles and responsibilities for individuals responsible for development activities consistent with its selected development framework . identify all system users and involve them in release planning activities . write user stories that identify user roles , include estimates of complexity , take no longer than one sprint to complete , and describe business value . establish outcomes for agile software development . monitor program performance and report to appropriate entities through the collection of 26 . conduct unit and integration , and functional acceptance tests , and code inspection consistent 27 . develop complete test plans and cases for interoperability and end user testing , as defined in the uscis transformation program test and evaluation master plan , and document the results . clearly define measures against which to analyze differences between services expected 29 . ensure contracting officer representatives are maintaining complete contract files . ensure quality assurance surveillance plans are developed when appropriate . closed this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . immigration benefits system: u.s . citizenship and immigration services can improve program management , gao - 16-467 ( washington , d.c.: july 7 , 2016 ) . asylum: additional actions needed to assess and address fraud risks , gao - 16-50 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 2 , 2015 ) . immigrant investor program: additional actions needed to better assess fraud risks and report economic benefits , gao - 15-696 ( washington , d.c.: aug. 12 , 2015 ) . immigration benefits system: better informed decision making needed on transformation program , gao - 15-415 ( washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2015 ) . h - 2a and h - 2b visa programs: increased protections needed for foreign workers , gao - 15-154 ( washington , d.c.: mar . immigration benefits: improvements needed to fully implement the international marriage broker regulation act , gao - 15-3 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 10 , 2014 ) . h - 2a visa program: modernization and improved guidance could reduce employer application burden , gao - 12-706 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 12 , 2012 ) . immigration benefits: consistent adherence to dhs's acquisition policy could help improve transformation program outcomes , gao - 12-66 ( washington , d.c.: nov. 22 , 2011 ) .