mtw . hud requires mtw agencies to submit annual reports containing summary information about the impact of the activities intended to encourage resident self - sufficiency they have been implementing . the agencies were able to use metrics of their choosing at the time of our review . hud has performed limited analyses — to assess outcomes for the programs as a whole — of data related to self - sufficiency outcomes that fss grant recipients must report into its information systems . in addition , hud has not analyzed similar data that fss , ross sc , and mtw agencies must report through other mechanisms to assess each program as a whole . standards for internal control emphasize the need for federal agencies both to collect reliable information with which to manage their programs and review the integrity of performance measures . moreover , these standards emphasize the need for program managers to collect operational data to determine whether they have been meeting their goals for the efficient and effective use of resources . additionally , the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) emphasizes the need for information on the effectiveness of federal programs to improve congressional decision making . based on the information that phas must report in pic and the fss addendum in pic , hud has performed limited analyses of the data related to self - sufficiency outcomes for the two fss programs . as previously discussed , fss participation data were sometimes incomplete and therefore of questionable reliability . specifically , hud's data lacked start dates and annual updates for some fss participants . despite these limitations , hud has used these data in its congressional budget justifications . for example , in the 2014 congressional budget justification hud reported that as of march 30 , 2012 , a total of 57,087 families were enrolled in the two fss programs . without annually updated records for each family , hud cannot reliably determine whether families were still active program participants . additionally , hud has not analyzed and reported on the experiences of all families that start the fss programs , including the extent to which they completed the program , the primary reasons they exited the program without completing it , and the extent to which required data are missing . according to hud , they have not conducted such analysis due their own concerns about the usefulness of available data . hope vi . hud requires participating agencies to submit quarterly reports of summary data on residents' progress towards self - sufficiency into the hope vi quarterly reporting system . for example , hope vi agencies must report the total number of residents who participated in activities that facilitate self - sufficiency , including the numbers enrolled in counseling programs , job training , and general education development classes . as described previously , internal control standards state that such information can help agencies determine whether they have been meeting operational goals and using resources effectively . according to hud officials with responsibility for administering the two fss programs , they were aware that some phas did a better job of reporting into pic than others , which affected the completeness and reliability of the data .