the agents responded that they were americans . the cbp officer next asked the agents where they were born , and they responded new york and west virginia . the agents then handed the cbp officers their counterfeit west virginia and virginia driver's licenses . the officer looked at the licenses briefly and asked the agents why they had visited canada . the agents responded that they had a day off from a conference that they were attending in washington and decided to do some sightseeing . the cbp officer returned the agents' identification and allowed them to enter the united states . we conducted a corrective action briefing with officials from cbp on june 9 , 2006 , about the results of our investigation . cbp agreed its officers are not able to identify all forms of counterfeit identification presented at land border crossings . cbp officials also stated that they fully support the newly promulgated western hemisphere travel initiative , which will require all travelers , including u.s. citizens , within the western hemisphere to have a passport or other secure identification deemed sufficient by the secretary of homeland security to enter or reenter the united states . the current timeline proposes that the new requirements will apply to all land border crossings beginning on december 31 , 2007 . the proposed timeline was developed pursuant to the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 . the act requires the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , to implement a plan no later than january 1 , 2008 , to strengthen the border screening process through the use of passports and other secure documentation in recognition of the fact that additional safeguards are needed to ensure that terrorists cannot enter the united states . however , the senate recently passed a bill to extend the implementation deadline from january 1 , 2008 , to june 1 , 2009 . additionally , the senate bill would also authorize the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , to develop a travel document known as a passport card to facilitate travel of u.s. citizens to canada , mexico , the countries located in the caribbean , and bermuda . we did not assess whether this initiative would be fully implemented by either the january 2008 or june 2009 deadline or whether it would be effective in preventing terrorists from entering the united states . the results of our current work indicate that ( 1 ) cbp officers at the nine land border crossings tested did not detect the counterfeit identification we used and ( 2 ) people who enter the united states via land crossings are not always asked to present identification . furthermore , our periodic tests since 2002 clearly show that cbp officers are unable to effectively identify counterfeit driver's licenses , birth certificates , and other documents . this vulnerability potentially allows terrorists or others involved in criminal activity to pass freely into the united states from canada or mexico with little or no chance of being detected .