faa . faa had warehouses at four main sites that contained property specific to the sites' missions , and most of the remaining warehouses were buildings that contained equipment , tools , or materials to maintain aviation support systems or housed support systems , such as approach lighting systems , according to our analysis of faa warehouse data , faa officials , and sites we visited . for example , we visited faa's warehouses at the mike monroney aeronautical center , including the logistics support facility , faa's largest warehouse and central location for maintaining and repairing aviation support systems deployed throughout the national airspace system . most items in the warehouse were spare parts , materials , and systems or system components that had been sent to the facility for repair . we also visited faa's staging area , which supports faa's manufacture and assembly of new systems to be deployed throughout the country . accordingly , much of the property at the two warehouses that comprise this facility was equipment , parts , and material , along with the machines and tools to manufacture and assemble the material . for example , we viewed components of a wind shear alert system that were being prepared to be shipped . faa's mobile asset deployment center stored and maintained faa's mobile assets , such as air traffic control towers and housing units that faa deploys to maintain service during disruptions such as natural disasters . finally , we visited a 96-square - foot shack — identified in frpp as a warehouse and pictured below — that housed an approach lighting system . ( see fig . 2 for examples of faa warehouses and property. ) office of science . most office of science warehouses were located at office of science national laboratories . warehouses at the two national laboratories we visited — argonne national laboratory and fermi national accelerator laboratory — contained a broad variety of equipment , including equipment being staged for near - term use and equipment in longer - term storage specifically designated for future projects . for example , one warehouse at fermi national accelerator laboratory contained a cryogenic system acquired by cern , the european organization for nuclear research , as its contribution to a planned experiment . this cryogenic system will be used for cooling purposes . a warehouse at the same site also contained some decades - old items kept as replacements for items still in use . according to officials , many of these older items would be difficult to obtain in a reasonable time frame for a reasonable price if a replacement were needed . in addition , at fermi national accelerator laboratory , we saw a large , out - of - use calorimeter — a device commonly used in physics experiments — that was being stored for eventual use in an educational display . warehouses also contained parts , materials , and supplies for laboratory use . ( see fig . 3 for examples of office of science warehouses and property. ) bop .