munitions list . given the current interest in missile technology proliferation and export controls , you asked us to determine whether the departments of commerce and state have clearly established which department has jurisdiction over missile technology control regime items . specifically , we identified the two departments' division of jurisdiction over regime items , the factors that contribute to unclear jurisdiction for these items , and the potential effects of unclear jurisdiction over these items . the united states along with six allies established the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) in 1987 . the regime is a voluntary agreement among member countries to limit the proliferation of missiles capable of delivering nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons and their associated equipment and technology . the regime consists of common export policy guidelines and a list of controlled items that include complete missile systems ( rocket and unmanned air vehicle systems ) and missile - related components and technologies that may have civilian applications . the list , known as the equipment , software , and technology annex ( hereafter , referred to as the regime annex ) , is periodically updated to reflect technological advances . member countries agree to control exports of regime items in accordance with their respective national laws . the united states fulfills its mtcr commitments primarily through the export control systems of the departments of commerce and state . these two systems were founded on different premises . the commerce department , through its bureau of export administration , controls exports of most dual - use items and technologies under the authority of the export administration act of 1979 . as such , the commerce department is charged with weighing u.s. economic and trade interests along with national security and foreign policy interests . dual - use items subject to the commerce department's export controls are identified in the commerce control list of the export administration regulations . in contrast , the state department , through its office of defense trade controls , controls exports of defense articles and services under the authority of the arms export control act . the state department's export control system is designed primarily to further national security and foreign policy interests . the items controlled by the state department can be found in the international traffic in arms regulations , specifically within the u.s . munitions list , which the state department develops with the concurrence of the department of defense . the departments of state and defense are reviewing and revising different portions of the u.s . munitions list on an annual basis , as part of the defense trade security initiative , to ensure that coverage of items on the list is appropriate.exporters are responsible for determining whether an item they seek to export is on the commerce control list and , therefore , subject to the commerce department's jurisdiction , or on the u.s . munitions list and subject to the state department's jurisdiction . with the passage of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1991 , the congress amended both the export administration act and the arms export control act to include restrictions on the export of regime items .