mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . appealed penalties were reduced by an average of 49 percent . in our reports released today , we are making a number of recommendations to improve mine operators' access to information and tools for training their workers , strengthen msha's oversight of training , improve the effectiveness of information sharing between msha and niosh , strengthen msha's workforce planning , and ensure transparency in penalty appeal determinations . msha's coal mine safety and health administration is responsible for carrying out enforcement activities related to surface and underground coal mines . as of january 2007 , msha employed approximately 550 underground coal inspectors in its 11 coal districts . msha's principal enforcement responsibility for underground coal mines is fulfilled by conducting a minimum of four comprehensive inspections of every underground coal mine each year . when msha inspectors observe violations of federal health and safety standards , they are required to issue a citation to the coal mine operator . even if an operator does not agree with the violation or the penalty amount , the operator must resolve the problems within the time frame set by the inspector . in assessing penalties , the mine act requires both the commission and msha to consider six statutory factors: 1. the mine operator's history of previous violations , 2. the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the mine , 3. whether the mine operator was negligent , 4. the effect on the operator's ability to continue in business , 5. the gravity of the violation , and 6. the demonstrated good faith of the mine operator charged in quickly remedying the situation after being notified of a violation . underground coal mine operators face significant challenges preparing for emergencies , including ensuring that miners receive realistic training and organizing mine rescue teams that satisfy new requirements . msha issued new requirements in march 2006 that direct mine operators to conduct mine emergency evacuation drills every 90 days , including drills that simulate actual emergency conditions ; install directional lifelines to help miners find their way out of a dark mine ; and instruct miners in the procedures for evacuating the mine in emergencies , such as those involving fires or explosions . my comments are based on the findings of two reports to be released today . we conducted all of our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . underground coal mine operators reported facing significant challenges in preparing for emergencies , including ensuring that miners receive realistic training and organizing mine rescue teams that satisfy new requirements . while mine operators recognize the importance of providing training in an environment that simulates an emergency , many of them reported challenges such as having limited access to special training facilities and the cost of providing such training . in addition , mine operators reported that they anticipate challenges in implementing new mine rescue team requirements , such as conducting training at least annually at each mine the rescue team services . msha approves mine operators' training plans and inspects their training records , but its oversight of miner training is hampered by several factors .