we agree . state's plans provide for preparing a prototype and pilot testing evaluation report . also , such a report will be needed by not only the lead agency for acquiring and deploying the operational system , but also all participating agencies that will need to integrate the operational system with their respective legacy systems . see comments 3 , 4 , and 5 . we agree . as stated in our report , the secretary of state was directed to lead a cabinet - level committee to implement the recommendations of the overseas presence advisory panel , which included acquiring and deploying a multiagency common platform knowledge management system . while we recognize the possibility that state might not be the lead agency for the next phase of the program , we strongly believe that , to allow for program continuity and avoid unnecessary delays , these issues must be addressed now . since state is currently the lead agency for the program , the recommendations are being directed to the secretary of state . we agree with state's comment , and note in our report , that the roles , responsibilities , and accountabilities of state and its agency partners would need to be fully and formally defined before moving beyond planned near - term activities . although state asserted during the course of our review , and in its comments , that its present informal structure for managing agency relationships is working and its comments assert that it provided documents to us attesting to this on numerous occasions , this documentation , while voluminous and repetitive , did not demonstrate what the current process is and whether it was working . as a result , we were forced to expand the scope of work to include a survey of state's agency partners to determine whether state had engaged them in program - related activities . from our survey , we were able to conclude that state had taken adequate action to engage the agencies . nevertheless , some agencies raised concerns that must be addressed before beginning the next phase of the program . for example , one agency partner stated that it had not participated in an approval process for program planning documentation , another partner stated that it was unaware of any approval process for planning - related activities , and a third stated that it had not reviewed any of the program planning documentation . moreover , one agency partner stated that a more formal program governance structure is needed , especially for reviewing and approving such documents as the program's concept of operations and the system's functional requirements . a similar statement was made in a meeting of the state - led foreign affairs systems integration architectural working group . specifically , it was stated that protocols needed to be established , such as officially listing the documents that would be shared so that all participants would be aware of these documents and have the opportunity to review them before making any decisions about how to proceed . we disagree . our report clearly links our findings , conclusions , and recommendations .