, 1st sess. could the postal regulator use its enhanced authority over ratemaking data to require usps to collect and / or update specific ratemaking data ? if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or at siggerudk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report included gerald p. barnes , assistant director ; kenneth e. john ; anna bonelli ; kevin bailey ; jay cherlow ; karen o'conor ; richard rockburn ; and walter vance . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe key u.s . postal service ( usps ) actions that were responsive to the 1999 data quality study ( the study ) to improve the quality of ratemaking data and ( 2 ) discuss possible implications of postal reform legislation for ratemaking data quality . if so , would that include regulatory authority over the quantity of data collected and the methods of data collection ( eg , in - person data collection v. telephone data collection ) ? we received written comments on a draft of this report from the chairman of the postal rate commission in a letter dated july 18 , 2003 , and the controller and vice president of the u.s . postal service via e - mail on the same date . their comments are summarized below , and the prc chairman's comments are reproduced as appendix ii . in addition , prc and usps officials provided technical and clarifying comments , which were incorporated where appropriate . “in light of the record of success under the current system , the proposed legislation relating to the requirements for reporting ratemaking data in practice is not likely to lead to the breakthrough improvements in the quality of the ratemaking data systems without a significant increase in costs to the stakeholders . concerned , furthermore , that the proposed legislative changes may sacrifice the checks and balances and the effective process of data review and refinement that have evolved under the current system.” we disagree with usps's first comment that the current ratemaking process has worked “remarkably well” since postal reorganization . we continue to believe that major changes are needed to the ratemaking structure . as described in our report , the current ratemaking structure has enabled long - standing deficiencies in ratemaking data quality to persist . further , we have reported that the ratemaking process is a litigious , costly , and lengthy process that can delay needed new revenues . in this regard , usps's comments appear to be inconsistent with the april 14 , 2005 , testimony of the postmaster general that “today's ratemaking process is both costly and time consuming” and needs major change , as well as the numerous criticisms that usps has made of the ratemaking process over the years . we continue to believe that comprehensive postal reform legislation is urgently needed , including improvements to the regulation and oversight of postal rates . second , we believe the need for reform is not diminished by comparisons of ratemaking data quality with that of foreign postal administrations , which have different regulatory environments .