( see fig . see appendix ii for a full list of the waivers and modifications . education has not assessed the impact of waivers and modifications on federal student financial aid recipients and title iv federal student financial aid programs as mandated by congress . specifically , both the 2001 and 2003 heroes acts required education to report to congress on the impact of its waivers and modifications within 15 months of first exercising its authority to waive or modify federal student financial aid provisions . based on education's issuance of comprehensive waivers and modifications in december 2003 , a study should have been completed no later than march 2005 . while heroes does not specify how education should go about assessing the impact of its waivers and modifications , education officials interpreted the act as requiring a rigorous experimental design that they say would be costly and cannot currently be supported with education's data systems . therefore , education currently has no plans to complete the required study . currently , education does not have a mechanism for identifying the total number of federal student financial aid recipients who have been provided assistance under heroes within its data systems . education maintains a central database of all federal student loans and pell grants through its national student loan data system , which tracks the status of loans and grants through their life cycle . the database collects required information on federal student aid recipients' enrollment status from schools and the status of their loans from lenders and guaranty agencies . based on current reporting requirements , the system can only be used to identify two types of assistance provided to borrowers based on their military service , military deferment and military grace periods , which are coded uniquely in the system and existed prior to heroes . education officials told us that the system would have to be reengineered to identify other types of borrowers who received assistance under heroes , such as those with loans in forbearance , because there are no additional codes in the system to explain what made the loan eligible for assistance , such as military service or financial difficulty . when education announced waivers and modifications , it included a provision requiring postsecondary schools and lenders to document their use of the waivers and modifications in such a way that they could report on their effect to education upon request . however , the announcement did not include any specific guidance on what types of data education wanted and how schools and lenders should collect it to ensure education could use the data . education officials told us that they thought the requirement went largely unnoticed and that lenders generally do not collect information on this population in such a way that would be reportable . for example , the officials said that while lenders maintain information on the reasons for forbearance in a borrower's individual loan record , they would not have a mechanism for running a query to identify every borrower granted forbearance based on active duty service .