gao - 15-346 . washington , d.c.: june 18 , 2015 . we recognize that leasing is appropriate at times . nevertheless , in its march 2015 testimony before congress , dod asserted that it had about 24 percent excess capacity prior to brac 2005 and that the department subsequently disposed of about 3 percent of this excess capacity through brac . in its comments , dod did not indicate the extent to which the department reviewed remaining excess capacity , if at all , for use by the organizations that subsequently reoccupied the 1.1 million square feet of leased space . dod also disagrees with our conclusion that reoccupying space that had been vacated through brac in order to achieve cost savings ( i.e. , vacating leased space and occupying less costly government owned space ) offsets savings attributed to these brac recommendations . while dod's letter referenced new mission and lease consolidation opportunities as the rationale for reoccupying vacated space , it did not explain how incurring these new lease costs was not , in fact , an offset to any savings attributable to brac from having reoccupied space just vacated for the purpose of saving money , among other things . this is particularly significant because dod expend appropriated funds through brac to construct or lease facilities to accommodate the dod organizations that vacated the leased space , only to later expend additional appropriated funds to reoccupy some of the same leased space previously vacated . dod did not concur with our second recommendation that the assistant secretary of defense ( energy , installations and environment ) modify the office's real property information model to include a new data element to capture the total square footage assigned to each individual lease when multiple leases exist for a single building and make a corresponding change to its guidance to avoid overstating the total square footage assigned to each lease in rpad . in its comments , dod stated that it agrees that the issue we identified does exist regarding multiple leases that are assigned the same building ( leases managed by whs in the national capital region ) and that the inclusion of an additional data element may well serve as an indicator to help resolve this issue . however , dod believes that the underlying cause for overstating the total square footage for these records in rpad is a data aggregation issue and has chosen an alternative approach to address the issue we raised . specifically , dod stated that the department is in the final stages of developing a platform that will transmit data into rpad , and that will include the capability to capture square footage for multiple leases in a single building . dod stated that its new data analytics and integration support platform for transmitting rpad data will serve as the near real time data warehouse of the dod real property inventory and will perform the data collection , verification , and validation of the real property inventory data submitted by each military department and whs ; and is expected to be fully deployed by fiscal year 2017 .