iv , figs . determining type and subject of activity . sba field and program offices are responsible for originating cosponsored activities . as previously stated , our analysis of the information sba maintains on cosponsorship agreements showed that the agency executed 132 cosponsorship agreements in fiscal year 2012 . in addition , our review of the official file for these agreements and other related materials showed that more than 80 percent of them included training activities , about 20 percent included recognition activities , and about 17 percent included matchmaking activities . further , the subject matter of the activities conducted under these agreements varied and included business planning and marketing , social media , e - commerce , technology , franchising , employment practices and employee benefits , tax planning and other legal issues , and government contracting . making conflict - of - interest determinations . sba field or program offices that originate cosponsored activities are responsible for vetting nonprofit and governmental entities ; sba's office of strategic alliances is responsible for vetting for - profit entities and upon request may assist originating offices in vetting nonprofit and government entities . this report notes that sba helps entrepreneurs start , build , and grow businesses by , among other things , providing counseling and training as well as actions to increase federal contracting and subcontracting opportunities . as part of discussions , we asked the participants to describe the ownership of the business they represented , including ownership types that sba has targeted for assistance . the responses received are noted in figure 7 . vetting is the process of gathering information to determine whether potential cosponsors have an actual or apparent conflict of interest with sba that would preclude them from cosponsoring an activity . the information gathered during the vetting process is submitted to sba's general counsel or designee to determine whether any conflicts of interest exist . the sba form 1615 documents the conflict - of - interest determination . sba is responsible for designating a cosponsor as fiscal agent when the cosponsored activity expects to receive cash contributions from cosponsors or fees from participants . the fiscal agent is responsible for collecting , managing , and disbursing cosponsorship funds and establishing a separate mechanism to account for all cosponsorship funds that prevents commingling of cosponsorship funds with the fiscal agent's own funds . our review of the proposed budgets for all fiscal year 2012 cosponsorship agreements showed that sba funded direct costs in less than half of the agreements , and when it did it generally funded costs for course materials and instructors , printing , postage , marketing activities , and awards . table 1 provides information on the budgets for cosponsorship agreements sba executed in fiscal year 2012 . the largest direct cost sba funded in fiscal year 2012 was $810,475 for the course materials and instructors for the emerging leaders initiative , a 7-month training program provided to small business executives in more than 20 cities ( under separate cosponsorship agreements ) across the country . sba does not systematically collect feedback on the benefits that cosponsored activities provide to small businesses .