weapons in managed retirement . these weapons have been removed from the stockpile but have not been approved for dismantlement . these weapons are maintained in such a way that they could be reactivated should there be a catastrophic failure in the stockpile necessitating such action . the nuclear weapons council standing and safety committee must approve dismantlement of these weapons . in addition , nnsa also characterizes retired nuclear weapons as either “war reserve” weapons or “quality assurance” weapons . retired war reserve weapons are those withdrawn from the active or inactive stockpile categories that are surplus to defense needs and that could be reinstated to the stockpile if not dismantled . retired quality assurance weapons are those that have been retired from the active or inactive stockpile categories for surveillance purposes — specifically , some of their components are destructively tested as part of the surveillance process , and these weapons are subsequently dismantled rather than being rebuilt . in discussing its future dismantlement schedule , nnsa tends to focus on the inventory of war reserve weapons because this inventory includes a large number of weapons that have been retired and accumulated in inventory over time and are weapons to be counted toward nnsa's dismantlement performance goal . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to assess ( 1 ) the extent to which the annual inventories of weapons awaiting dismantlement and the national nuclear security administration's ( nnsa ) annual dismantlement rates have changed over time , and , if so , the reasons why ; ( 2 ) how nnsa measures progress toward achieving its performance goal of dismantling all weapons retired prior to fiscal year 2009 by the end of fiscal year 2022 , and any challenges it might face in meeting the goal ; ( 3 ) nnsa's schedule for dismantlement of weapons retired as a result of the new strategic arms reduction treaty ( new start ) and the challenges , if any , nnsa faces in dismantling those weapons ; ( 4 ) the physical capacity available at pantex to meet nnsa's planned future dismantlement workload and to potentially accelerate dismantlement ; and ( 5 ) the challenges , if any , affecting disassembly and disposition of components from dismantled weapons . in general , we addressed these objectives by reviewing relevant nuclear weapons stockpile guidance and planning documents and interviewing nnsa officials . these documents include nuclear weapons stockpile plans , the nuclear weapons stockpile requirements and planning documents , and nnsa's nuclear weapons production and planning directives . we interviewed nnsa officials responsible for overseeing the weapons dismantlement and disposition ( wdd ) program and obtained technical information and data from them on the stockpile , past and future dismantlement workload , component management , and on other issues pertaining to the program .