note 4 . interest expense interest expense on federal debt managed by bpd for fiscal years 2004 and 2003 consisted of federal debt held by the public net amortization of premiums and discounts total interest expense on federal debt held by the public net amortization of premiums and discounts ( 3,717 ) ( 6,670 ) total interest expense on intragovernmental debt total interest expense on federal debt managed by bpd note 5 . fund balance with treasury the fund balance with treasury , a non - entity , intragovernmental account , is not included on the schedules of federal debt and is presented for informational purposes . in addition to the individual named above , erik a. braun , dean d. carpenter , dennis l. clarke , chau l. dinh , mickie e. gray , jennifer l. hall , jay mctigue , lori b. ryza , kathryn j. peterson , and jason o . strange made key contributions to this report . both securities will be offered semiannually . however , we compared this information for consistency with the schedules and discussed the methods of measurement and presentation with bpd officials . based on this limited work , we found no material inconsistencies with the schedules . management is responsible for the following: preparing the schedules of federal debt in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ; establishing , maintaining , and assessing internal control to provide reasonable assurance that the broad control objectives of the federal managers' financial integrity act are met ; and complying with applicable laws and regulations . we are responsible for obtaining reasonable assurance about whether ( 1 ) the schedules of federal debt are presented fairly , in all material respects , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and ( 2 ) management maintained effective related internal control as of september 30 , 2004 , the objectives of which are the following: financial reporting: transactions are properly recorded , processed , and summarized to permit the preparation of the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2004 , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles . compliance with laws and regulations: transactions related to the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2004 , are executed in accordance with laws governing the use of budget authority and with other laws and regulations that could have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt . we are also responsible for testing compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations that have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt . further , we are responsible for performing limited procedures with respect to certain other information appearing with the schedules of federal debt .