( see figure 2. ) in addition to the standard , annual contributions to csrs discussed above , the service is responsible for paying additional amounts to csrdf to fund the future costs of pay increases that usps granted to its employees under terms in new labor contracts and the annual colas to retirees , which were prescribed by law . the provisions for usps to make these additional contributions to opm make the funding of the service's retirement plans for both pay increases and colas different from other federal agencies making annual contributions to the federal csrs retirement plan . as described in more detail in a later section of this report , usps makes annual installment payments to opm toward its additional liability for csrs employees' pay increases and retirees' colas . usps provided oral comments that substantially agreed with our report . matters of emphasis and points of clarity recommended by usps have been reflected in this report , as appropriate . opm provided written comments that are reprinted in appendix iv , along with our comments . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house and senate committees on appropriations , the postmaster general , the chairman of the postal board of governors , the chairman of the postal rate commission , the chief financial officer of the u.s . postal service , the director of the office of personnel management , and interested congressional committees . we will also provide copies to others on request . if you have any questions on this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 2600 or jeanette m. franzel , acting director , at ( 202 ) 512-9471 . what is the potential impact of growing retirement - related expenses on postal rates ? could this impact affect usps' ability to be successful in a marketplace with increasing competition from electronic alternatives , private delivery companies , and foreign postal administrations ? under current law , is usps fully covering opm's future retirement costs for usps employees , or is usps paying more than is needed to cover opm's future payments to usps retirees ? has opm estimated the amount of future obligations to usps retirees , and has opm determined that usps has contributed a sufficient amount , or , possibly , more than enough , toward plan assets that will pay usps retirees ? the “fine tuning” items were not included in the report because the amounts were paid to opm by fiscal year 1998 and are no longer outstanding liabilities of the postal service . our report has been revised to reflect that the board of actuaries of csrs determined the 5-percent discount rate used in the amortization tables to calculate payments to be made to opm . our senior actuary agreed with the opm comment ; therefore , we have deleted the sentence from our report . we can also be reached by e - mail at steinhoffj@gao.gov or franzelj@gao.gov , respectively . joseph applebaum , senior actuary , michael fischetti , meg mills , john sawyer , and fred evans were key contributors to this report . fers ( including tsp ) fers ( including tsp ) .