some of these identified challenges follow . loss of proprietary information: ten small businesses we interviewed are reluctant to enter into partnerships with prime contractors out of concern that they could lose their proprietary information through either an infringement from prime contractors or a mishandling of proprietary information by dod program officials . the three prime contractors we spoke with said they take intellectual property rights of small businesses seriously , and they noted that specific procedures are in place to safeguard intellectual property rights of small businesses , such as the signing of nondisclosure agreements . a dod official said that the fear of losing proprietary information is a misperception on the part of small businesses , because dod services and components take steps to work with and protect the small businesses' intellectual property rights . additionally , the sbir policy directive requires agencies to ensure sbir businesses' proprietary information is protected . however , according to five small businesses we interviewed , incidents have occurred in which dod officials appear to have shared proprietary information with prime contractors . for example: one small business we interviewed disclosed that dod hired it to teach several prime contractors how to recreate a specific infrared technology it had developed so that the prime contractors could evaluate the technology . some of the difficulties they cited follow . harsh space environment: to meet dod's requirements to be flight - ready for the harsh space environment , technologies need more expensive materials and testing in specialized facilities . for example , flight - ready hardware for the space environment requires electronic components that can withstand radiation from space - derived particles or nuclear detonations . we conducted our work from august 2009 to october 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government accounting standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were art gallegos , assistant director ; maria durant ; claire buck ; amanda jones ; morgan delaney - ramaker ; arturo holguin ; sylvia schatz ; and nathan pope . however , an official from one prime contractor said it offers a discount on using its testing facilities to small businesses that subcontract with it during phase ii of the sbir program . sustaining operations through delays and cancellations: according to a small - business official , dod space and weapons acquisitions program delays and cancellations can affect small businesses' ability to stay in business . air force officials agree that small companies can be at a greater disadvantage than larger companies when space acquisition programs are delayed or system development goals are far off into the future , because some small companies that rely on a specific government contract may not be able to stay in business if they have to wait too long to receive the contract award .