no information available . makes its logistics services and food distribution sites available for hiv / aids prevention activities by other u.n. agencies . requires its truck drivers in ethiopia to take 2-month hiv - prevention course . attempts to ensure that all people obtain the highest attainable level of health . mobilizes expertise and resources for rapid response . gives high priority to assisting vulnerable groups , such as commercial sex workers and persons in emergency situations . aims to strengthen the health sector's response to hiv / aids and to provide technical assistance to countries to improve their hiv / aids prevention and care interventions . $146 million projected for 2002-2003 . developing a project for hiv / aids assistance to refugees , internally displaced persons , and returnees from angola , democratic republic of congo , and sierra leone . producing a basic supply package for hiv / aids assistance in emergencies . aims to ensure universal access to high - quality reproductive health services to all couples and individuals by 2015 . provides reproductive health kits , trains service providers to diagnose and treat sexually transmitted infections , and conducts information activities . advocates for hiv prevention and the integration of hiv prevention into national reproductive health programs . aims to strengthen its emergency hiv / aids activities . $254 million projected for 2001-2005 . provided health kits and technical support in bosnia , east timor , eritrea , ethiopia , kosovo . provided training on hiv / aids prevention and care for health providers working with eritrean refugees in sudan . coordinates the international humanitarian response in complex emergencies , supports the humanitarian community in policy development , and advocates on humanitarian issues . monitoring / early warning , contingency planning , interagency needs assessment , field coordination , and development of interagency funding appeals . advocates for the inclusion of hiv / aids programs into u.n. emergency appeals for funding . no information available . provided training for other u.n. agencies on incorporating hiv / aids and other factors into u.n. emergency appeals . supports hiv / aids prevention and care , helps reduce the vulnerability of individuals and communities , and assists in alleviating the pandemic's impact . provides strategic guidance to the u.n. system on hiv / aids , mobilizes partners and resources , and assists partners in information activities . unaids' 132 country - level “theme groups” on hiv / aids coordinate the u.n. response to hiv / aids at the country level . $305 million projected for 2001-2005 . created a humanitarian unit to address hiv / aids and security issues , including peacekeeping . funded a study to be conducted by the u.n. children's fund to improve hiv / aids interventions for children in conflict . together with dpko , plans to deploy five high - level hiv / aids officers to five peacekeeping operations . promotes women's human rights , economic security , and political participation ; promotes u.n. efforts to support women's empowerment and to incorporate gender into u.n. policies and programs . advocates for increased gender sensitivity in u.n. programs operating in complex emergencies . dod agreed with our recommendations .