dod concurred with this recommendation . despite the benefits attributed to the joint deployment distribution operations center in kuwait , effective management of supply distribution across the theater has been hindered by ongoing problems in achieving asset visibility . senior military commanders in kuwait attributed these problems to a lack of interoperability among information technology systems that makes it difficult to obtain timely , accurate information on assets in the theater . we have previously reported that the defense logistics systems used by various components to order , track , and account for supplies are not well integrated and do not provide the information needed to effectively manage theater distribution and provide asset visibility . officials told us their staff must use manual work - arounds to overcome the problems caused by noninteroperable information systems and estimated that their staff spend half their time pulling data from information systems , e - mailing it around for validation or coordination , consolidating it on a spreadsheet , and then analyzing it to make management decisions . in january 2007 , a joint assessment conducted by several dod components at camp arifjan , kuwait , found that separate movement control battalions in kuwait and iraq use both automated and handwritten transportation movement requests to track air and ground movements and must consolidate manual and automated data into spreadsheets in order to capture the total theater movement picture . neither movement battalion has total visibility over what is occurring in both kuwait and iraq nor do they have total visibility of the surface transportation resources necessary to optimize the distribution of resources . in our review of joint theater logistics , we also found continuing problems with container management that hinder asset visibility and impede dod's ability to effectively manage logistics operations and costs , although improvements had been made since we last reported on this issue in 2003 . some challenges that dod faces with container management include the application of rfid on containers in the supply chain , compliance with container management processes , and the return of commercial containers to maritime carriers . in 2004 , the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology , and logistics ) directed the use of active rfid on all consolidated shipments moving to , from , or between overseas locations in order to provide global in - transit visibility , and u.s. central command has emphasized the need to use this technology to improve asset visibility in iraq and afghanistan . however , according to u.s central command officials , dod continues to struggle with the application of rfid in the theater supply chain because of problems such as containers shipped without rfid tags or with tags that are broken , tags with incorrect information , or tags that are rewritten but not cross - referenced to the original shipping information . noncompliance with container management processes established by u.s. central command can also limit asset visibility . for example , the army's system has not been able to effectively track containers as they pass through distribution channels , significantly hampering asset visibility in theater because tagged containers can become “lost” in theater , with no one able to track the location of the container or its contents .