coverage . in addition , wisconsin obtained a medicaid waiver effective january 2014 that made certain childless adults up to 100 percent of the fpl eligible for medicaid , which gave them access to medicaid - covered services and prescription drugs , including behavioral health treatments . officials from the non - expansion states we examined noted initiatives relevant to low - income , uninsured adults , such as improving crisis response and coordinating care for individuals involved with law enforcement . texas officials noted that 24 of the 33 local mental health authorities have a facility - based crisis option to treat individuals experiencing a crisis and that they would like to provide the remaining local mental health authorities with similar facilities , which are intended to avoid inpatient care . in wisconsin , behavioral health treatment includes mobile crisis services to respond to individuals in the community experiencing a crisis . a wisconsin official told us that there were legislative efforts underway to expand these services , particularly in rural areas . missouri has hired community mental health liaisons to facilitate access to behavioral health services for individuals who are in frequent contact with law enforcement . the selected non - expansion states established priority populations for providing behavioral health treatment to those with the most severe behavioral health needs . for the states we examined , priority populations for mental health treatment included individuals with serious mental illness and those presenting in crisis . similarly , all the non - expansion states we examined identified priority populations for receiving treatment for substance use conditions . specifically , pregnant women and individuals abusing drugs intravenously were among the priority groups that the states identified to receive treatment . as part of setting priorities for those with the most serious behavioral health needs , the non - expansion states included specific eligibility requirements based on diagnosis or impairment , in addition to financial status , for behavioral health treatment for the uninsured . in montana , individuals aged 18 to 64 diagnosed with a severe , disabling mental illness , and incomes up to 150 percent of the fpl may qualify for the state - funded mental health services plan . montana officials told us that their mental health services plan does not provide treatment to individuals with more moderate behavioral health needs , but that these individuals may get some treatment through community - based “drop - in” centers . in texas , local mental health authorities are required to provide services to adults with diagnoses of schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , or clinically severe depression , and may , to the extent feasible , provide services to adults experiencing significant functional impairment due to other diagnoses . individuals who are not members of the identified priority groups are generally not eligible to receive treatment . three of the states we examined maintained waiting lists for individuals with more modest needs for behavioral health treatment . texas officials said that they triage individuals eligible for behavioral health treatment , and those with less urgent needs may have to wait . in some cases , individuals may receive a lower level of care than recommended while waiting for treatment due to resource limitations .