our analysis corroborated this information . for example , in fiscal year 2014 , of 127 date errors identified in cdrs nationally , 125 of them were cessation date errors . in addition , we calculated margins of error for each estimate to assess the statistical reliability of each estimate . we used the statistical formula that produces appropriate margins of error , consistent with our approach to calculating margins of error in our analysis of ssa's sampling method . to evaluate ssa's approach to calculating cost savings from cdrs , we compared ssa's estimation process to actuarial standards of practice and federal guidelines for benefit - cost analyses of federal programs . see 20 c.f.r . in explaining the accuracy standard , ssa stated that its primary purpose was to improve the initial claims process and ensure that only properly entitled claimants receive disability benefits and that its approach was to specify outputs ( i.e. , performance accuracy ) , rather than specifying all inputs that could go into the standard . ssa conducts stewardship reviews which examine the non - medical quality of various decisions related to benefit payments , including date designations . to do so , ssa reviews a sample of individuals receiving payments . in conducting and reporting on these reviews , however , ssa does not specifically focus on cdrs . sampling cdrs for quality review: ssa produces accuracy rate estimates by state dds , but its sampling approach does not reliably and efficiently generate accuracy rate estimates for continuances and cessations separately in every state . according to federal guidance for developing statistical estimates , agencies should develop a sampling plan that is reflective of the level of detail and precision needed of the key estimates . cdr accuracy rates vary by state , and continuances are consistently more accurate than cessations . in fiscal year 2014 , for example , the states' estimated cdr accuracy rates varied from 92.4 percent to 99.8 percent . in the same year , the estimated accuracy rate for continuances was 98.3 percent nationwide , whereas the equivalent for cessations was 95.5 percent . moreover , the range of accuracy rates across states is much larger for cessations . in fiscal year 2014 , state - level accuracy rates for cessations ranged from 78.3 to 100 percent , while the accuracy rates for continuances ranged from 92 to 100 percent . to monitor cdr accuracy , ssa randomly selects about 70 continuances and 70 cessations for quality review each quarter from each state . despite this sampling approach , ssa officials stated that their sampling design is not intended to produce precise estimates for continuations and cessations separately by state . however , precise accuracy rate estimates for continuations and cessations separately by state are needed to monitor dds performance because of the difference in accuracy by decision type and because the state ddss are managed separately . in analyzing cdr workload and accuracy data , we found that ssa's sampling approach produced accuracy rate estimates with margins of error that were consistently wide in seven states and consistently narrow in six states for either one type of cdr decision or both .