following are descriptions for each fmc . fmc butner ( butner , north carolina ) is part of an fcc and serves as a major medical and psychiatric referral center for male inmates . fmc butner has all specialty areas of medicine and is the primary referral center for oncology , providing chemotherapy and radiation therapy . fmc butner also manages a broad range of subacute and chronically ill inmates and has an orthopedic surgery program available . dialysis services are provided on - site . ( 2 ) to what extent does bop have data available to understand and help control its health care costs ? as of may 2017 , there were 927 inmates at fmc butner . ( 3 ) what initiatives has bop identified and implemented to help control health care costs and how effectively has bop planned its health care cost control efforts ? to address these questions , we interviewed bop officials knowledgeable about health care costs and cost control efforts from several divisions and offices , as well as officials at bop's six regional offices . we conducted site visits to 10 bop institutions , and selected these institutions based , in part , on factors that both bop and existing research indicated could be affecting costs , such as inmate characteristics and geography , as well as other factors that allowed for variation in our sample ( see app . i for more details on our selection criteria ) . in addition , we reviewed key documents , such as bop's congressional budget justifications for fiscal years 2009 through 2018 . to examine how much bop has obligated for inmate health services over the past 8 fiscal years and the factors that affect bop's costs , we reviewed key documents , such as bop's annual financial statements , and the department of justice's financial management information system sub - object classification ( soc ) code guide . we also analyzed bop obligation data from fiscal years 2009 through 2016 on medical services , psychology services , drug and sex offender treatment programs , and medical staff training . we included 8 years of obligations data in order to observe trends over time in health care costs . we included all categories of care that are considered essential to treating health , including mental health and substance use disorder treatment . to determine the per capita obligations , we divided the total obligation by the inmate population at the end of each fiscal year . we adjusted these data to reflect health care inflation . to better understand the composition of medical services obligations , we analyzed obligations by soc code . to understand the changes in pharmaceutical expenditures over the period we reviewed , as well as what illnesses were impacting those obligations , we analyzed bop's list of top 50 medications for fiscal years 2009 through 2016 . we compared these medications to the u.s. national library of medicine's medlineplus list of drugs and supplements , in order to determine their uses .