, retrospective estimates ) . these account for about half of the total tax expenditures . they represent a substantial federal commitment . an estimated $1 trillion in revenue was forgone through tax expenditures in fiscal year 2011 — an estimate produced by summing the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) estimates for each of the 173 tax expenditures reported in that year . as we have pointed out in our recently issued guide to evaluating tax expenditures , many tax expenditures are equivalent to spending through the tax code . for example , some tax expenditure programs are intended , like some spending programs , to encourage economic development in disadvantaged areas , finance postsecondary education , and stimulate research and development . the revenue the federal government forgoes from tax expenditures reduces funds available for other federal activities , requires higher tax rates to raise any given amount of revenue , or increases the budget deficit . the internal revenue service ( irs ) is responsible for administering the tax laws , including those for tax expenditures . however , irs is not required to collect or evaluate data other than those which are required for administration of the tax code unless it is legislatively mandated to collect additional information . since 1994 , we have recommended greater scrutiny of tax expenditures , as periodic reviews could help determine how well specific tax expenditures work to achieve their goals and how their benefits and costs compare to those of spending and other programs with similar goals . our recently issued guide , cited above , provides a framework for evaluating the performance of tax expenditures . as requested , this report focuses on the availability of data needed to evaluate tax expenditures . specifically , our objectives are to ( 1 ) determine the information available from irs for evaluating tax expenditures ; and ( 2 ) compare , for a few case studies , the information identified by federal agencies for evaluating outlay programs with similar purposes to tax expenditures . to address the first objective , we identified 173 tax expenditures for fiscal year 2011 from treasury's list of tax expenditures from the budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2012 . to determine the dollar amount of these tax expenditures , we used revised fiscal year 2011 estimates from the fiscal year 2013 budget . we then reviewed irs tax returns , information returns , other tax forms , and publications for tax year 2011 to determine whether they had information on the tax expenditures that appeared on the treasury list . for those tax expenditures that had information , we reviewed irs's statistics of income ( soi ) documentation guide , proposed tax year 2010 forms and schedules , the latest year available , to determine whether soi collects this information from tax forms . we also reviewed our prior reports to identify instances where irs data available for evaluating tax expenditures were limited and the limitations were not remedied by data from other sources . to address the second objective , we based our selection of case studies on the tax expenditures identified by agencies and the office of management and budget ( omb ) as contributing to crosscutting priority goals .