software . software is expected to control about 95 percent of fcs's functionality and will be included in all fcs platforms . in its simplest form , software is the collection of computer programs and procedures that perform some task on a computer system or platform . it includes: ( 1 ) system software such as operating systems , which interface with hardware to provide the necessary services for application software ; ( 2 ) middleware , which controls and coordinates distributed systems ; and ( 3 ) application software such as word processors , which perform productive tasks for users . overall development of fcs software is being managed by the lsi in cooperation with the army's fcs program office . there are over 100 software vendors involved in the development of software programs for fcs , including the lsi , 14 first - tier contractors , and other sub - contractors . over 75 percent of software being developed for fcs is to operate the network . network software is expected to integrate the collection of individual systems into a system of systems . this software will include the system of systems common operating environment ( soscoe ) , network management system , battle command and mission execution , sensor data management , warfighter machine interface , and others . these will be included on all the fcs platforms and will perform a variety of functions . for example , software on platforms is to control the individual systems , such as radios and air and ground vehicle communications . soscoe is the operating environment that serves as the middleware between the operating systems and the software applications , integrating all other fcs software . the battle command software is to provide functions such as mission planning and preparation , situational understanding , and battle management and mission execution . warfighter machine interface software is expected to provide the visual interface of the network to the warfighter . according to the army , warfighter machine interface is “the face of the fcs network,” which includes the display of services , touch screens , and buttons . it will provide a visual picture of the battlespace and allows the ability to collaborate across the forces . figure 2 shows how the warfighter may see the battlefield through the network . integrated computing system . the integrated computing system is the on - board computer that will fit into the various fcs platforms . there are eight types of integrated computing systems that vary in size to fit into the various fcs platforms — manned ground vehicles , unmanned aerial vehicles , and unattended ground vehicles . the computing system is expected to provide an integrated common operating environment to manage processing , secure the system , and allow access to the network on the move . it is also envisioned to support battle command applications , sensor processing , communications , weapons and platform management , and have embedded security and safety features that will help ensure a secure operating environment with certified firewall and network intrusion protection . joint tactical radio system ( jtrs ) / warfighter information network - tactical ( win - t ) .