figure 12 . a majority of the states responding to our 50-state survey reported that provider payments for schip , medicaid , job retention and advancement services , utility assistance , and subsidized child care increased between state fiscal year 2000 and spring 2003 , though some states reported that provider payments for many of these supports decreased during the same time period . regarding changes to copayments , most states responding to our survey reported that families' copayments for schip , medicaid , and subsidized child care stayed the same between state fiscal year 2000 and spring 2003 , while some states reported that families' copayments increased during that time . we have classified increases in copayments as decreasing the availability of supports because as families' copayments increase , fewer families may be able to afford to participate in the support program . ( see fig . ( 2 ) how have states structured programs to support low - income families ? ( 3 ) what changes have states made to supports for low - income families in recent years ? in addressing these questions , we focused on some of the many federal and state programs that provide assistance to low - income families . we selected key supports that include not only those that assist low - income families by providing cash income but also those that subsidize some of the expenses associated with work outside of the home , such as child care and transportation , or help with work and family needs in other ways , such as by subsidizing utility expenses . our review focused primarily on the following programs and types of supports , for which states make many of the decisions about eligibility , benefit amounts , and service provision: income assistance provided through tanf cash assistance , tanf diversion assistance , and state tax credits ; job retention and advancement services ; medicaid , state children's health insurance program ( schip ) , and other health - related programs , including substance abuse , mental health , and domestic violence programs ; transportation support services ; and utility assistance . our review also discusses the federal earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , food stamps , and rental housing assistance to some extent because these are important components of the overall set of supports for low - income families . for those programs about which states make key decisions , we obtained information through a mail survey administered to directors of social services in all 50 states and the district of columbia in spring 2003 , and through site visits between december 2002 and march 2003 in five states ( new york , north carolina , oklahoma , washington , and wisconsin ) . for our site visits , we selected states that demonstrated an effort to assist low - income families with support services and that , as a group , were geographically and programmatically diverse . for those programs about which states make key decisions , we obtained information directly from state officials because limited information is collected at the national level on states' provision of support services . for other programs , we relied on a review of federal reports and other relevant literature .