( see fig . roughly the same number of hospitals received bonuses and penalties , with more bonuses awarded in fiscal year 2013 and fiscal year 2015 , and more penalties awarded in fiscal year 2014 . the amount of the annual median bonuses and median penalties increased slightly each year . the median bonus in 2015 was 0.32 percent of applicable medicare payments and the median penalty was 0.26 percent . what initial effects have been observed from the hvbp program on medicare payments to hospitals ? what initial effects have been observed from the hvbp program on the quality of care provided by hospitals ? what initial effect did the hvbp program have on selected hospitals' quality improvement efforts ? to determine the initial effects observed from the hvbp program on medicare payments to hospitals , we analyzed data provided by cms on the bonuses and penalties awarded to each of the approximately 3,000 hvbp - eligible hospitals from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 . we analyzed these data for hospitals overall as well as for small urban , small rural , and safety net hospitals . to do so , we identified small urban and small rural hospitals as those having 100 acute care beds or fewer , using data from the american hospital association survey and cms's determination about hospitals' rural or urban classification . we identified safety net hospitals using cms data on hospitals' medicare disproportionate patient percentage — a measure of medicaid and low - income medicare patients — and hospitals' proportion of uncompensated care , which we obtained from annual medicare cost reports . we ranked hvbp - eligible hospitals on both measures and identified as safety net hospitals those hospitals that were in the top 10 percent when summing the rankings of both the disproportionate patient percentage and uncompensated care measures . in addition , we examined how these scores related to various hospital characteristics , such as a hospital's net income as reported on medicare cost reports . we reviewed related documentation and interviewed knowledgeable cms and american hospital association officials , and we determined that these data on bonuses and penalties and hospital characteristics were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to determine the initial effects observed from the hvbp program on the quality of care provided by hospitals , we analyzed data on quality measures collected by cms between 2005 and 2014 ( the most recent available ) as part of the iqr program for the approximately 3,000 hvbp - eligible hospitals . this analysis included both iqr quality measures that were used in the hvbp payment formula and other iqr measures not included in the hvbp program , such as measures of hospital readmissions . we conducted this analysis for all iqr measures related to inpatient care for which we obtained a sufficient number of data points both before and after the implementation of the hvbp program . ( see appendix i for a listing of these measures. ) the quality measures we analyzed cover hospital performance on clinical processes to provide care , patients' experiences in receiving care , and outcomes associated with patient care . cms provided the clinical process and patient outcomes data .