dod concurred with all the recommendations . the subcommittee has requested that we undertake a series of audits directed at dod's efforts to resolve long - standing financial management problems over the visibility of its assets . our first such audit is evaluating the army's efforts in the area and will include follow - up work on lmp . in december 2005 , we reported that dod needed to reassess its planned investment in the ntcss — a system intended to help navy personnel effectively manage ships , submarines , and aircraft support activities . among other things , we reported that the navy had not economically justified its ongoing and planned investment in the ntcss and had not invested in the ntcss within the context of a well - defined dod or navy enterprise architecture . in addition , we reported that the navy had not effectively performed key measurement , reporting , budgeting , and oversight activities , and had not adequately conducted requirements management and testing activities . ( see fig . 1 for a simplified and illustrative conceptual depiction of dod's federated business enterprise architecture. ) the importance of extending the dod business enterprise architecture to the military services is underscored by our recent findings about the military services' management of their respective enterprise architecture programs . specifically , in august 2006 , we released an assessment of federal agency enterprise architecture programs' satisfaction of the elements in our enterprise architecture management maturity framework ( eammf ) . our eammf is a five - stage architecture framework for managing the development , maintenance , and implementation of an architecture and understanding the extent to which effective architecture management practices are being performed and where an organization is in its progression toward having a well - managed architecture program . in short , the framework consists of 31 core elements that relate to architecture governance , content , use , and measurement . these elements reflect research by us and others showing that architecture programs should be founded upon institutional architecture commitment and capabilities , and measured and verified products and results . with respect to the maturity of the military services' respective enterprise architecture programs , we found that the departments of the air force , the army , and the navy had not satisfied about 29 , 55 , and 29 percent of the core elements in our framework , respectively . in addition , the army had only fully satisfied 1 of the 31 core elements ( 3 percent ) . ( see table 1 for the number and percentage of elements fully , partially , and not satisfied by each of the military services ) . by comparison , the other major federal departments and agencies that we reviewed had as a whole fully satisfied about 67 percent of the framework's core elements . among the key elements that all three services had not fully satisfied were developing architecture products that describe their respective target architectural environments and developing transition plans for migrating to a target environment , in addition to the following .