this program was not adopted . a program to award safety belt performance grants designed to encourage states to adopt and enforce primary safety belt laws and increase the rate of safety belt use . inspection locations . states have used the impaired driving grant to focus their efforts on education , training , media , and public information . for example , georgia and other states have used the funding to promote students against destructive decisions , which educates youth on alcohol and drug education and prevention . states are planning to fund training for local law enforcement officers and promote outreach programs to prosecutors and judges . our analysis also indicated that states have used the grants to fund awareness programs on the impact of impaired driving and target messages to teen drivers , as well as to fund a variety of high - visibility enforcement activities , such as the national “over the limit , under arrest” campaign . for example , 15 california police departments participated or plan to participate in the traditional holiday enforcement campaigns where the departments set up dui checkpoints and conduct billboard campaigns urging residents to drive sober during this period . the illinois state police uses grant funds to target establishments that sell alcoholic beverages to minors . states have also used the grant to purchase new equipment , such as breath alcohol testing vans , diesel - powered light towers , and variable message boards for law enforcement to use at checkpoints . in addition to these activities , states have used this grant for activities to enhance courts' and prosecutors' ability to prosecute impaired driving , as well as to encourage legislation imposing stronger sanctions and penalties for impaired driving . for example , arkansas plans to use the funding to provide a traffic safety resource prosecutor who will serve as a resource to prosecutors in the state on impaired driving and other traffic cases . in addition , nhtsa officials indicated that states have used this grant to promote legislation to impose sanctions and penalties for impaired driving . the motorcyclist safety grant program's focus on training for motorcyclists and increasing other motorists' awareness of motorcyclists has provided states with a new source of funding for education and training , media and public information , and activities such as purchasing motorcycles for training courses . states are using the funds to train more rider education coaches and add more classes because capacity for these classes has been limited and classes have filled up quickly in many states . for example , in alaska , the juneau american bikers aimed toward education ( abate ) plans to expand the number of motorcycle safety foundation - certified rider education coaches in southeast alaska . nevada plans to allocate $20,000 to provide training to maintain current instructor levels and add new instructors in fiscal year 2007 . additionally , states have funded or plan to fund campaigns to increase other motorists' awareness of motorcyclists and promote motorcycle training courses . for example , utah funded motorcycle safety and “share the road” public awareness campaigns , while kentucky and several other states plan or have begun to publicize and promote training courses .