dispose of unneeded assets . in october 2017 , we found that disposing of unneeded assets , such as closing unnecessarily duplicative boat stations , based on a sound analytical process , could potentially generate $290 million in cost savings over 20 years . specifically , the coast guard identified 18 unnecessarily duplicative boat stations with overlapping coverage that could be permanently closed without negatively affecting the coast guard's ability to meet its mission requirements , including its 2-hour search and rescue response standard . in 2017 , the coast guard affirmed that its leadership believes the study remains valid , but as of september 2019 it has not closed any stations . figure 1 depicts the extent of the coast guard's overlapping boat and air station search and rescue coverage , as identified by the coast guard , some of which the coast guard determined to be unnecessarily duplicative . in february 2019 , we found that 5 of the 18 boat stations recommended for closure had projects listed on the coast guard's current project backlog . for example , station shark river , in new jersey , was recommended for recapitalization in fiscal year 2017 , despite coast guard recommendations to close the station in 1988 , 1996 , 2007 , and 2013 . notably , the coast guard has made multiple attempts in previous years to close such stations but was unable to due to congressional intervention , and subsequent legislation prohibiting closures . in october 2017 , we recommended that the coast guard establish and implement a plan with target dates and milestones for closing boat stations that it has determined provide overlapping search and rescue coverage and are unnecessarily duplicative . in february 2019 , we further recommended disposing of unneeded assets to more efficiently manage resources and better position the coast guard and congress to address shore infrastructure challenges . the coast guard agreed with our recommendations . as of september 2019 , the coast guard reported that it was considering changes in the operational status of several stations , such as closing the stations during the winter months when they conduct few , if any , search and rescue cases . the coast guard estimated that it will continue to consider changes until march 2020 . these are positive steps , but we continue to believe that it is important for the coast guard to dispose of unneeded assets . given the coast guard's competing acquisition , operational , and maintenance needs , and its existing $1.774 billion project backlog of recapitalization and new construction projects , these actions may help to mitigate some of its resource challenges . we will continue to monitor the coast guard's efforts to implement these recommendations . report shore infrastructure project backlogs accurately . in february 2019 , we found areas in which the coast guard could increase budget transparency for shore infrastructure by accurately reporting project backlogs and costs in congressionally - required plans . specifically , we found that the coast guard had not provided accurate information to congress necessary to inform decision - makers of the risks posed by untimely investments in maintenance and repair backlogs .