gao - 08-645 . washington , d.c.: june 23 , 2008 . information on the amount of the transaction is reported . information on the items being purchased is not available through ebt . the system scans these data to identify transactions or sets of transactions that fit a certain set of criteria defined by established patterns of fraudulent activity . what are the key factors to consider in designing a program that provides fsp participants with financial incentives to purchase certain foods ? what is known about the effectiveness of financial incentives and other approaches intended to increase the purchase of targeted foods that could contribute to a healthy diet ? what options are available to fns for implementing financial incentives , and what are the advantages and challenges involved in implementing such options ? to identify recent studies that examine the effectiveness of nutrition promotion approaches , we conducted a literature review and consulted with usda staff . we identified related studies published from january 2000 through february 2008 and conducted detailed reviews of 16 studies , including reviews or summaries of original research from peer - reviewed journals , published research from usda's economic research service ( ers ) , and studies of wic farmers' market programs . we reviewed each study's research methodology and determined that the studies were reliable for the purposes of our work . to understand the issues involved in designing a financial incentive program , we interviewed representatives of stakeholder groups that would be affected by implementation of an incentive program , including usda officials ; officials from four states with wic ebt experience ( ohio , texas , washington , and wyoming ) ; officials from one state ( california ) that passed legislation authorizing the provision of financial incentives to fsp participants for purchasing targeted foods ; three ebt contractors serving almost all of the states ; retailer associations and retailers representing large chain and smaller independent grocery stores ; food and nutrition advocacy groups ; and researchers . we also facilitated group discussions about the options for delivering financial incentives and implementation issues with state officials , retailers , and industry representatives at three national conferences . to further explore financial incentive options and implementation issues , we convened a panel of 17 experts representing stakeholder groups that would be involved in implementing an incentive program , including fns , states , state ebt contractors , retailers , and manufacturers of retailer checkout systems . appendix i explains our scope and methodology in more detail . we conducted this performance audit from may 2007 through july 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the fsp is intended to help low - income individuals and families obtain a more nutritious diet by supplementing their income with benefits to purchase food . most food items sold in grocery stores can be purchased with fsp benefits , except for hot foods , tobacco products , and alcoholic beverages .