cuddeback . “expedited medicaid enrollment , mental health service use , and criminal recidivism among released prisoners with severe mental illness.” psychiatric services , vol . ( study 10 ) sacks , j.y. , k. mckendrick , and z. hamilton . “a randomized clinical trial of a therapeutic community treatment for female inmates: outcomes at 6 and 12 months after prison release.” journal of addictive diseases , vol . what is known about the crimes committed by inmates with serious mental illness who were incarcerated by the federal and selected state governments ? what is known about the costs to the federal and selected state governments to incarcerate and provide mental health services to incarcerated individuals with serious mental illness ? what strategies for reducing recidivism among individuals with serious mental illness have federal and selected state governments and studies identified ? to address all three objectives , we reviewed documents , interviewed officials , and analyzed data obtained from bop and selected states' departments of corrections . for objective 3 , we also reviewed documents and interviewed officials from doj's office of justice programs and hhs ( samhsa and the national institute of mental health ) . for purposes of this review , we based our work on the definitions of “serious mental illness” that are provided by each of the selected federal agencies and selected states' department of corrections . we selected six states based upon variation in the rate of incarcerated adults per capita to obtain a mix of states with high , medium , and low rates , specialist recommendations on data quality and quality of programs for inmates with serious mental illness , and variation in geography . using these criteria , we selected california , new york , ohio , texas , virginia , and washington . to determine what types of crimes were committed by inmates with serious mental illness who were imprisoned by the federal government and selected state governments , we analyzed policies and guidance at bop and the departments of corrections in selected states to determine how , if at all , the agencies define serious mental illness and the processes used to identify incarcerated inmates with serious mental illness . we also analyzed available data from bop and the departments of corrections in selected states to identify the most serious types of crimes for which inmates with serious mental illness were convicted and incarcerated during fiscal year 2017 . we focused on fiscal year 2017 as it was the most recent year of data available on bop's population of inmates with serious mental illness . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed officials from the selected state departments of corrections to determine the challenges they faced in recording , tracking , and maintaining data on inmates with serious mental illness , but we did not independently assess the internal controls associated with the selected states' data systems . we provided state level data as illustrative examples of the crimes committed by inmates with serious mental illness in selected states .