i for more information on the criteria used to select the stakeholders interviewed ) . through interviews with these stakeholders using open - ended questions , we identified two major factors — high development costs for alternative jet fuels and uncertainty with respect to federal regulations and policies — as the primary contributors to the overarching challenge that alternative jet fuels are not commercially available at a price that is competitive with conventional jet fuel . almost all of the stakeholders whom we interviewed ( 22 of 23 ) cited at least one factor related to high development costs . while one of these stakeholders discussed the challenges associated with high development costs broadly , the remaining 21 of them highlighted development cost challenges associated with specific supply - chain segments . feedstock production: stakeholders we interviewed most commonly cited the high cost of feedstock in connection with the first segment of the supply chain ( 15 of 23 stakeholders ) . five of these stakeholders noted that for fuel produced using the hefa production process , the cost of some types of feedstock — even before it is transported or converted — currently exceeds that of conventional fuel . dependence on commodity markets: because some alternative jet fuels are made from tradable commodities , the cost of jet fuel production depends on prices in commodity markets . as noted earlier , the price of soybean oil — an input to alternative fuels — has historically exceeded the price of conventional jet fuel . consequently , it has been impossible for a producer of alternative jet fuels that uses the hefa production process and soybean oil as a feedstock to compete on price alone with conventional jet fuels , even if the producer's other production and transportation costs were negligible . furthermore , in many instances , the input commodities ( feedstock ) have alternative uses . for example , oil - producing and cellulosic feedstocks can be used to generate heat , power , and other ground transportation fuels . therefore , an increase in demand for these feedstocks in alternative uses could raise their price and the costs of producing alternative jet fuels . cost of conventional jet fuels: increases in the supply of conventional jet fuels would make it harder for alternative fuels to compete based on price alone . and although international petroleum markets heavily influence the prices of conventional fuels , which can be volatile and difficult to predict into the future , domestic policies can affect jet fuel supply and fuel prices . for example , five stakeholders highlighted that there has been significant previous federal investment in establishing the conventional petroleum industry , such as through long - standing federal tax expenditures that encourage exploration and drilling for conventional petroleum oil . appendix i provides a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2013 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .