2 for the distribution ) . in comparison , just over 14 percent of the total was appropriated to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , with other departments receiving 5 percent or less of the total supplemental funds . factoring in rescissions during the same time period shows that dod received the most supplemental funds on both a gross and net basis . construction , 2001 ; ( div . b — emergency supplemental act , 2000 ) defense appropriations act , 2001 ( title ix — additional fiscal year 2000 emergency supplemental appropriations for the department of defense ) supplemental appropriations act for recovery from and response to terrorist attacks on the united states defense and emergency supplemental appropriations for recovery from and response to terrorist attacks on the united states , 2002 ( 2nd $20 billion - 9 / 11 attacks ) wartime supplemental appropriations act , 2003 supplemental for disaster relief act , 2003 branch , 2003 ( title iii — emergency supplemental appropriations act , 2003 ) supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 interior , environment and related agencies appropriations act , 2006 ( title vi — veterans health care ) supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and hurricane recovery , 2006 of defense appropriations act , 2007 ( title x — fiscal year 2006 wildland fire emergency appropriations ) . in addition to the individual listed above , carol henn , assistant director ; tiffany mostert ; elizabeth hosler ; farahnaaz khakoo ; and john stradling made significant contributions to this report . thomas beall , pedro briones , john brooks , carlos diz , arthur james , susan offutt , sheila rajabiun , john smale , and elizabeth wood also made key contributions to this report . in total , over $11 billion of the over $279 billion provided in these laws was not designated as emergency . emergency - designated provisions may necessarily be on a fast track — and therefore receive less scrutiny — to facilitate a rapid response to some emergency event . meanwhile , the items that are not emergency designated may benefit from the urgency of the legislation by avoiding the scrutiny and trade - offs that are inherent in the regular budget and appropriations processes . second , our analysis showed that some supplementals contain emergency - designated provisions not related to the event / issue ( s ) that may have prompted the need for the supplemental . this analysis shows that on average the appropriations fema receives through regular appropriations are less than the average amount received through supplemental appropriations each year . even when extraordinary events such as katrina and 9 / 11 are removed , the supplemental appropriations are still of a significant size relative to the regular annual appropriations . the department of the interior's wildland fire management account also receives funds through regular and supplemental appropriations . this account , like fema's disaster relief account , received supplemental funding in at least 6 of the 10 years studied . regular budget requests for fire suppression activities are based on a historical 10-year average of suppression expenditures adjusted for inflation .