gao - 15-284 . washington , d.c.: march 19 , 2015 . military personnel: dod needs to take further actions to prevent sexual assault during initial military training . gao - 14-806 . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2014 . other workshops' dates are being finalized . during the course of our review , we met with military officials and program personnel from a joint base and three service - specific installations who described prevention activities that had been developed locally and were not listed in dod's strategy . the efforts at these installations included a variety of activities ranging from displays of sexual - assault awareness symbols to service - sponsored sporting events that were generally based on the theme of preventing sexual assault . despite their responsibilities for and experience with coordinating and implementing prevention - focused activities , the program personnel we met with consistently said that dod and their respective services had not communicated and disseminated guidance to them on the department's prevention strategy and that they were generally unaware of how the department's 2014 – 16 prevention strategy related to their development and implementation of sexual - assault prevention activities . in the absence of such guidance , we discussed with sapr personnel at the installations we visited their processes for determining which prevention - focused activities to sponsor . for example , we spoke with program personnel at one installation who said that while they were aware of dod's prevention strategy , they had not received any headquarter - level guidance or direction on the types of activities they should sponsor in support of their efforts to prevent sexual assault . at another installation , we spoke with program personnel who stated they didn't think that the communication flow between the headquarters - level sapr office and the installation was as fast or as formal as it needs to be to address a constantly changing program . in addition , sapr personnel provided a briefing on their program in which prevention - focused activities were categorized according to the five domains identified in dod's 2014- 16 prevention strategy . when we asked how they became familiar with dod's prevention strategy , a program official said she had found the information during a self - initiated search through documents on sapro's website . such an action is noteworthy ; however , without a plan to communicate the prevention strategy and roles and responsibilities for its implementation , dod and the military services cannot be sure that all installation - based program personnel are implementing activities that are designed to achieve the goals and objectives of the department's prevention strategy . we also found that the services' sapr policies — a key conduit for communicating a program's purpose and corresponding roles and responsibilities to relevant personnel — have not been updated to reflect the tenets of dod's most recent prevention strategy . dod's 2014-16 sexual assault prevention strategy specifies that one of the department's objectives is to achieve unity of effort and purpose across all of dod in the execution of sexual - assault prevention and also directs the dod components and the secretaries of the military departments to align their implementing plans and policies with the department's prevention strategy .