evaluating bids . oemm and blm differ in their regulations and policies for evaluating whether the bids received for areas offered for lease are sufficient . for offshore leases , oemm compares sealed bids with its own independent assessment of the value of the potential oil and gas in each lease . after the bids are received , oemm — using a team of geologists , geophysicists , and petroleum engineers assisted by a software program — conducts a technical assessment of the potential oil and gas resources associated with the lease and other factors to develop an estimate of their fair market value . this estimate becomes the minimally acceptable bid and is used to evaluate the bids received . the bidder submitting the highest acceptable bonus bid that meets or exceeds oemm's estimate of the fair market value of a lease is awarded the lease . the primary term of the lease , which may be 5 , 8 , or 10 years , depends on the water depth of the leased area . if no bids equal or exceed the minimally acceptable bid , the lease is not awarded but is offered at a subsequent lease sale . according to oemm , since 1995 , the practice of rejecting bids that fall below the minimally acceptable bid and re - offering these leases at a later sale has resulted in an overall increase in bonus receipts of $373 million between 1997 and 2006 . for onshore leases , blm relies exclusively on competitors , participating in an oral auction , to determine the lease's market value . furthermore , blm , unlike oemm , does not currently employ a multidisciplinary team with the appropriate range of skills or appropriate software to develop estimates of the oil and gas reserves for each lease parcel , and thus , establish a market and resource - based minimum acceptable bid . instead , blm has established a uniform national minimum acceptable bid of at least $2 per acre and has taken the position that as long as at least one bid meets this $2 per acre threshold , the lease will be awarded to the highest bidder . importantly , onshore leases that do not receive any bids in the initial offer are available noncompetitively the day after the lease sale and remain available for leasing for a period of 2 years after the competitive lease sale . any of these available leases may be acquired on a first - come , first - served basis subject to payment of an administrative fee . prior to 1992 , blm offered primary terms of 5 years for competitively sold leases and 10 years for leases issued noncompetitively . since 1992 , blm has been required by law to only offer leases with 10-year primary terms whether leases are sold competitively or issued noncompetitively .