dhs and doe each concurred with our recommendation . dhs reported that nppd is to collaborate with ferc to identify critical electrical infrastructure assets beginning with the evaluation of critical substations identified by ferc , and will explore elements of criticality that might not have been considered by ferc , in coordination with doe . doe stated that its office of electricity delivery and energy reliability will review ferc's electrical infrastructure analysis and will work with ferc and dhs to identify any additional elements of criticality and determine if further assessment is needed . both dhs and doe expect to complete these efforts by march 2017 . these actions should address the intent of our recommendation . we found in march 2016 that although dhs components had independently conducted some efforts to assess electromagnetic risks , the department had not fully leveraged available risk information or conducted a comprehensive analysis of these risks . within the office of policy , there is recognition that “space weather” and “power grid failure” are significant risk events , which dhs officials have determined pose great risk to the security of the nation . however , dhs officials were unable to provide detailed information about the specific risk inputs — namely threat , vulnerability , and consequence information — that were used to assess how electromagnetic events compared to other risk events , or how these inputs were used to inform dhs's applicable risk - management priorities . further , officials within nppd were unable to identify any specific actions taken or plans to systematically collect or analyze risk information regarding electromagnetic impacts to the electric grid as part of department - wide risk assessment efforts . according to the nipp , to assess risk effectively , critical infrastructure partners — including owners and operators , sector councils , and government agencies — need timely , reliable , and actionable information regarding threats , vulnerabilities , and consequences . additionally , the electric grid remains vulnerable to other potential threats , such as physical and cyberattacks . we concluded that better collection of threat , vulnerability , and consequence information through existing dhs programs and strengthened collaboration with federal partners could help dhs better assess the relative risk ranking of electromagnetic events versus other risks and help inform asset protection priorities . moreover , according to subject - matter experts , the impact to the electric grid from electromagnetic threats may vary substantially by location , network and operating characteristics , and other factors . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . approximately 85 percent of the nation's critical electrical infrastructure is owned and operated by private industry . dhs expects to implement these efforts by december 2016 and if implemented effectively , should address the intent of our recommendation .