seq . applicants but offer coverage at a premium that is higher than the standard rate based on the presence of a pre - existing condition . a medical condition reported by an individual is considered a pre - existing condition by the insurer if it exists at the time the individual applies for coverage or if an individual was treated for or diagnosed with the condition in the past . states , which have the responsibility for regulating private insurance , have in some instances required protections for individuals with pre - existing conditions . state protections include the following: guaranteed issue requirements prohibit the denial of coverage to individuals based on pre - existing conditions . in some states , all products must be guaranteed issue , while in other states guaranteed issue requirements are only applicable to some products or to some individuals , for instance individuals with 12 months of continuous coverage , or to some standard products , such as a basic health plan . an insurer of last resort law requires one insurer in the state to issue products to individuals regardless of pre - existing conditions . rating restrictions prohibit insurers in the individual market from adjusting an individual's health insurance premiums based on an individual's health status . two types of rating restrictions are pure community rating and adjusted community rating . under the former , insurers may not adjust premiums due to health status , age , or gender ; under the latter , they may adjust premiums according to characteristics such as gender or age , depending on the state . rate bands limit the extent to which premiums can vary based on an individual's health status , for example , to a certain percentage of the average premium . limitations on the number of years a health insurer can look back at an individual's health history when making its determination as to whether and at what price to offer coverage . high - risk health insurance pools that provide coverage to individuals whose health status , including the presence of pre - existing conditions , limits their access to coverage in the private individual health insurance market . high - risk insurance pools — typically publicly subsidized , state - run nonprofit associations — often contract with a private health insurer to administer the pool and offer a range of health plan options . until 2014 , ppaca requires that individuals who have pre - existing conditions and have been uninsured for 6 months be offered the opportunity to enroll in a temporary national high - risk pool program , known as the pre - existing condition insurance plan ( pcip ) . pcip will close at the end of 2013 , which is when ppaca will begin to require insurers to accept every individual who applies for coverage , regardless of factors related to health status . states were given the option of running their own pcip with federal funding , or allowing the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to administer the pcip in their state . twenty - seven states elected to administer a pcip for their residents , while 23 states and the district of columbia opted to allow hhs to administer their pcips .