, human , physical ) to be addressed . in developing the original water sector ssp , the environmental protection agency had fully or partially addressed 29 criteria and did not address 1 . the current version of the ssp fully addressed 1 cyber - related criterion that was not previously addressed and fully addressed 2 cyber - related criteria that were previously partially addressed . figure 1 summarizes the extent to which each ssp update addresses the 30 criteria . the sector - specific agencies did not fully address missing cyber - related criteria in their ssp updates in large part due to the following: agency officials said that in developing their plans , they were focused more on specific ( physical ) threats to the sector than the cyber security aspects . while dhs began efforts to improve the cyber content of ssps , sector agency officials stated that dhs did not make them aware of the specific cyber criteria shortfalls we identified and reported on in 2007 . while dhs issued ssp ( formatting ) guidance in 2008 , this guidance did not specifically request updates to cyber security aspects of the plans or provide other substantive - type direction . as previously stated , dhs issued guidance in march 2009 that specifically requested that the sectors address cyber criteria shortfalls in their 2010 sector - specific plan revisions . however , until these plans are issued , it is not clear whether they fully address cyber requirements . this notwithstanding , having sector - specific agencies continue to have ssps that do not fully address key cyber elements has reduced the effectiveness of the existing sector planning approach and thus increases the risk that the nation's critical cyber assets have not been adequately identified , prioritized , and protected . sector plans and related reports do not fully provide for effective implementation to provide for effective sector plan implementation , dhs issued guidance that called for the sector - specific agencies to provide for such activities in their ssps and sector annual reports . specifically , with regard to the ssps , the department issued march 2006 guidance directing the sector - specific agencies to develop and incorporate in their ssps actions and activities — referred to as implementation actions — essential to carrying out the plans and achieving the goal of securing the sectors' cyber and other assets . according to the guidance , implementation actions are to include ( 1 ) a description of the actions necessary to implement the plan , ( 2 ) milestones for when the actions are to be accomplished , and ( 3 ) the parties responsible for managing and overseeing action execution . developing and updating implementation actions , including milestones , and responsible parties , is important for reporting and assessing the progress and effectiveness of the sector - specific plans . with regard to sector annual reports , the department issued guidance in march 2008 that called for sector - specific agencies ( in their 2008 annual reports to be issued later in 2008 ) to ( 1 ) update implementation actions , and ( 2 ) report on the extent of progress in achieving the actions . idnce , dhs refer to thection as n implementtion mtrix .