iii ) . we also obtained cocaine seizure data for fiscal years 1998 through 2000 from the coast guard and customs and cocaine seizure data for fiscal year 2000 from dod . the agencies concurred with the report . they also provided technical comments , which have been incorporated in this report where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of the report to the senate and house judiciary committees , the senate caucus on international narcotics control , the secretaries of defense and transportation , the commissioner of the u.s. customs service , the administrator of the u.s. drug enforcement administration , the director of the office of national drug control policy , and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . all results data are classified . during fiscal years 1998 through 2000 , the coast guard tracked: ( 1 ) the amount of cocaine seized , ( 2 ) the amount of marijuana seized , and ( 3 ) the cocaine seizure rate . the amount of cocaine or marijuana seized is not isolated to the transit zone . tracking the amount of drugs seized alone as a measure of effectiveness has limited utility . that is because increased seizures may be a function of either the increased effectiveness of interdiction agencies or increased drug flow into the united states . the coast guard has attempted to address this issue by tracking the cocaine seizure rate . the cocaine seizure rate is the amount of cocaine seized as a percentage of the total estimated cocaine flow into the united states.none of these measures are specific to the transit zone . in fiscal year 1998 , customs kept track of three transit - zone specific measures of results , including the amount of cocaine and marijuana seized in the transit zone and the track rate ( whether suspect air targets were successfully tracked ) . according to agency officials and customs reports , transit zone cocaine and marijuana seizures were those made by foreign law enforcement agencies with assistance from customs air or marine assets . in fiscal year 1999 , customs dropped the track rate but continued to track transit zone cocaine and marijuana seizures . as of fiscal year 2000 , customs no longer tracked measures of results specific to the transit zone . customs officials said that the agency's primary responsibility in the transit zone is to provide detection and monitoring and support to agencies , such as the coast guard and foreign law enforcement , that are charged with apprehending drug smugglers . customs officials also said that its air and marine assets travel across the source , transit , and arrival zones and are not isolated to the transit zone . due to these factors , customs has discontinued reporting transit - zone specific measures , including seizures , and is developing new measures of effectiveness of its air and marine assets in detecting drug smugglers .