the estimate has few errors . aoc updated its cost estimate prior to beginning the project , but once the project began , aoc did not update the estimate . aoc did not document variances between planned and actual costs . ( see fig . the building houses 142 office suites , 5 conference rooms , 4 hearing rooms , and the caucus room , which can accommodate large meetings . the building also provides space for a library , food service , and a health unit . according to aoc planning studies , the building is plagued with serious safety , health , environmental , and operational issues that are worsening . for example , without action , essential systems for heating and cooling that are located behind walls and in mechanical rooms will continue to deteriorate , potentially negatively affecting members of congress , staff , and constituents . aoc has been developing the scope of the cannon building's renewal project since approximately 2004 when aoc's consultant conducted a facility condition assessment ( fca ) that identified the building's deficiencies . in 2009 , we reviewed aoc's progress in developing the cannon building project and found that while it had followed a reasonable process to plan the building's renewal such as through updating the fca , it was important that aoc continue , as planned , to refine the project's scope and cost estimate.review , aoc has proceeded with the design phase of the project , based since our 2009 upon its budget of $753 million for the planning , design , and construction phases . the project is currently expected to be completed by 2025 . according to aoc officials and current design documents , aoc plans to correct most of the cannon building's identified deficiencies and to address requirements such as energy conservation , physical security , hazardous materials abatement , and historic preservation . the project is to involve substantial reconfiguration of interior and exterior spaces to include reconstructing the building's top floor , which now partially consists of storage space , and landscaping the courtyard . the project is also expected to provide refurbished windows and a new roof . additional work is intended to preserve and repair the building's stone exterior . the project is also expected to allow for complete replacement of all plumbing , heating and cooling , fire protection , electrical , and alarm systems ; refurbish restrooms and make them more accessible to people with disabilities ; and provide new wall and floor finishes in some areas . in addition , the project includes removing asbestos that may be contained in plaster ceilings and walls . aoc plans to conduct the work in phases corresponding to the four sections of the building and including an initial phase for utility work as shown in figure 2 . tenants displaced during construction of each section are to move to temporary offices while other occupants will remain in building sections not affected by construction . the u.s. capitol dome , an important symbol of american democracy and an architectural icon , was constructed of cast iron more than 150 years ago .