and these are only the reported attacks . control systems are computer - based systems that are used by many infrastructures and industries to monitor and control sensitive processes and physical functions . typically , control systems collect sensor measurements and operational data from the field , process and display this information , and relay control commands to local or remote equipment . in the electric power industry they can manage and control the transmission and delivery of electric power , for example , by opening and closing circuit breakers and setting thresholds for preventive shutdowns . employing integrated control systems , the oil and gas industry can control the refining operations on a plant site as well as remotely monitor the pressure and flow of gas pipelines and control the flow and pathways of gas transmission . in water utilities , they can remotely monitor well levels and control the wells' pumps ; monitor flows , tank levels , or pressure in storage tanks ; monitor water quality characteristics , such as ph , turbidity , and chlorine residual ; and control the addition of chemicals . control system functions vary from simple to complex ; they can be used to simply monitor processes — for example , the environmental conditions in a small office building — or manage most activities in a municipal water system or even a nuclear power plant . in certain industries such as chemical and power generation , safety systems are typically implemented to mitigate a disastrous event if control and other systems fail . in addition , to guard against both physical attack and system failure , organizations may establish back - up control centers that include uninterruptible power supplies and backup generators . there are two primary types of control systems . distributed control systems ( dcs ) typically are used within a single processing or generating plant or over a small geographic area . supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) systems typically are used for large , geographically dispersed distribution operations . a utility company may use a dcs to generate power and a scada system to distribute it . figure 3 illustrates the typical components of a control system . a control system typically consists of a “master” or central supervisory control and monitoring station consisting of one or more human - machine interfaces where an operator can view status information about the remote sites and issue commands directly to the system . typically , this station is located at a main site along with application servers and an engineering workstation that is used to configure and troubleshoot the other control system components . the supervisory control and monitoring station is typically connected to local controller stations through a hard - wired network or to remote controller stations through a communications network — which could be the internet , a public switched telephone network , or a cable or wireless ( e.g . radio , microwave , or wi - fi ) network . each controller station has a remote terminal unit ( rtu ) , a programmable logic controller ( plc ) , dcs controller , or other controller that communicates with the supervisory control and monitoring station .