gao - 12-1022 . that have proven their effectiveness in solving the region's most pressing problems . usaid is currently conducting an evaluation of some of its carsi activities , and state is developing an evaluation of inl activities under carsi , consistent with its evaluation policy . usaid and state have both taken steps to monitor and report on the results of carsi - funded activities . however , in our previous work we concluded that monitoring activities do not take the place of program evaluations . as we previously concluded , monitoring is ongoing in nature and measures agencies' progress in meeting established objectives , typically using performance metrics . evaluations are individual , systematic studies that typically examine a broader range of information on program performance and its context than is feasible to monitor on an ongoing basis . thus , evaluations allow for overall assessments of whether a program is working and what adjustments need to be made to improve results . usaid officials stated that they will also conduct evaluations of other carsi activities that meet the criteria established in usaid's 2011 evaluation policy . usaid's evaluation policy requires each usaid operating unit to evaluate all projects that equal or exceed the average project size for that operating unit , at least once during the project's lifetime . preliminary results from el salvador show that murder and robbery rates have been reduced in communities receiving usaid assistance under the program . usaid officials identified a range of ways that they expect the crime prevention programming evaluation to assist them , once it is completed . for example , they expect the evaluation to provide evidence of the extent to which usaid's crime prevention program reduced crime victimization and perceptions of insecurity in at - risk communities . we found the data sufficiently reliable for our purposes . at the time of reporting , the most recent data available on funding for carsi were as of june 1 , 2013 , and the most recent non - carsi funding data available were as of march 31 , 2013 . however , we found no change in the total carsi allocations between march 31 , 2013 , and june 1 , 2013 . thus , it is possible to compare carsi and non - carsi funding allocations . to examine steps u.s. agencies used to help identify and consider key factors when selecting activities to fund under carsi , we reviewed documentation from state and usaid , including u.s. agency assessments of partner countries , as well as written statements provided to us from embassies in partner countries and from state and usaid on the steps they utilized . to examine the extent to which u.s. agencies reported carsi results and evaluated carsi activities , we reviewed state , usaid , and other agencies' documentation on carsi activities and the results of these activities . we also worked with state officials at headquarters to develop written questions for the embassies in all seven partner countries on the steps they used to help identify and consider these key factors when selecting carsi activities .