vi. ) however , we found that savings that contractors reported , in accordance with the plan the agency agreed to , sometimes included savings that were not achieved because of agency actions , such as physical changes to buildings . doe agrees that such factors , which were not contemplated prior to contract formation , should be verified by annual measurement and verification activities . we continue to believe that it is important for agencies to obtain information from contractors on savings that are not achieved because of agency actions and have modified our report to discuss “achieved savings” instead of “actual savings.” in dod's technical comments , it provided some missing data for the amount the army awarded in espcs for fiscal years 2011 , 2012 , and 2014 . dod also provided updated guaranteed costs savings data for some army projects after it submitted comments on the draft report . we updated the report with these data . dod also requested that we list dod as the agency in tables 2 and 4 and list the air force , army , and navy as components , but we did not do so because we did not include other dod components in the scope of our audit , and we wanted to highlight the details specific to the air force , army , and navy . we recognize that the air force , army , and navy are components of dod , and we acknowledge this in the beginning of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretaries of defense , energy , and veterans affairs ; the attorney general ; the administrator of the general services administration ; and the director of the office of management and budget . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix xi . we were asked to review federal use of energy savings performance contracts ( espc ) and process changes since 2005 . this report examines the extent to which ( 1 ) selected agencies have used espcs and plan to use them in the future , ( 2 ) selected agencies' espc projects have achieved their expected cost and energy savings , and ( 3 ) selected agencies have overseen and evaluated their espc projects . to determine which federal agencies to include in our review , we selected agencies with the highest energy usage and greatest facility square footage , based on government - wide data collected by the federal energy management program ( femp ) . we chose the following seven agencies based on the above criteria the departments of energy ( doe ) , justice , and veterans affairs ( va ) ; the general services administration ( gsa ) ; and the army , navy , and air force within the department of defense ( dod ) .