in those instances , we did not make the suggested changes . dod partially concurred with our three recommendations . in regards to our recommendation to delay procurement of the lead flight iii ship until more detail design information will be available , dod acknowledged the importance of a thorough understanding of the costs and risks prior to making procurement decisions but does not believe the procurement should be delayed . we continue to believe that waiting until at least fiscal year 2017 to procure the lead flight iii ship would result in additional time to develop the detail design for flight iii and would in turn support a more refined understanding of design changes and their implications on ship construction and costs prior to making significant contractual commitments . as noted in our report , both shipbuilders support this delay . additionally , the flight iii program has yet to finalize its request for proposal for the lead ship and receive a shipbuilder response , both of which are required prior to the planned defense acquisition board review — which was postponed indefinitely earlier this year — and are needed in order to proceed with the procurement of the lead flight iii ship . the positive aspects of delaying the lead ship procurement , when combined with the reality that the department will be challenged to accomplish all of its requisite activities to procure the first flight iii ship before the end of fiscal year 2016 , support lead ship procurement based on improved design knowledge in fiscal year 2017 . regarding our recommendation on the next planned multiyear procurement for ddg 51 flight iii ships , the department agrees that the criteria for seeking multiyear procurement authority must be met but disagreed that it should refrain from seeking multiyear procurement authority based on the current state of information available on the flight iii configuration . dot&e continues to assert this position . specifically , dot&e has stated that the navy's plan to use a manned ship for testing cannot realistically demonstrate the performance of the integrated flight ill combat system against anti - ship cruise missile stream raids — a series of targets approaching the ship from the same bearing — in the self - defense zone because of range safety restrictions . according to dot&e , it is the practice for all other warships to use an unmanned self - defense test ship for their operational test programs . use of an unmanned self - defense test ship equipped with spy - 6 and the aegis combat system would allow a safety offset that is much closer to the ship ( less than 400 feet ) and would permit the targets to conduct realistic maneuvers , which provides the ability to ensure operationally realistic stream raid effects are present and make the test adequate . the navy has asserted that the end - to - end testing scenarios identified by dot&e for operationally testing flight iii self - defense capabilities can be accomplished on a manned flight iii ship .