performing a certification . the certification process described consists of five steps: ( 1 ) planning the effort to understand the issues for the entire system and to place boundaries on the work ; ( 2 ) collecting critical data and information such as the risk analysis , inputs , processing steps , outputs , and a listing of application system controls ; ( 3 ) performing a basic evaluation of security requirements and functions , control implementation , and the implementation method ; ( 4 ) in the event that a basic evaluation does not provide enough evidence for certification , performing a detailed evaluation to analyze the quality of security safeguards ; and ( 5 ) preparing a security evaluation report — the primary product of a certification — that includes both technical and management security recommendations and a proposed accreditation statement . security evaluation report . the format and contents of the security evaluation report are described , including major findings , recommended corrective actions , and a proposed accreditation statement . in particular , the major findings are to include both proposed residual vulnerabilities and proposed vulnerabilities requiring correction . depending on the seriousness of the security flaw identified , implementation of an application under development may be delayed or an operational application may require removal from service . however , other intermediate alternatives were also identified , such as withholding accreditiation pending completion of corrections , adding procedural security controls , restricting the application to process only nonsensitive or minimally sensitive data , or removing especially vulnerable application functions or components . the accreditation decision and statement . the accrediting official essentially uses the security evaluation report to evaluate the certification evidence , decides on the acceptability of security safeguards , approves corrective actions , signs the accreditation statement , and ensures that corrective actions are accomplished . the accreditation statement officially documents the explicit acceptance of responsibility for computer security , and should identify any restrictions of operation for the application , as well as any corrective actions . recertification and reaccreditation . the guidance explains that certification and accreditation are not permanent , and may need to be performed again for reasons including changes to the application , changes in requirements , passage of a time interval ( such as the 3-year interval established by omb ) , the occurrence of a significant violation , or audit or evaluation findings . in may 2004 , nist issued its guide for the security certification and accreditation of federal information systems ( special publication 800- 37 ) to be used in certifying and accrediting non - national security systems . developed as part of nist's project to promote the development of standards and guidelines to support fisma , this new guide is to replace fips publication 102 when it is rescinded ( which , according to a nist official , should take place in the next six months ) . at the time of our survey , all 24 agencies reported that they planned to adopt or modify their existing guidance to be consistent with special publication 800-37 , and 14 agencies reported they already used a draft version of the guidance .