this requirement applied to all programs that identified incremental risk . additionally , for grant programs that identified incremental risk , m - 13-07 states that agencies should avoid granting extension requests for audit report submission and should explore the feasibility of conducting additional audit activities to review internal control procedures prior to funding the activity . table 7 summarizes the requirement to expedite review and resolution of audit findings per m - 13-07 . as illustrated in table 8 , our review found that agencies' discussion in their internal control plans of expediting review and resolution of audit findings varied . while the requirement applied to the 38 programs that identified incremental risk , not all agencies discussed resolving all audit findings within 6 months after completion of the audit . specifically , of the 38 programs , there were 12 programs that identified incremental risk and did not discuss expediting review and resolution of audit findings in their internal control plans . however , while the requirement applied to the 38 programs that identified incremental risk , 5 programs that did not identify incremental risk also discussed expediting review and resolution of audit findings in their sandy disaster relief internal control plans . for the 17 grant programs , agencies did not discuss avoidance of granting extension requests for audit report submission and exploring the feasibility of conducting additional audit activities prior to funding the activity . specifically , for the 17 grant programs , 14 did not discuss avoiding granting extension requests for audit report submission and 11 did not discuss exploring the feasibility of conducting additional audit activities prior to funding the activity . it is not clear from the sandy disaster relief internal control plans whether agencies determined that these additional audit activities prior to funding the activity would not be feasible . these activities occurred prior to and following the release of the guidance . on february 19 , 2013 , omb sent the chief financial officer community advance notice of the forthcoming omb guidance . this notice identified minimum requirements for agency internal control plans that would be included and further explained in the omb guidance . also , as reported by omb staff and agency officials , omb met with the agencies to discuss agency risk assessments and the development of internal control plans . in accordance with m - 13-07 , each of the 19 agencies that received funds under the act submitted a sandy disaster relief internal control plan with specific program details using the template provided by omb . omb guidance directed agencies to develop internal control plans based on incremental risk . we found that agencies identified incremental risk related to sandy activities for 38 of the 61 programs receiving funding under the disaster relief act . our review of the internal control plans disclosed that agencies did not consistently apply m - 13-07 in preparing these plans . specifically , agencies' plans ranged from providing most of the required information to not providing any information on certain programs .