the navy's comments appear in appendix i . to acquire information about the number and status of spawar low - rate initial production programs , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the spawar acquisition reform office ; selected spawar program offices ; the office of the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) ; the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy ( command , control , communications , computers , and information / electronic warfare / space ) ; the office of the deputy director defense procurement strategies ; the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) ; and the office of the chief of naval operations . to obtain detailed information about the impact of the high percentage of spawar low - rate initial production procurements , we selected and reviewed 14 programs , representing 70 percent of all spawar low - rate initial production programs . of these 14 programs , we examined 8 programs in detail looking at operational , logistic , interoperability , and training issues to determine how well these programs were performing . to obtain information about the operational testing , evaluation , interoperability , and fielding of low - rate initial production systems , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the office of the director of navy test , evaluation , and technology requirements ; the office of the navy commander operational testing and evaluation force ; the office of the program manager for battle group systems integration testing ; and the office of the director of operational test and evaluation , office of the assistant secretary of defense . to obtain information about the operation , performance , interoperability , maintenance , repair , retrofit , suitability , and training regarding low - rate initial production systems in the fleet , we visited the naval surface force command , pacific ; the naval air command , pacific ; and the naval submarine command , pacific , squadron eleven . we also visited specific ships in each command , including the u.s.s . benfold ( ddg - 65 ) , the u.s.s . it is required on all aircraft carriers and amphibious ships and at training facilities . spawar approved 100 percent of the total inventory objective to be bought under low - rate initial production ; however , the system does not work due to a number of problems with the antenna , power amplifier , and radio frequency control . the system also created , and was affected by , electromagnetic interference , which caused severe interoperability problems . for example , the interference caused a complete loss of global positioning system navigation capability . furthermore , in order for the digital system to work , an air - search radar had to be shut down . we also reviewed selected laws and regulations governing low - rate initial production , including title 10 of the u.s. code , the dod 5000 series acquisition regulations ( the1996 and revised 2000 version ) , and secretary of the navy instruction 5000-2b governing acquisition and procurement of low - rate initial production and commercial - off - the - shelf technology .