gao - 09-568 . washington , d.c.: june 19 , 2009 . influenza pandemic: continued focus on the nation's planning and preparedness efforts remains essential . gao - 09-760t . washington , d.c.: june 3 , 2009 . u.s. public diplomacy: key issues for congressional oversight . we plan to report on these issues later this year . my statement today will highlight opportunities to strengthen interagency collaboration by focusing on four key areas: ( 1 ) developing overarching strategies , ( 2 ) creating collaborative organizations , ( 3 ) developing a well - trained workforce , and ( 4 ) improving information sharing . i will also discuss the importance of sustained leadership in addressing these areas . this statement is based on completed gao work , which was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . national security threats have evolved and require involvement beyond the traditional agencies of dod , the department of state , and usaid . the departments of homeland security , energy , justice , the treasury , agriculture , commerce , and health and human services are now a bigger part of the equation . what has not yet evolved are the mechanisms that agencies use to coordinate national security activities such as developing overarching strategies to guide planning and execution of missions , or sharing and integrating national security information across agencies . the absence of effective mechanisms can be a hindrance to achieving national security objectives . within the following key areas , a number of challenges exist that limit the ability of u.s. government agencies to work collaboratively in responding to national security issues . our work has also identified actions that agencies can take to enhance collaboration . although some agencies have developed or updated overarching strategies on national security - related issues , our work has identified cases where u.s. efforts have been hindered by the lack of information on roles and responsibilities of organizations involved or the lack of mechanisms to coordinate their efforts . national security challenges covering a broad array of areas , ranging from preparedness for an influenza pandemic to iraqi governance and reconstruction , have necessitated using all elements of national power — including diplomatic , military , intelligence , development assistance , economic , and law enforcement support . these elements fall under the authority of numerous u.s. government agencies , requiring overarching strategies and plans to enhance agencies' abilities to collaborate with each other . strategies can help agencies develop mutually reinforcing plans and determine activities , resources , processes , and performance measures for implementing those strategies . the government performance and results act ( gpra ) provides a strategic planning and reporting framework intended to improve federal agencies' performance and hold them accountable for achieving results . effective implementation of gpra's results - oriented framework requires , among other things , that agencies clearly establish performance goals for which they will be held accountable , measure progress towards those goals , and determine strategies and resources to effectively accomplish the goals . furthermore , defining organizational roles and responsibilities and mechanisms for coordination in these strategies can help agencies clarify who will lead or participate in which activities and how decisions will be made .