gao - 07-878r . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2007 . hud is funded through appropriations . fhfb is responsible for regulating the fhlbank system's safety and soundness as well as its mission activities . the agency has a five - member board , with the president of the united states appointing four members — each of whom serves a 7-year term — subject to senate approval . the fifth member is the secretary of hud . the president also appoints fhfb's chair . like ofheo , fhfb carries out its oversight authorities through examinations , establishing capital standards , rule making , and taking enforcement actions . fhfb is funded through assessments of the 12 federal home loan banks and is not subject to the appropriations process . we continue to believe that the current fragmented regulatory structure for the housing gses is inadequate to monitor these large and complex financial institutions and their mission activities . establishing a single housing gse regulator that is equipped with adequate authorities and governed by a board would better ensure that the gses operate in a safe and sound manner and fulfill their housing missions . the current fragmented structure of federal housing gse regulation does not provide for a comprehensive and effective approach to safety and soundness regulation . although the housing gses operate differently , they share common characteristics as large and complex financial institutions . for example , the gses rely on sophisticated strategies and activities , such as the use of derivatives , to manage the interest rate and other risks that are inherent in their operations . in recent years , the gses , as discussed earlier , have not always demonstrated the capacity to effectively manage the risks that they face . moreover , ofheo , and fhfb to a lesser degree , lack key authorities to fulfill their safety and soundness responsibilities , as described below: unlike bank regulators and fhfb , ( 1 ) ofheo's authority to issue cease and desist orders does not specifically list an unsafe and unsound practice as grounds for issuance and ( 2 ) ofheo's powers do not include the same direct removal and prohibition authorities applicable to officers and directors . bank regulators have prompt corrective action authorities that are arguably more robust and proactive than those of ofheo and fhfb . these authorities require that bank regulators take specific supervisory actions when bank capital levels fall to specific levels or provide the regulators with the option of taking other actions when other specified unsafe and unsound actions occur . although ofheo has statutory authority to take certain actions when fannie mae or freddie mac capital falls to predetermined levels , the authorities are not as proactive or broad as those of the bank regulators . ofheo also has established regulations requiring specified supervisory actions when unsafe conditions are identified that are not related to capital adequacy , but ofheo's statute does not specifically mention these authorities . fhfb's statute does not establish a prompt corrective action scheme that requires specified actions when unsafe conditions are identified . although fhfb officials believe they have all the authority necessary to carry out their safety and soundness responsibilities , the agency has significant discretion in resolving troubled fhlbanks .