commercialization . efforts to bridge the gap between research and development activities and the marketplace by transitioning technologies to commercial applications . we did not include those initiatives that focused solely on deployment activities , which include efforts to facilitate or achieve widespread use of existing technologies either in the commercial market or for nonmarket uses such as defense , through their construction , operation , or use . initiatives that focus on deployment activities include a variety of tax incentives . we also narrowed our list to only those initiatives that focused research on advancing or developing new and innovative solar technologies . next , we shared our list with agency officials and provided our definitions of r&d and commercialization . we asked officials to determine whether the list was complete and accurate for fiscal year 2010 initiatives that met our criteria , whether those initiatives were still active in fiscal year 2011 , and whether there were any new initiatives in fiscal year 2011 . if officials wanted to remove an initiative from our list , we asked for additional information to support the removal . in total , we determined that there were 65 initiatives that met our criteria . to identify and describe the key characteristics of solar - related initiatives implemented by federal agencies , we developed a questionnaire to collect information from officials of those 65 federal solar energy - related initiatives . the questionnaire was prepopulated with information that was obtained from the agencies for gao's renewable energy report including program descriptions , type of solar technology supported , funding mechanisms , and type of funding recipients . questions included the type of technology advancement activities , obligations for solar activities in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , initiative - wide and solar - specific goals , and coordination efforts with other solar - related initiatives . we conducted pretests with officials of three different initiatives at three different agencies to check that ( 1 ) the questions were clear and unambiguous , ( 2 ) terminology was used correctly , ( 3 ) the questionnaire did not place an undue burden on agency officials , ( 4 ) the information could feasibly be obtained , and ( 5 ) the questionnaire was comprehensive and unbiased . an independent gao reviewer also reviewed a draft of the questionnaire prior to its administration . on the basis of feedback from these pretests and independent review , we revised the survey in order to improve its clarity . after completing the pretests , we administered the questionnaire . we sent questionnaires to the appropriate agency liaisons in an attached microsoft word form , who in turn sent the questionnaires to the appropriate officials . we received questionnaire responses for each initiative and , thus , had a response rate of 100 percent . after reviewing the responses , we conducted follow - up e - mail exchanges or telephone discussions with agency officials when responses were unclear or conflicting . when necessary , we used the clarifying information provided by agency officials to update answers to questions to improve the accuracy and completeness of the data . because this effort was not a sample survey , it has no sampling errors .