cir . concerning the availability of the experimental use exception to a university , the court ruled that the experimental use exception is very narrow and strictly limited , extending only to experimental uses that are not in furtherance of the infringer's legitimate business and are solely for the infringer's amusement , to satisfy idle curiosity , or for strictly philosophical inquiry . the court also stated that the profit or nonprofit status of the user is not determinative of whether the use qualifies for the experimental use exception . experimental use may infringe a patent when the use furthers the infringer's business . for example , the business of a research institution includes conducting research . some patent owners believe that allowing others to use their patented technologies for research purposes may pose no threat and may actually be to their benefit . in fact , representatives from corporations involved in the research and development of products in the biomedical area told us that they welcome additional research that will continue to advance the state of the art as long as such use is not merely an attempt to use the patents for commercial purposes without obtaining a license . they said that there has been an unstated “gentlemen's agreement” among researchers in this regard that will not be affected by the madey case . if true , government researchers may , as a practical matter , be able in many cases to continue using the patented technologies of others without obtaining licenses . va and dod procurement officials were unaware of any instances in which a federal agency had used the government's licenses to have contractors manufacture products that incorporate federally funded inventions . furthermore , these procurement officials said that , as discussed above , the government's license does not provide an automatic discount for federal government procurements . they added that even if they wanted to use the license for procurements , they would not know which products incorporate federally funded inventions . the va and dod officials also said that the government's licenses would probably not significantly reduce their procurement costs because they believe they already receive favorable pricing through the federal supply schedule and national contracts . in particular , for a branded pharmaceutical to be listed on the federal supply schedule , the manufacturer must agree to give the government a 24-percent discount over the nonfederal average manufacturer price . furthermore , the federal government has negotiated national contracts that provide even greater discounts for some pharmaceuticals . the government's license under the bayh - dole act provides protection against claims of patent infringement when federal agencies or their authorized funding recipients use federally funded inventions . scientists working for federal agencies and their contractors generally are authorized to use federally funded inventions ; however , agencies have not necessarily provided similar authorization in their grant agreements for scientists at universities and other institutions . the decision rendered by the court of appeals for the federal circuit in madey v. duke university calls into question the validity of the general research exception that many scientists have cited as a basis for using the patented technology of others in their research . we provided nih with a draft of this report for its review and comment .