ii ) . in performing our work , we reviewed applicable federal laws and regulations , fbi policies and procedures , and relevant statistics . we interviewed federal officials at and reviewed documentation obtained from the department of justice's office of legal policy ; the fbi's counterterrorism division ; the fbi's nics section and criminal justice information services division at clarksburg , west virginia ; and the terrorist screening center ( tsc ) , which is the multiagency center responsible for consolidating federal terrorist watch lists . generally , our analyses focused on background checks processed by the fbi's nics section and 11 states during the period february 3 , 2004 ( when the fbi's procedures for handling terrorism - related nics transactions became effective ) , through june 30 , 2004 . the 11 states we contacted ( california , colorado , florida , hawaii , illinois , massachusetts , north carolina , pennsylvania , tennessee , texas , and virginia ) were those that fbi data indicated — and the states subsequently confirmed — had processed nics checks ( during the period february 3 through june 30 , 2004 ) that resulted in one or more valid matches with terrorist watch list records . this report addresses the following questions regarding nics and terrorist watch lists: what terrorist watch lists are searched during nics background checks ? how many nics transactions have resulted in valid matches with terrorist watch list records ? for valid matches , what are federal and state procedures for sharing nics - related information with federal counterterrorism officials ? to what extent does the fbi monitor the states' handling of nics transactions with valid matches to terrorist watch list records ? what issues , if any , have state agencies encountered in handling such transactions ? also , appendix ii of this report presents summary information on federal and state requirements for retaining information related to nics transactions with valid matches to terrorist watch list records . in performing our work , we interviewed officials from the department of justice , the fbi , and the terrorist screening center — a multiagency center responsible for consolidating federal terrorist watch lists — and reviewed documentation they provided us . we obtained data on nics transactions that resulted in valid matches with terrorist watch list records during the period february 3 , 2004 ( when the revised nics procedures took effect ) , through june 30 , 2004 . we also contacted 11 states ( california , colorado , florida , hawaii , illinois , massachusetts , north carolina , pennsylvania , tennessee , texas , and virginia ) that fbi data indicated — and the states subsequently confirmed — had processed nics checks ( during the period february 3 through june 30 , 2004 ) that resulted in one or more valid matches with terrorist watch list records . the results of our interviews with state officials may not be representative of the views and opinions of others nationwide . however , we did discuss the sources of data with fbi and state officials and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review .