ii ) . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to identify and describe dod and ffrdc facilities that receive funding from dod for microelectronics production or research prototyping , we visited all eight facilities identified by dod as having capability to produce or prototype microelectronics . using a set of structured questions , we interviewed officials at each facility to determine their microelectronics focus , clean - room and equipment characteristics , and types of research , production and / or research prototyping the facility provides . we also obtained and analyzed supporting documents and toured the facilities . we did not include in our scope universities or commercial firms that also conduct dod research and have microelectronics facilities . because microelectronics is a part of a much broader area of research , we looked at dod's overall research coordination in addition to microelectronics - specific areas . to determine how dod coordinates its research investments , we interviewed officials from the executive staff of the defense science and technology reliance process ; the office of the deputy under secretary of defense for science and technology ( space and sensor technology ) ; and the advisory group on electron devices . we also obtained and reviewed dod's defense research planning - documents — including the basic research plan , the defense technology area plan , joint warfighting science and technology plan , and the defense technology objectives document . we also met with defense advanced research projects agency officials to discuss their role in sponsoring dod research and development activities . in addition , at the dod service laboratories that we visited , we obtained information on microelectronics related research projects . we performed our review from november 2003 to january 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the individual named above , bradley terry , lisa gardner , karen sloan , hai tran , brian eddington , and steven pedigo made key contributions to this report . the people who work in clean rooms wear special protective clothing that prevents workers from contaminating the room ( see fig . the equipment found at research facilities and at production facilities are similar but are used for different purposes . because research facilities focus on developing new device concepts , materials , and processes , the equipment is set up for flexibility because it is used for different experiments to prove concepts and validate theories . once a technology is sufficiently developed , a small quantity is prototyped in a production environment to prove the design . production facilities are set up to produce higher volumes of microelectronics and have more automation and multiple sets of equipment to increase productivity .