commerce's it infrastructure is decentralized . during our 2-month testing period , 16 incidents were reported by the seven bureaus collectively , 10 of which were generated to report computer viruses . four of the other six reported incidents related to our testing activities , one of which was reported after our discovery of evidence of a successful intrusion that commerce had not previously detected and reported . although the commerce it review board approves major acquisitions , most bureaus have their own it budgets and act independently to acquire , develop , operate , and maintain their own infrastructure . for example , commerce has 14 different data centers , diverse hardware platforms and software environments , and 20 independently managed e - mail systems . the bureaus also develop and control their own individual networks to serve their specific needs . these networks vary greatly in size and complexity . updating operating systems and other software to correct these vulnerabilities is important because once vulnerabilities are discovered , technically sophisticated hackers write scripts to exploit them and often post these scripts to the internet for the widespread use of lesser skilled hackers . since these scripts are easy to use , many security breaches happen when intruders take advantage of vulnerabilities for which patches are available but system administrators have not applied the patches . second , public law 99-74 requires that a warning message be displayed upon access to all federal computer systems notifying users that unauthorized use is punishable by fines and imprisonment . however , until this project is completed , each of the bureaus is expected to continue to configure , operate , and maintain its own unique networks . recognizing the importance of its data and operations , in september 1993 commerce established departmentwide information security policies that defined and assigned a full set of security responsibilities , ranging from the department level down to individual system owners and users within the bureaus . since 1998 , the commerce cio position has been responsible for developing and implementing the department's information security program . an information security manager , under the direction of the cio's office of information policy , planning , and review , is tasked with carrying out the responsibilities of the program . the cio's responsibilities for the security of classified systems has been delegated to the office of security . in the last 2 years , the cio introduced several initiatives that are essential to improving the security posture of the department . after a 1999 contracted evaluation of the bureaus' security plans determined that 43 percent of commerce's most critical assets did not have current information system security plans , the cio issued a memorandum calling for the bureaus to prepare security plans that comply with federal regulations . also , in may 2000 , the office of the cio performed a summary evaluation of the status of all the bureaus' information security based on the bureaus' own self - assessments . the results determined that overall information security program compliance was minimal , that no formal information security awareness and training programs were provided by the bureaus , and that incident response capabilities were either absent or informal .