mexico is such a country . a lack of transparency in ssa's processes , and the limited nature of its review of mexico's program , cause us to question the extent to which ssa will be positioned to respond to potential program risks should a totalization agreement with mexico take place . ssa officials told us that the process used to develop the proposed totalization agreement with mexico was the same as for prior agreements with other countries . the process — which is not specified by law or outlined in written policies and procedures — is informal , and the steps ssa takes when entering into agreements are neither transparent nor well - documented . current law does not prescribe how ssa should select potential agreement countries . according to ssa , interest in a mexican agreement dates back more than 20 years . ssa officials noted that increased business interaction between the two countries due to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) was a factor in the renewed negotiations . in addition , because there is a totalization agreement with canada , our other nafta partner , ssa believed that equity concerns required consideration of an agreement with mexico . in february 2002 , ssa sought clearance from the department of state to begin such negotiations . the law also does not specify which elements of other countries' social security systems must be evaluated during totalization agreement negotiations . ssa officials met with mexican officials to exchange narrative information on their respective programs . senior ssa officials also visited mexico for 2 days in august 2002 . during their visit , these officials told us that they toured social security facilities , observed how mexico's automated social security systems functioned , and identified the type of data maintained on mexican workers . ssa took no technical staff on this visit to assess system controls or data integrity processes . in effect , ssa only briefly observed the operations of the mexican social security program . moreover , ssa did not document its efforts or perform any additional analyses then , or at a later time , to assess the integrity of mexico's social security data and the controls over that data . in particular , ssa officials provided no evidence that they examined key elements of mexico' s program , such as its controls over the posting of earnings , and its processes for obtaining key birth and death information for mexican citizens . our final report with recommendations will be issued by september 30th . in summary , ssa has no written policies or procedures outlining the specific steps it follows when entering into totalization agreements , and the actions it took to assess the integrity and compatibility of mexico's social security system were limited and neither transparent nor well - documented . ssa officials briefly toured mexican facilities , observed how their automated systems functioned , and identified the type of data maintained on mexican workers . however , ssa provided no information showing that it assessed the reliability of mexican earnings data and the internal controls in place to ensure the integrity of information that ssa will rely on to pay social security benefits .