( see app . i for the criteria used to select states. ) the findings from our case studies are not generalizable . the first component of the case studies included a structured review of state laws and regulations . in the reviews , which were verified by the states , we identified the consumer protection standards and enforcement authorities in place at the state level applicable to rate setting practices . in addition to the reviews , we interviewed regulators from the selected states' insurance departments about ( 1 ) steps taken to oversee rate setting practices , ( 2 ) challenges they faced in overseeing this aspect of the product , ( 3 ) which standards have been effective in improving rate stability , and ( 4 ) regulatory changes under consideration . we also reviewed national data collected from companies and published by the california department of insurance on rate increases proposed and approved in any state from 1990 through 2006 . however , naic officials also reported that states were concerned that the report seemed to critique certain aspects of state regulation without a balanced discussion and seemed to be making an argument for certain reforms . in particular , naic officials noted that states said the draft report highlighted the differences in state regulation of rates and the fact that new regulations are not typically made retroactive . naic officials also noted that as in every other area of state regulation , state laws differ based on markets , consumer needs , and political realities . naic officials added that state lawmakers and regulators must balance many different factors when developing rules and one size often does not fit all . our draft reported differences in states' oversight of rate setting and claims settlement practices without making any conclusions or recommendations . we reported both the extent to which naic model standards have been adopted and other standards and practices states have in place . further , naic officials noted that states expend considerable resources to educate consumers so that they make informed decisions . while this may be the case , our review was focused on the oversight of rate setting and claims settlement practices because of recent concerns in these areas . we did not review states' broader consumer education efforts related to long term care insurance . for example , companies typically charge higher premiums for comprehensive coverage as compared to policies without such coverage , and consumers pay higher premiums the higher the daily benefit amount , the greater the inflation protection , and the shorter the elimination period . similarly , premiums typically are more expensive the older the policyholder is at the time of purchase . for example , in california , a 55-year - old purchasing one company's 3-year , $100 per day comprehensive coverage policy in 2007 would pay about $2,200 per year , whereas a 70-year - old purchasing the same policy would pay about $3,900 per year . company assumptions about interest rates on invested assets , mortality rates , morbidity rates , and lapse rates — the number of people expected to drop their policies over time — also affect premium rates .