( see app . ii for information on the amount of carryover funds available to each of the 56 states at the beginning of fiscal year 1999. ) states may have substantial amounts of carryover funds for a variety of reasons . the department made no other comments on the information contained in the draft report . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; interested members of congress ; the honorable donna e. shalala , secretary of health and human services ; the honorable jeanette c. takamura , assistant secretary for aging , department of health and human services ; the honorable jacob j. lew , director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me or thomas e. slomba , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-5138 . key contributors to this report were carolyn m. boyce , senior social science analyst ; and peter m. bramble , jr. , senior food assistance analyst . to address the objectives of our review , we developed separate written mail - out surveys for state and area agencies that received title iii nutrition and support funds , respectively , in fiscal year 1999 . we pretested the draft state survey at three states that manage senior services ( colorado , louisiana , and pennsylvania ) , and the draft area - agency survey at four area agencies in four states ( colorado , louisiana , virginia , and west virginia ) . we visited these states and area agencies to conduct each pretest . during these visits , we attempted to simulate the actual survey experience by asking the state or area agency official to fill out the survey . we subsequently interviewed the officials to ensure that the ( 1 ) questions were readable and clear , ( 2 ) terms were precise , ( 3 ) survey did not place an undue burden on the survey recipients , and ( 4 ) survey appeared to be independent and unbiased . administration on aging ( aoa ) officials also reviewed and provided comments on each draft survey . in order to maximize the response to our surveys , we mailed a prenotification letter to all of the 56 states and 652 area agencies about 1 week before we mailed the surveys . we also sent a reminder letter to nonrespondents about 4 weeks after the initial survey mailing and a replacement survey for those who had not responded after about 8 weeks . after reviewing all of the survey responses , we contacted several states by telephone and e - mail to clarify their responses to various survey questions . our survey data represent the responses from all of the 56 states and 563 of the 652 area agencies ( an 86-percent response rate ) . we also collected title iii administrative and program information from aoa .