iii ) . cms concurred with our report and its concluding observations . ssa expressed appreciation that we used its analysis of applicants denied the lis in 2006 and 2007 as the foundation of our analysis of the impact of the assets test on lis applicants . both agencies provided technical comments that we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the acting administrator of cms and the commissioner of social security . we will also provide copies to others on request . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or steinwalda@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . in addition to the contact above , phyllis thorburn , assistant director ; carolyn garvey ; drew long ; maya tholandi ; and eric wedum made key contributions to this report . ( see fig . all 20 spaps that serve a broadly defined population have an income test , but only one , north carolina's , has an asset test . all but one of these programs , pennsylvania's pharmaceutical assistance contract for the elderly ( pace ) , have income limits that exceed the lis income threshold , which is less than 150 percent of the fpl . the annual catastrophic threshold is $5,726.25 . at this point , the beneficiary's “true out - of - pocket” ( troop ) payment has amounted to $4,050 with the remainder ( $1,676.25 ) paid by the plan . after reaching the annual catastrophic threshold , the beneficiary is responsible for only modest cost sharing: the higher of 5 percent of the prescription drug's cost or $2.25 for a generic drug and $5.60 for a brand name drug . when congress passed part d , it also provided the lis , an additional subsidy for beneficiaries with limited assets and income to help them pay their portion of out - of - pocket costs . most medicare beneficiaries who receive the lis are “deemed” — that is , they qualify for the subsidy automatically on the basis of being medicaid or supplemental security income ( ssi ) recipients , or because they are enrolled in certain medicare savings programs . those beneficiaries who are not deemed must apply for the lis and show that their assets and income are below specified limits . as of january 2008 , cms data showed that 9.38 million beneficiaries were receiving the lis , of whom 7.85 million had been deemed and 1.53 million had applied for the subsidy . cms estimated that there were 2.6 million beneficiaries who were eligible for the lis but not receiving it . the amount of assistance provided to lis recipients is also determined by their income and assets . all lis recipients are entitled to a premium subsidy that is based on their income .