other services provided . in addition to these medicare specific differences , a few stakeholders we interviewed also noted the two qualifying hospitals receive additional funding from their strong philanthropic donor base that may allow them to provide other services and resources , not covered by medicare or offered at some irfs . for example , while a few irfs that responded to our information request reported offering housing for families of injured patients , the two qualifying hospitals offer up to 30 days of free housing to families of newly injured rehabilitation patients , if both the family and patient live more than 60 miles from the hospital . shepherd center . our review of medicare claims data indicates the most common diagnosis group of the 365 medicare discharges during this time — fiscal year 2013 to fiscal year 2016 — related to treatment for skin grafts that can be associated with pressure ulcers , among other things . shepherd center officials confirmed that most of their medicare beneficiaries received treatment for a pressure ulcer that occurred after initial injury which , as previously noted , can be so severe as to result in life - threatening infections . according to officials , most of their post - injury medicare beneficiaries receive post - operative care and other wound management services following surgery to treat pressure ulcers , to ensure that the site will not tear again and to avoid reoccurrence . other diagnosis groups for medicare patients at shepherd center included those for spinal disorders and injuries and extensive operating room procedures unrelated to principal diagnosis . according to officials , beneficiaries in these diagnosis groups received treatment for a range of conditions , including traumatic injuries , urinary tract infections , neurogenic bladder and bowel or respiratory complications . officials told us the hospital also served medicare beneficiaries recovering from other acquired brain injuries , such as stroke , and paralyzing neuromuscular conditions , such as multiple sclerosis . stakeholders we interviewed — including providers at other facilities — noted that traumatic spinal cord and brain injury patients — including those covered by medicare — require significant levels of care due to the complexity of their injuries as well as the immediate and long - term complications that can occur from the injuries . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at farbj@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix describes our methodology for conducting simulations of payments for the two qualifying hospitals . we used medicare claims data to conduct simulations of payments for the two qualifying hospitals . we first identified discharges at each hospital in two baseline years — federal fiscal years 2013 and 2016 . we selected fiscal year 2016 because it was the year with the most recent data available at the time of our analysis , and we selected a second baseline year because data for 2016 was different than data for other recent years .