it will apply from 2010 . guidance will be issued on its relation with the general product safety directive . standards: the eu product safety system is based on voluntary standards . however , products that are manufactured to harmonized standards developed by recognized european standardization bodies ( cen , cenelec , and etsi ) on the basis of a mandate ( formal request ) by the ec and ultimately referenced on the “official journal” of the eu benefit from a presumption of conformity with the safety requirements of the relevant legislative framework that are covered by those standards . the eu considers their safety requirements to be the backbone of its system . the safety requirements are expressed in sectoral ( industry or product - specific ) directives , conformity assessment measures and , in certain sectors , the availability of european standards . the general product safety directive fills in the gaps when no sectoral directive exists . for example , the eu has specific sectoral directives on toys , and some industrial products , such as electrical products , machinery , and pressure equipment . businesses must carry out conformity and safety assessments of their products in accordance with the general product safety directive and / or specific legislation applicable to their products . businesses are required to certify that their products are safe , as defined under the directive . for some products self - declaration is sufficient , but other products require third - party verification . detection , reporting and the removal of unsafe products: the eu and its member states have the authorities to require mandatory recalls , and companies can negotiate voluntary recalls as necessary , similar to u.s. recalls . under the general product safety directive and applicable product - specific legislation , national authorities can ban the marketing of a dangerous product , order or organize its actual and immediate withdrawal , alert consumers to the risks it presents , order or coordinate its recall from consumers , and order or organize its destruction in suitable conditions . businesses are required to report to the authorities if they detect that they have a dangerous product . businesses also must remove unsafe products from markets and are under legal obligation to stop , withdraw , and / or recall their distribution . businesses are required to repair or replace products and / or refund consumers the cost under certain criteria . policy enforcement and compliance: dg sanco has no inspection and no jurisdictional authority . member - state authorities can review technical product files that all businesses are required to maintain to certify general conformity with product standards . cnca has similar arrangements with other countries . within the common market , the regulations apply to the importer , distributor , manufacturer , and retailer . imported products must meet the same requirements as domestic products . member states must have authorities to carry out appropriate sampling and safety testing of domestically manufactured or imported products and to follow - up on consumer complaints .