gao - 05-570r . what capabilities should be included ? until these questions are answered and differences are reconciled , further investments in the program — for either the procurement of new aircraft or modernization — cannot be justified . the jsf program appears to be on the same path as the f - 22a program . after being in development for 9 years , the jsf program has not produced the first test aircraft , has experienced substantial cost growth , has reduced the number of planned aircraft , and has delayed delivery of the aircraft to the warfighter . moreover , the jsf program remains committed to a business case that invests heavily in production before testing has demonstrated acceptable performance of the aircraft . at the same time , the jsf program has contracted to develop and deliver the aircraft's full capability in a single - step , 12-year development program — a daunting task given the need to incorporate the technological advances that , according to dod , represent a quantum leap in capability . the business case is a clear departure from the dod policy preference that calls for adopting an evolutionary approach to acquisitions . furthermore , the length and cost of the remaining development are exceedingly difficult to accurately estimate , thereby increasing dod's risks in contracting for production . with this risky approach , it is likely that the program will continue to experience significant cost and schedule overruns . the jsf program expects to begin low - rate initial procurement in 2007 with less than 1 percent of the flight test program completed and no production representative prototypes built for the three jsf variants . technologies and features critical to jsf's operational success , such as a low observable and highly common airframe , advanced mission systems , and maintenance prognostics systems , will not have been demonstrated in a flight test environment when production begins . other key demonstrations that will have not been either started or only in the initial stages before production begins include testing with a fully integrated aircraft — mission systems and full software , structural and fatigue testing of the airframe , and shipboard testing of navy and marine corps aircraft . when the first fully integrated and capable development jsf is expected to fly in 2011 , dod will already have committed to buy 190 aircraft at an estimated cost of $26 billion . according to jsf program plans , dod's low - rate initial production quantities will increase from 5 aircraft a year in 2007 to 133 a year in 2013 , when development and initial operational testing are completed . by then , dod will have procured more than double that amount — 424 aircraft at an estimated cost of about $49 billion , and spending for monthly production activities is expected to be about $1 billion , an increase from $100 million a month when production is scheduled to begin in 2007 . figure 1 shows the significant overlap in development and testing and the major investments in production .