( fig . 4 compares the msis baseline to the msis adjusted expenditures as a percentage of cms - 64 , by expenditure category , for fiscal year 2009. ) in fiscal year 2009 , the difference between msis and cms - 64 was $43 billion . much of the difference was primarily the result of the different designs of each data set . cms uses msis data for beneficiary - specific expenditures , while cms - 64 data are used to compute the federal financial participation for each state's medicaid program costs . however , even after adjusting for dsh payments , medicare premiums , prescription drug rebates , and medicaid health insurance payments , differences remain . in fiscal year 2009 , total msis expenditure data , after adjustments , showed msis at 94 percent of cms - 64 expenditures , which left billions of dollars unexplained . the remaining differences between the two data sets are potentially explained by inconsistencies in cms guidance and states' reporting practices , neither of which can be quantified . in fiscal years 2007 through 2009 , cms provided states with inconsistent msis and cms - 64 guidance regarding expenditure definitions , reporting dates , and reporting of supplemental payments . additionally , when compared with cms - 64 , state msis data were often delayed beyond the time frames established by cms , inconsistent in reporting payments for local government providers , and were of poor quality . taken together , these two data sets have the potential to offer a robust view of the medicaid program , enhancing cms oversight of aggregate spending trends , per beneficiary spending growth , and cross - state comparisons , all of which could be useful in improving the financial integrity of this high - risk program . this is critical given that medicaid , a program that gao identified on our high - risk list , has among the highest estimated improper payments of any federal program reporting such data . however , the usefulness of these data sets as oversight tools is limited because of delays in reporting and unnecessary inconsistencies between the two data sets , both of which are inconsistent with federal internal control standards . the 3-year lag in states' reporting of msis data prevents its use for timely oversight of beneficiary - related utilization and other spending trends . for example , identifying a difference in hospital expenditures between msis and cms - 64 is of limited use when detected 3 years later . if states were meeting the current requirement of providing msis data 45 days after each quarter , then such comparisons could provide more useful and timely information . cms has recently completed a pilot study aimed in part on improving msis data . cms has indicated that it will begin implementing aspects of this initiative in all states by fiscal year 2014 . one goal of this initiative is to integrate state reporting of msis with the reporting of cms - 64 data . however , cms officials have indicated they have yet to determine a timeline for this goal .