these efforts are encouraging . however , the aggressive development and testing schedule presents various challenges . for example , two of the three releases of pbocs were not included in the performance test in december because development of these releases had not yet been completed . this increases the risk that performance issues , such as those described above , may reoccur in future releases of the system , and the bureau's ability to resolve and retest these issues before the system is needed for key field operations will be limited . in addition to dapps and pbocs , the bureau will rely on six other key automated systems to conduct the census . progress has been made with respect to system testing . however , much system testing remains to be completed in the next few months , as shown in table 1 . given the importance of it systems to the decennial census , it is critical that the bureau ensure that dapps , pbocs , and other key systems are thoroughly tested and able to meet full operational requirements . the limited amount of time to resolve what are , in certain cases , significant performance issues creates a substantial challenge for the bureau . in contrast to the it systems , the rollout of other activities is going more smoothly . indeed , the bureau has taken steps to address certain previously identified problems , and its plans to improve the enumeration of hard - to - count groups are generally more robust compared to similar activities during the 2000 census . those activities include procedures for fingerprinting temporary employees ; the rollout of key marketing efforts aimed at improving the participation of hard - to - count populations ; the bureau's plans for mailing a second , follow - up questionnaire and the removal of late mail returns ; activities aimed at including the homeless and people residing in nonconventional dwellings ; and the bureau's plans to secure a complete count of those in the hurricane - affected areas along the gulf coast . the bureau plans to fingerprint its temporary workforce for the first time in the 2010 census to better conduct background security checks on its workforce of hundreds of thousands of temporary census workers . however , the bureau found that during address canvassing , an operation that the bureau conducted in the summer of 2009 to verify every address in the country , 22 percent of the workers ( approximately 35,700 people ) hired for the operation had unclassifiable prints . the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) determined that this problem was generally the result of errors that occurred when the prints were first taken at the local census offices . to fingerprint workers during address canvassing , bureau employees captured two sets of fingerprints on ink fingerprint cards from each temporary worker by the end of the workers' first day of training . the cards were then sent to the bureau's national processing center in jeffersonville , indiana , to be scanned and electronically submitted to the fbi . if the first set of prints were unclassifiable , then the national processing center sent the fbi the second set of prints .