see fig . 1 and fig . 2 , which show the primary access and quality and older quality of care webpages , respectively . on the two webpages , va reports its 110 health care quality measures across various subpages , with some measures reported on multiple subpages . specifically , as of june , 2017: va reported 15 of its 110 quality measures on the primary access and quality webpage , which comprises three subpages . two subpages focus on measures related to access ( which we refer to as the “wait times” and “experience with access” subpages ) and the third subpage compares how vamcs perform relative to non - va hospitals in their geographic area on a few selected hospital compare measures ( which we refer to as the “non - va hospital comparison” subpage ) . according to va officials , the 15 quality of care measures on the primary access and quality webpage were selected because they provide information that is useful to veterans in making health care choices . on the older quality of care webpage , which comprises four subpages , va reported 100 quality measures . according to va officials , each of the four subpages of this webpage was created for a specific purpose and as a result , some measures are reported on multiple subpages . we also found that va reported five of the same quality measures on both the primary and older webpages , which include measures reflecting patient ratings of their experience in the hospital and healthcare - associated infection rates . va officials told us that they do not plan on consolidating the information currently reported on the two webpages since they serve different purposes , as explained earlier . see table 4 for a summary of the health care quality measures reported on va's access and quality and quality of care webpages . we found that va's primary access and quality webpage generally reports health care quality of care information in ways that are more accessible and understandable than va's older quality of care webpage . we assessed both webpages using criteria we identified in prior work for evaluating how well websites present information on health care quality to the public . specifically , we found that va's primary webpage meets four of six presentation criteria compared with va's older webpage , which met none of the criteria . ( see table 5. ) we found that va's primary webpage does especially well at presenting information on quality of care on the two subpages that focus on access to care . in particular , these subpages: provide information written in plain language with accompanying enable consumers to customize the information presented , so that they can , for example , select the types of medical appointments of interest to them ; and allow users to rank order vamcs by level of performance on a given quality measure . in contrast with va's primary webpage , we found that va's older quality of care webpage displays quality measures in ways that generally do not meet any of the presentation criteria .