staff acknowledgments are provided in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on the department of justice's letter dated january 13 , 2005 . as discussed in this report , only about $40 million , or about 7 percent , of the $568 million restitution for these five selected cases had been paid as of june 2004 , and collections for these individual cases ranged from less than 1 percent to about 10 percent of the restitution amounts owed . prospects are not good for collecting additional restitution to fully compensate the crime victims for the selected cases in our study . regardless of whether these offenders currently have , or once had , wealth equal to the restitution amounts , the disparity between restitution owed to the crime victims for the financial losses they incurred as a result of criminal activity and amounts paid to the victims by the offenders makes it necessary for justice to take advantage of all debt collection opportunities to better achieve the intent of mvra , which is to compensate crime victims to the extent of their financial loss . the offenders' restitution amounts totaled about $568 million . however , according to court records , only about $40 million , or about 7 percent of the total , had been collected several years after the courts sentenced each of the offenders . the vast majority of these collections resulted from asset forfeiture actions and from payments that were made before the offenders were sent to prison or placed on probation . we found that the flus , which typically become involved in criminal debt collection after the debt is established at judgment , performed certain debt collection activities ; however , they were not able to reduce the restitution debts significantly by identifying and liquidating additional assets of the offenders to pay the victims . moreover , based on information available to us , the flus' prospects are not good for collecting additional restitution amounts from the offenders to compensate their victims to the extent initially ordered by the courts . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) . each weekday , gao posts newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence on its web site . to have gao e - mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to updates. in 2004 , we reported that according to justice's unaudited records , collections relative to outstanding criminal debt averaged about 4 percent for fiscal years 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 ( gao - 04-338 ) .