gao - 08-384 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2008 . see figure 4 . currently , over 350 rnav / rnp procedures are available at 54 airports , including dallas / fort worth , miami international , washington dulles , and atlanta hartsfield . still another nextgen initiative , high - density terminal and airport operations , is intended to improve the efficiency of aircraft operations at busy airports , and , in the process , reduce emissions . ( 2 ) what is the status of selected key federal efforts to address aviation emissions ? and ( 3 ) what are some next steps and major challenges for the federal government , the aviation industry , and congress related to aviation emissions ? my statement is based on previous gao reports updated with a synthesis of recent empirical literature and interviews with officials from faa , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; representatives of aviation industry and environmental associations , and selected aviation emissions experts . we balanced the selection of these experts to capture the views of the many different groups involved in aviation emissions reduction efforts and nextgen . we conducted our work from march to may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the study to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our study objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our study objectives . aviation - related activities contribute to local air pollution and produce greenhouse gases that cause climate change . aircraft account for about 70 to 80 percent of aviation emissions , producing emissions that mainly affect air quality below 3,000 feet and increase greenhouse gases at higher altitudes . at ground level , airport operations , including those of motor vehicles traveling to and from the airport , ground service equipment , and stationary sources such as incinerators and boilers , also produce emissions . together , aircraft operations in the vicinity of the airport and other airport sources produce emissions such as carbon monoxide , sulfur oxides , particulate matter , nitrogen oxides , unburned hydrocarbons , hazardous air pollutants , and ozone that contribute to air pollution . in addition , these sources emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change , but aircraft operations in the upper atmosphere are the primary source of aviation - related greenhouse gases . carbon dioxide is both the primary aircraft emission and the primary contributor to climate change . it survives in the atmosphere for over 100 years . furthermore , other gases and particles emitted by aircraft — including water vapor , nitrogen oxides , soot , contrails , and sulfate — can also have an impact on climate , but the magnitude of this impact is unknown , according to faa . figure 1 illustrates aviation's impact on air quality and climate . currently , aviation accounts for a small portion of air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions .