omb agreed with our recommendation . when executive branch agencies carry out activities in a fragmented and uncoordinated way , the resulting patchwork of programs can waste scarce funds , confuse and frustrate program customers , and limit the overall effectiveness of the federal effort . how can the up - front costs associated with the consolidation be funded ? who are the consolidation stakeholders , and how will they be affected ? how have the stakeholders been involved in the decision , and how have their views been considered ? on balance , do stakeholders understand the rationale for consolidation ? to what extent do plans show that change management practices will be used to implement the consolidation ? congress could also require executive branch agencies to conduct program evaluations that would assess how well federal programs are working and identify steps that are needed to improve them . these evaluations typically examine processes , outcomes , impacts , or the cost - effectiveness of federal programs . however , few executive branch agencies regularly conduct in - depth program evaluations to assess their programs' impact or learn how to improve results . such program evaluations can complement ongoing performance measurement but typically involve a more in - depth examination to learn the benefits of a program or how to improve it . gpra requires agencies to describe the summary findings of any completed program evaluations in their performance reports . in addition , agencies are to describe how program evaluations informed establishing or revising goals in their strategic plans , along with a schedule for future program evaluations to be conducted . congress can also encourage executive branch agencies to help improve the efficiency and effectiveness of federal programs through its oversight activities . for example , our past work has highlighted several instances in which congress has used performance information in its decision making to ( 1 ) identify issues that the federal government should address , ( 2 ) measure progress towards addressing those issues , and ( 3 ) identify better strategies to address the issues , when necessary . congressional use of similar information in its decision making for the identified areas of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication will send an unmistakable message to agencies that congress considers these issues a priority . such oversight can also highlight progress that agencies are making in addressing needed reforms . congress recently highlighted the importance of addressing issues of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication through its oversight . for example , the senate budget resolution for fiscal year 2014 directs committees to review programs and tax expenditures within their jurisdiction for waste , fraud , and duplication and to consider the findings from our past annual reports . similarly , the house budget resolution for fiscal year 2014 describes some of our findings from our past annual reports , notes the number of programs that will need to be reauthorized in fiscal year 2014 , and states that that our findings should result in programmatic changes in both authorizing statutes and program funding levels .