outdoor water . use water efficient landscape and irrigation strategies , such as water reuse , recycling , and the use of harvested rainwater , to reduce outdoor potable water consumption by a minimum of 50% over that consumed by conventional means . the installation of water meters for locations with significant outdoor water use is encouraged . outdoor water . three options can be used to measure outdoor potable water use performance: option 1: reduce potable irrigation water use by 50% compared to conventional methods . option 2: reduce building related potable irrigation water use by 50 percent compared to measured irrigation water use in 2003 or a year thereafter with quality water data . per section 9002 of the farm security and rural investment act , for usda - designated products , use products with the highest content level per usda's biobased content recommendations . for other products , use biobased products made from rapidly renewable resources and certified sustainable wood products . if these designated products meet performance requirements and are available at a reasonable cost , a preference for purchasing them shall be included in all solicitations relevant to construction , operation , maintenance of , or use in the building . usda's biobased product designations and biobased content recommendations are available on usda's biopreferred website at < www.usda.gov / biopreferred > . environmentally preferable products . use products that have a lesser or reduced effect on human health and the environment over their lifecycle when compared with competing products or services that serve the same purpose . a number of standards and ecolabels are available in the marketplace to assist specifiers in making environmentally preferable decisions . for recommendations , consult the federal green construction guide for specifiers at < www.wbdg.org / design / greenspec.php > . environmentally preferable products . use products that have a lesser or reduced effect on human health and the environment over their lifecycle when compared with competing products or services that serve the same purpose . a number of standards and ecolabels are available in the marketplace to assist specifiers in making environmentally preferable decisions . for recommendations , consult the federal green construction guide for specifiers at < www.wbdg.org / design / greenspec.php > . new construction and major renovations construction , demolition and land clearing materials , excluding soil , where markets or on - site recycling opportunities exist . provide salvage , reuse and recycling services for waste generated from major renovations , where markets or on - site recycling opportunities exist . beverage containers and paper from building occupants , batteries , toner cartridges , outdated computers from an equipment update , and construction materials from a minor renovation . eliminate the use of ozone depleting compounds during and after construction where alternative environmentally preferable products are available , consistent with either the montreal protocol and title vi of the clean air act amendments of 1990 , or equivalent overall air quality benefits that take into account lifecycle impacts . eliminate the use of ozone depleting compounds where alternative environmentally preferable products are available , consistent with either the montreal protocol and title vi of the clean air act amendments of 1990 , or equivalent overall air quality benefits that take into account lifecycle impacts .