improve financial management . education has implemented many actions to address its financial management weaknesses . significant progress was made recently when education received an unqualified — or “clean” — opinion on its financial statements for fiscal year 2002 . while this is an important milestone for the department , internal control and systems weaknesses remain that impede education's ability to produce timely , accurate , and useful financial information for its managers and stakeholders . n / a yes yes yes yes yes yes www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? as you know , this january , we issued our performance and accountability series on management challenges and program risks at major agencies , including the department of education . the report for education focused on a number of management challenges and continued the high risk designation for student aid programs . you asked me to focus my testimony on two areas in that report . these are education's efforts to ( 1 ) reduce fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement in its student aid programs while continuing to ensure access to postsecondary education and ( 2 ) improve its financial management to help build a high performing agency . education has taken steps to meet these challenges , such as establishing a senior management team to address management problems , including financial management , throughout the agency . and , while education has made significant progress , including receiving a clean opinion on its fiscal year 2002 financial statements , weaknesses remain that will require the continued commitment and vigilance of education's management to resolve . i will discuss education's student aid programs and financial management in turn . ensuring access to postsecondary education while reducing vulnerability of aid programs to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement is one of the key management challenges education faces . education helps millions of students enroll in higher education programs by providing for more than $50 billion in grants and loans annually . the department is responsible for ensuring that these programs are efficiently managed , establishing procedures to ensure that loans are repaid , and preventing fraud and abuse . since 1990 , we have identified education's grant and loan programs as high risk for fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . both education and congress have made changes to address management challenges in the student financial aid programs . congress established education's office of federal student aid ( fsa ) as a performance - based organization in 1998 . its purpose is to increase accountability of officials , provide greater flexibility in management , integrate information systems , reduce costs , and develop and maintain a system that contains complete , accurate and timely data that can ensure program integrity . in 2001 , education established a management improvement team ( mit ) of senior managers to formulate strategies to address key management problems throughout the department . according to education , mit has developed a system to identify , track , and resolve audit and management issues both agencywide and in the student financial aid programs . education has faced challenges in four areas related to its grant and loan programs .