dhs agreed with our recommendations . doe neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendations , but raised concerns about one of our findings . in its written comments , doe disagreed with our finding that the physical security of the remote sensing laboratories may not be sufficient to protect them against terrorist attacks . according to doe , physical security measures at these two facilities are sufficient because ( 1 ) two senior - level managers diligently reviewed the physical security measures around the facilities and believe that they are sufficient and ( 2 ) the laboratories are located on air force bases . we disagree with these rationales and stand behind our finding . first , while we acknowledge that current physical security measures for the two remote sensing laboratories are consistent with doe guidance , the laboratories are protected at the lowest level of physical security . this means that a facility can meet the requirements by having walls and doors but no other physical security measures . for example , the remote sensing laboratory at andrews air force base does not have a fence or any vehicle barriers , but security officials told us that it still meets the minimum security requirements . further , doe's justification for protecting the laboratories at the lowest level of physical security is that their emergency response capabilities and assets have been dispersed across the country and are not concentrated at the laboratories . however , although we found that doe had dispersed some of its emergency response capabilities and assets , a number of critical emergency response capabilities and assets still exist only at the laboratories . because these capabilities and assets have not been fully dispersed , current physical security measures may not be sufficient for protecting the facilities against a terrorist attack . second , the security officials responsible for developing security plans for the laboratories told us that they do not rely on air force personnel to protect the facility against a terrorist attack . as we reported , while the laboratories' location on air force bases may appear to provide an additional level of security , access onto nellis and andrews air force bases is not strictly limited , and any person with a federal government identification may gain entry . furthermore , guards at these installations do not inspect every vehicle . in fact , as discussed in our report , gao staff gained access to the bases multiple times with little or no scrutiny of their identification , and their vehicles were never searched . doe also noted that aerial background radiation surveys have limitations . for example , aerial surveys may not be able to detect well - shielded radiological materials . we acknowledged these limitations in our report . however , despite the limitations , without baseline survey information from an aerial survey , law enforcement officials may lose valuable time when searching for nuclear or radiological threats by investigating pre - existing sources of radiation that are not harmful . in addition , if there were a nuclear or radiological attack , the lack of baseline radiological data would likely make the cleanup more costly and time consuming . dhs provided comments via e - mail .