the goals and subgoals follow . subgoal 1.1: information sharing is exhibited across departments and agencies as a routine part of doing business and recognized as an imperative to success . subgoal 1.2: all personnel charged with sharing terrorism - related information are trained to carry out information sharing responsibilities . subgoal 1.3: employees are routinely recognized and rewarded for effective information sharing , as well as expertise and competency development . subgoal 2.1: federal departments and agencies practice security reciprocity among federal , state , local , and private sector entities , including people , facilities , and systems . subgoal 2.2: consistent marking and handling of controlled unclassified information is practiced across the u.s. government ; practices are also adopted by state , local , tribal , and private sector entities . subgoal 2.3: ise participants build trusted distributed infrastructure for sharing information with all other participants , and are able to leverage repeatable processes from each others' architecture programs to maximize availability of common ise shared services . subgoal 2.4: ise departments and agencies ; state , local , and tribal governments ; and the private sector protect privacy in a consistent manner . subgoal 3.1: all federal , state , local , tribal , and law enforcement entities operating domestically participate in a standardized , integrated approach to gathering , documenting , processing , analyzing , and sharing terrorism - related suspicious activity information . subgoal 3.2: a national , integrated network of state and major urban area fusion centers that enables federal , state , local , tribal , and private sector organizations to gather , document , process , analyze , and share relevant information in order to protect our communities . subgoal 3.3: federal agencies produce , share , and disseminate both time - sensitive and strategic information and intelligence products that meet state , local , tribal , and private sector needs . subgoal 3.4: federal departments and agencies have implemented appropriate policies and processes to coordinate and facilitate the sharing of information with foreign governments and allies . subgoal 4.1: integrated performance and investment processes monitor progress toward performance goals and successfully use investments to support activities that maintain or enhance information sharing . subgoal 4.2: ise participants sustain their investments in information systems that support a trusted , distributed infrastructure for sharing information . subgoal 4.3: ise participants use common practices and policies for producing , handling , and using information . according to relevant guidance , an enterprise architecture ( ea ) should describe architectural views of the business processes , data , applications and services , technology , and security for the enterprise's current and future environments . an ea should also include a sequencing plan for transitioning from the current environment to the future environment . table 1 describes the extent to which the information sharing environment ( ise ) architecture documents address such relevant ea guidance . table 2 describes the information sharing environment's ( ise ) satisfaction of selected core elements in stages 1 and 2 of our enterprise architecture management maturity framework ( eammf ) .