these can help address habs . according to agency officials , nps responds to hab events that have an impact on human or animal health , at the request of park units . the agency's response efforts are limited to identifying hazards ; consulting on management strategies ; arranging for diagnostic testing of specimens ; and connecting the park unit with additional public health resources , such as state health departments and the environmental protection agency . the agency's response activities are intended to assist park managers in developing appropriate partnerships and effectively preventing and addressing habs on - site ; communicating agency - wide strategies ; understanding the severity of the problem ; and implementing management strategies that minimize the risk to aquatic life , the public , and employees . in addition , nps is developing a website to assist parks with hab response activities , update staff on the current scientific understanding of habs , and allow the agency to track habs within park units . nps officials reported that the website should be completed and available to the public by the end of calendar year 2016 . nutrient pollution – habs ( https: / / www.epa.gov / nutrientpollution / harmful - algal - blooms ) : contains links for more information on causes , effects , “what you can do to help” ( volunteer to monitor waterbodies ) , preventing nutrient pollution ( in your home , yard , community , and classroom ) , webinars , videos , and national and state resources . national ocean council ( https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / administration / eop / oceans ) : provides information on the council and the national ocean policy ; the national ocean policy implementation plan to address challenges facing the ocean , our coasts , and the great lakes ( including four action items related to habs ) ; the final recommendations of the interagency ocean policy task force ; and marine planning , a science - based tool that regions can use to address specific ocean management challenges and advance their economic development and conservation objectives . subcommittee on ocean science and technology ( https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / administration / eop / ostp / nstc / oceans ) : briefly describes the subcommittee's purpose and provides links to documents and reports , such as the harmful algal blooms and hypoxia comprehensive research plan and action strategy: an interagency report to congress in february 2016 ; a scientific assessment of hypoxia in u.s. coastal waters from 2010 ; older scientific assessments of marine and freshwater habs from 2008 ; a hab management and response assessment and plan from 2008 ; and a national assessment of efforts to predict and respond to habs in u.s. waters from 2007 . as previously stated , the subcommittee oversees the interagency working group on the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act ( iwg - habhrca ) and is co - chaired by the office of science and technology policy , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) .