fertilizer manufacturing . the price that most consumers pay for natural gas is composed of three the price that most consumers pay for natural gas is composed of three major components . the first is the charges for the natural gas itself , major components . the first is the charges for the natural gas itself , referred to as the natural gas commodity . the second includes the charges referred to as the natural gas commodity . the second includes the charges for interstate transportation of the natural gas , generally through large for interstate transportation of the natural gas , generally through large pipelines from areas where it is produced to areas where it is consumed . pipelines from areas where it is produced to areas where it is consumed . the third includes the charges for local distribution by natural gas the third includes the charges for local distribution by natural gas utilities — the private companies that deliver natural gas to consumers in utilities — the private companies that deliver natural gas to consumers in homes and businesses . utilities generally pass on to consumers the costs homes and businesses . utilities generally pass on to consumers the costs of the commodity and interstate transportation , adding these costs to the of the commodity and interstate transportation , adding these costs to the charges for local gas distribution . charges for local gas distribution . oversight of these components is shared by the federal government and oversight of these components is shared by the federal government and the states . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) is the lead the states . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) is the lead federal agency with authority over certain sales of the natural gas federal agency with authority over certain sales of the natural gas commodity for resale ( for example , the sales by interstate natural gas commodity for resale ( for example , the sales by interstate natural gas pipelines or their affiliates to the natural gas utilities that , in turn , sell pipelines or their affiliates to the natural gas utilities that , in turn , sell natural gas to consumers ) and over the interstate transportation of natural natural gas to consumers ) and over the interstate transportation of natural gas . ferc is obligated to , among other things , ensure that natural gas gas . ferc is obligated to , among other things , ensure that natural gas prices under its jurisdiction are “just and reasonable.” prior to 1993 , ferc prices under its jurisdiction are “just and reasonable.” prior to 1993 , ferc regulated the commodity and interstate transportation prices subject to its regulated the commodity and interstate transportation prices subject to its jurisdiction by approving prices based on costs and other factors . while jurisdiction by approving prices based on costs and other factors . while the regulated market ensured stable prices , it also caused severe gas supply shortages because , with artificially low prices , producers had no incentive to increase production and consumers had no reason to curtail their demand .