gao - 09-445 . washington , d.c.: april 29 , 2009 . not all uninsured crops were eligible for payment under the crop disaster programs . furthermore , a statutory payment cap prohibited usda from paying an individual or a farming operation for more than 95 percent of what the value of the crop would have been in the absence of the loss ( expected value ) . specifically , the sum of the disaster payment , the value of the salvageable crops , and any crop insurance payments could not exceed 95 percent of the crop's expected value in the absence of a disaster . the 2008 farm bill authorized and funded a new disaster program for losses in crop years 2008 through 2011 . the approved counties are designated as disaster counties . rma has overall responsibility for administering the federal crop insurance program , through the federal crop insurance corporation , and in partnership with private insurance companies that share a percentage of the risk of loss or opportunity for gain associated with each insurance policy written . rma is also to address program compliance issues , including protecting the program against fraud , waste , and abuse . under the agricultural risk protection act of 2000 , rma uses information technologies , such as data mining , to identify anomalous patterns of crop insurance claims payments that are consistent with actions farmers could take to obtain personal benefit through fraud or abuse of the crop insurance program . rma has identified 45 patterns of crop insurance payments that it defines as anomalous , such as receiving payments while experiencing high frequency of losses or high severity of losses in comparison with surrounding farming operations ; using poor farming practices ; or exhibiting irregular behavior with insurance agents or adjusters that suggests collusion . rma's data mining does not identify specific instances of fraud or abuse of the crop insurance program ; rather , it identifies anomalous patterns of crop insurance claims payments that are consistent with the potential for fraud and abuse and considers these payments as “suspicious.” rma places farmers who exhibit such patterns on an annual list , after the year in which the crop insurance claims payments are made , to monitor their current or future farming practices . farmers may be on the list for multiple anomalous patterns in 1 year . rma provides its annual list to the appropriate fsa state offices for distribution to fsa county offices , as well as to the insurance company selling the policy to the farmer . staff in fsa county offices advise the selected farmers that they have been identified for an inspection as a result of data mining and conduct field inspections during the growing season . in conducting these inspections , fsa inspectors are to determine , among other things , the tillage method used ; weed control practices ; type and amount of fertilizer applied ; weather conditions ; and how the inspected crop compares with others in the area .