for example , the u.s . across the different regions , however , there was variation . postal service had previously chosen to submit some data to frpp , but no longer does . the population of federal entities with independent leasing authority can vary over time . as such , any list that is not regularly updated may not be comprehensive because it captures a snapshot in time . we looked for documentation of 10 sub - practices within the 4 leading practices . ( see list of sub - practices in figure 5. ) evaluating lease file documentation across these entities with independent leasing authority is inherently challenging because each entity may have its own specific requirements of what should be documented in a lease file and for what length of time . as such , we were only able to evaluate what was provided to us , which may not fully reflect all the steps taken by the entity to execute the lease . as a result , if there was documented evidence that all of the sub - practices were included in the lease file , we had reasonable assurance that the four leading practices were implemented . however , we found the extent to which the lease files contained documented evidence that the sub - practices were being used varied . for example , the vast majority of our 30 selected lease files lacked evidence of ( 1 ) advertisement of need for space ( 88 percent ) ; ( 2 ) determining if the lease qualifies as an operating lease or a capital lease ( 83 percent ) ; ( 3 ) documenting factors used to evaluate offers ( 77 percent ) ; and ( 4 ) documenting the time frame for acquiring space ( 77 percent ) . however , most of our selected lease files contained some documented evidence of specifying geographical area for needed space ( 80 percent ) and conducting market research ( 53 percent ) . ( see fig . the extent to which lease files documented alignment with the leading practices varied by entity , but none of the lease files contained evidence of full alignment with all the leading practices . for three of the six entities , all of the lease files were in partial alignment with leading practices . two entities had some lease files that were in partial alignment and others that were not in alignment with leading practices . we were unable to determine whether the one selected uspto lease file was in alignment with leading practices because the entity was unable to provide required documentation . ( see table 5. ) without documented evidence in the lease files that all of the leading practices and sub - practices were used in the acquisition of leased space , it is difficult to determine whether the federal entities performed the leading practices that would help them achieve the best lease rate in a competitive and transparent manner . all selected entities we reviewed leased more office space per employee on average than gsa's recommended target . according to gsa officials , gsa recommends that federal entities allocate approximately 150 rentable square feet per employee for office space .