( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to va for review and comment . va officials acknowledged this lack of information . nasaa officials reported that many state agencies want more direction on how to conduct and report on targeted school reviews in response to complaints . to what extent does va coordinate and share information with the states to support their oversight activities ? we reviewed va policies , procedures , practices , and applicable federal laws and regulations . in addition , we interviewed va officials and eight officials from the national association of state approving agencies ( nasaa ) , the organization that represents the interests of state agencies overseeing schools receiving va education benefits . these selected nasaa officials have held a variety of leadership positions within the organization , including on the nasaa executive board as well as on select nasaa committees . during these interviews , we obtained nasaa officials' perspectives about state agencies in general , and about their specific experiences as directors or members of their own state agencies . nasaa officials we interviewed represented the views of state agencies across all four nasaa regions ( east , south , central , and west ) , and were from states that received both recent increases and decreases in va funding , and with a varied number of schools and beneficiaries that received va education benefits . we also interviewed officials from three additional states selected to provide more in - depth information at the state level . these included a state with a recent decrease in va funding ( new hampshire ) , a state with a recent increase in funding ( california ) , and a state that did not renew its contract with va in fiscal year 2018 ( new mexico ) . we chose these states to obtain different perspectives on how the level of funding affected their ability to carry out school oversight . for all three questions , we also reviewed va documents and written correspondence between va , nasaa , and the state agencies in fiscal years 2014 to 2018 related to va education benefits . in addition , we reviewed a 2016 report from va's office of inspector general ( inspector general ) and a 2017 study conducted by an external contractor hired by va that discuss va's use of risk factors in selecting schools for its annual reviews . we obtained va data on the amount of funding allocated by the agency to the state agencies in fiscal years 2003 to 2018 . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing key documents and written responses from knowledgeable officials . we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we used as criteria federal standards for internal control regarding ( 1 ) identifying , assessing , and responding to risks related to achieving objectives and ( 2 ) defining contingency plans if key roles are vacated to help the entity continue to achieve its objectives . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to november 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .