gao - 13-33 . former welfare recipients increased their income through employment , and employment rates among single parents increased . at the same time , some families worked more and had higher incomes , others had incomes that left them still eligible for cash assistance . however , many of these eligible families were not participating in the program . according to our estimates in a february 2010 report , about 87 percent of the caseload decline through 2005 can be explained by the decline in eligible families participating in the program , in part because of changes to state welfare these changes included mandatory work requirements ; programs.changes to application procedures ; lower benefits ; policies such as lifetime limits on assistance ; diversion strategies such as providing one - time , non - recurring benefits instead of monthly cash assistance to families facing temporary hardships ; and sanctions for non - compliance , according to a review of the research . our december 2012 report found that while the tanf block grant still serves as the nation's major cash assistance program for low - income families with children , states have also increasingly used it as a flexible funding stream for supporting a broad range of allowable services . the tanf block grant , states have generally maintained access to their full tanf allocation each year . as the number of families receiving cash assistance declined , states shifted their tanf priorities to other forms of aid , or non - cash services , which can include any other services meeting tanf purposes . we found that states spent significant amounts of tanf funds on services such as child welfare or child care . we reported that nationwide , in fiscal year 1997 , states spent about 23 percent of tanf funds on non - cash services . in contrast , states spent more than 66 percent of tanf funds for these purposes in fiscal year 2013 , according to the most recent available data from hhs . gao - 13-33 . spent federal tanf funds on existing or new programs according to state legislative priorities and , as a result , funds are often allocated to and administered through multiple state and local agencies ( see fig . this is in contrast to tanf's predecessor program , afdc , which was typically administered through state welfare agencies . our work showed that the multiple state and local agencies that receive tanf funds may serve low - income families beyond the tanf cash assistance caseload . because job preparation and employment are key goals of tanf , one of the federal measures of state tanf programs' performance is the proportion of tanf cash assistance recipients engaged in allowable work activities . generally , states are held accountable for ensuring that at least 50 percent of all families receiving tanf cash assistance and considered work - eligible participate in one or more of 12 specified work activities for an average of 30 hours per week .