photographs . the corps can use aerial and ground photographs to determine if waters or wetlands are located on a project site and to identify other structures on the site that may provide pathways for water to travel from one water body to another . such photographs are available from a number of sources , including the project proponents . in addition , aerial photographs are available from the department of agriculture's natural resources conservation service showing wetlands on private farms that , in return for federal subsidies , have been preserved instead of being turned into cropland . in the five districts we reviewed , 562 of the 770 files included aerial photographs . this ranged from a low of 44 percent of the omaha district's files ( 112 of 257 ) to a high of 91 percent of both the chicago district's ( 137 of 150 ) and the galveston district's ( 59 of 65 ) files . similarly , 320 of the 770 files included ground photographs . this ranged from a low of 26 percent of the jacksonville district's files ( 36 of 140 ) to a high of 63 percent of the chicago district's files ( 95 of 150 ) . the corps uses these maps and photographs not only to provide unique information about the site but also to corroborate information about a site . for example , the corps can compare national wetlands inventory maps with topographic maps to help confirm whether there are waters or wetlands on a project site . the national wetlands inventory map could also alert the corps to the types of waters or wetlands on the site . if the land has been used for growing crops , the corps can obtain natural resources conservation service aerial photographs to determine if that agency has verified the existence of wetlands on that particular site . this information can then be used in examining aerial or site photographs provided by the project proponent . currently , project managers can use online resources for much of the data they need to make jurisdictional determinations . for example , many topographic maps and aerial photographs are available through online sources . in addition , project managers in all of the districts we visited can retrieve more sophisticated versions of aerial photographs , such as color - infrared photographs and digital orthophoto quadrangles , which are computer - generated images of aerial photographs that have been enhanced to better view the ground . similarly , project managers in all five districts have the ability to superimpose different maps , such as soil survey maps , onto aerial photographs . in some cases , they can produce one map that shows the topography , wetlands , and soils present on a property . according to several project managers we contacted , this ability provides them with a more comprehensive view of the status of waters or wetlands at individual project sites . as can be seen in the following examples , some districts may also use other data sources that are specific to their district in making jurisdictional determinations . the galveston district relies on maps that designate flood - prone areas — areas that are likely to be flooded .