what about these activities is good ? what about these activities might be harmful ? do you think activities like these are important for a marine / sailor to become a part of the group or the unit ? these surveys do not measure the prevalence of hazing . instead , they measure the extent to which servicemembers perceive that hazing ( and demeaning behaviors ) occurs in their units . in addition , the organizational climate surveys were designed to be a tool for commanders to evaluate their individual units as opposed to aggregate - level analyses ; thus , the data have limitations when used for aggregate - level analysis . the results of these surveys are also not generalizable , in part because the army requires that command climate surveys be conducted more frequently than is required by the other services . as such , army responses are overrepresented relative to the other military services when results are aggregated . finally , survey data may reflect other errors , such as differences in how questions are interpreted . note: data are from december 2012 through december 2014.these data only include allegations investigated by military police or criminal investigators . we excluded from the above data one case with one alleged offender and an unknown number of alleged victims due to the absence of a precise number of victims . enlisted grades begin at e1 ( lowest grade ) , and officer grades begin at o1 . as shown in figure 2 , during this time period the army identified a total of 17 alleged cases involving 93 alleged offenders and 47 alleged victims . the majority of alleged offenders and alleged victims were either in grades e4-e6 or e1-e3 , and more alleged offenders were e4-e6 than e1- e3 , while more alleged victims were e1-e3 than e4-e6 . a majority of alleged offenders and alleged victims were male . the updated policy was issued as a memorandum in december 2015 . have you experienced hazing in the navy / marine corps ? i'm not sure total 14 4 36 9 5 2 55 15 2 . ( if “yes” or “i'm not sure” for 1 ) what happened ? ( please briefly describe the event ( s ) ) 3 . in the group discussion we talked about two examples that some would consider hazing . if these examples happened in your unit , would it be ok with the unit leadership ? ( check one for each row ) crossing the line ( navy ) / pinning ( marine corps ) i don't know 4 . some activities that are traditions in the marine corps / navy are now considered hazing . is it important to continue any of these activities ? please explain why or why not ? have you received hazing prevention training in the navy / marine corps ? is there anything else you want us to know about hazing in the navy / marine corps ?