timeliness . the adjudication center contractor met timeliness standards for completing initial adjudication of its twic , hme , and aviation worker caseloads ( see figure 1 for a description of this process ) . tsa requires that its contract adjudicator workforce complete initial adjudication of 95 percent of cases within 7 calendar days of the case entering tsa's screening gateway case management systems for twic , hme , and aviation worker cases . according to tsa data , from august 2011 to january 2013 , the adjudicator workforce met this standard for twic , hme , and aviation worker cases . while the adjudication center's timeliness measure shows the adjudication center's contractor met tsa's standard for completing initial adjudication , the measure does not show the extent to which the agency has communicated its adjudication decision to the applicant in a timely manner — key statutory and tsa policy requirements for its credentialing programs — and tsa officials reported they did not maintain such documentation . for example , as specified in statute , tsa shall review an initial twic application and provide a response to the applicant , as appropriate , within 30 days of receiving the initial application . moreover , officials with the oia program management division and adjudication center reported that tsa had established internal requirements for the agency to meet 30 day and 14 day applicant response times for hme and aviation worker applicants . to what extent has tsa addressed potential risks posed by using a mix of government employees and contractors to adjudicate security threat assessments ? to determine the extent to which tsa has measured performance for the adjudication center , and what these data show , we focused our review on adjudication center performance in processing cases for the twic , hme , and aviation worker programs . we selected and obtained adjudication center performance in processing cases for these three programs because tsa reported these programs accounted for approximately 95 percent of its security threat assessment caseload . therefore , we considered adjudication center performance in processing the caseload for these three programs to generally reflect the performance of the adjudication center as a whole . we analyzed pertinent laws and regulations related to tsa's security threat assessments and program requirements for the twic , hme , and aviation worker programs , including provisions enacted through the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism ( usa patriot ) act of 2001 , the aviation and transportation security act , and the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) of 2002 . we also reviewed tsa program documentation that included performance standards and requirements for the adjudication center and its contractor , such as standard operating procedures for case management and contract documentation which included performance standards and requirements for the adjudication center and its contractor , such as the adjudication center's quality assurance surveillance plan and evaluation and performance reports . through our review , we determined tsa used three key performance metrics to measure the performance of the adjudication center in processing security threat assessments: ( 1 ) timeliness for completing initial adjudication of a case , ( 2 ) caseload size , and ( 3 ) adjudication accuracy .