combatting cybercrime . in june 2007 , we identified a number of challenges impeding public and private entities efforts in mitigating cybercrime , including working in a borderless environment with laws of multiple jurisdictions . we stated that efforts to investigate and prosecute cybercrime are complicated by the multiplicity of laws and procedures that govern in the various nations and states where victims may be found , and the conflicting priorities and varying degrees of expertise of law enforcement authorities in those jurisdictions . in addition , laws used to address cybercrime differ across states and nations . for example , an act that is illegal in the united states may be legal in another nation or not directly addressed in the other nation's laws . developing countries , for example , may lack cybercrime laws and enforcement procedures . in its recent report , csis stated that many countries still do not have adequate cybercrime laws and recommended that ( 1 ) countries that refuse to cooperate with law enforcement should be penalized in some way and ( 2 ) methods be found to address the concerns of countries not willing to sign an existing treaty addressing cybercrime . in summary , the dependence of the federal government and the nation's critical infrastructure on computerized information systems and electronic data makes them potentially vulnerable to a wide and evolving array of cyber - based threats . securing these systems and data is vital to the nation's security , prosperity , and well - being . nevertheless , the security over these systems is inconsistent and additional actions are needed to address ongoing cybersecurity and privacy challenges . specifically , federal agencies need to address control deficiencies and fully implement organization - wide information security programs , cyber incident response and mitigation efforts needs to be improved across the government , maintaining a qualified cybersecurity workforce needs to be a priority , efforts to bolster the cybersecurity of the nation's critical infrastructure needs to be strengthened , and the privacy of pii needs to be better protected . several recommendations made by the commission and csis are generally consistent with previous recommendations made by gao and warrant close consideration . chairwoman comstock , ranking member lipinski , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to your questions . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are michael gilmore , nancy glover , and kush malhotra . gao , cybersecurity: dhs's national integration center generally performs required functions but needs to evaluate its activities more completely , gao - 17-163 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 1 , 2017 ) . gao , federal information security: actions needed to address challenges , gao - 16-885t ( washington , d.c.: sept. 19 , 2016 ) . gao , federal chief information security officers: opportunities exist to improve roles and address challenges to authority , gao - 16-686 .