we disagree . we disagree with dod's characterization of our report . our report accurately reflects information included in dod's documents related to how it calculated its estimated furlough savings and associated documentation it provided to congress . as we stated in the report , dod calculated a cost estimated savings of $300 per person per day and used this estimate in discussions including the initial decision to furlough until it decided to reduce the number of furlough days from 11 to 6 days even though additional information was available regarding which civilians dod excepted , as the exceptions decision was made 3 months earlier . however , dod did not initially include or update the estimated savings per person per day of $300 to account for the 142,602 civilians that were excepted from the furlough . these civilians excepted from the furlough represent approximately 18 percent of the total civilian workforce.savings as a result of the civilian workforce furlough , dod multiplied the estimated number of civilians to be furloughed by the estimated savings of $300 per person per day . while dod did adjust the numbers of civilians it included in its calculated cost savings , it never adjusted the per person per day estimate of $300 to account for the 18 percent of the civilian workforce excepted from the furlough . further , as we state in the report , should dod need to furlough civilians in the future , the incorporation of information as it becomes available would better inform decision makers because actions taken regarding dod's civilian workforce affects approximately 770,000 civilians . to calculate the estimated cost we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional parties ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the u.s. army , the u.s. navy , and the u.s. air force ; and , the commandant of the u.s. marine corps . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3604 or at farrellb@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . this report: ( 1 ) examines how the department of defense ( dod ) implemented its civilian workforce furloughs and any reported cost savings , ( 2 ) examines the extent to which dod utilized up - to - date cost - savings information in the planning and implementation of civilian workforce furloughs , and ( 3 ) identifies any reported examples of impacts that resulted from the dod civilian workforce furloughs . to address how dod implemented its civilian workforce furlough , we obtained and analyzed information and interviewed knowledgeable officials from the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ( hereafter referred to as office of the comptroller ) , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , and the departments of the army , navy , and air force .