policies . additionally , the study verifies any unreported income sources by mailing and calling employers and contacting an employment verification service . finally , the study calculates the correct subsidy amount , based on both the reported and unreported sources of income , and computes the difference between the correct amount and the amount hud actually paid to estimate the impact of unreported income on hud's improper payments . hud has developed and implemented a web - based tool called the eiv system that allows program administrators to compare income information reported by tenants with income information from government agencies through a secure internet portal . eiv gives hud program administrators the ability to independently check the accuracy of reported tenant incomes and identify any income source not disclosed by the tenant during mandatory annual and interim certifications of income . hud had agreements with about two dozen states by the end of 2004. in the computer matching and privacy protection act of 1988 . after reaching another agreement with hhs in 2007 , hud expanded access to eiv to property managers . hud initially made the use of eiv voluntary for program administrators but issued a rule in december 2009 that made use of the system mandatory , effective january 31 , 2010 . eiv produces a number of reports that help program administrators to identify unreported income sources and thus help reduce rent subsidy overpayments . for example , the income discrepancy report lists households whose wages , unemployment , or social security benefits income reported in eiv is $2,400 or more than the information reported by tenants to hud . program administrators must confirm any discrepancies by obtaining information directly from third parties , such as employers , and notify the tenant of the results of the third - party verification . program administrators determine that a tenant underreported income , they must calculate the difference between the amount of rent the tenant should have paid and the amount the tenant actually paid back to the time the underreporting started . the tenant is obligated to reimburse the program administrator for this difference — potentially through a repayment agreement — and the program administrator is required to send the reimbursed funds to hud . eiv also produces a new hires report that provides employment information on tenants who have started new jobs and , therefore , may have increased their incomes , within the last 6 months . hud requires tenants to report changes in income when the household's income increases by $200 or more per month . the report allows program administrators to be proactive in reaching out to tenants to report the income changes so that their rents can be adjusted in a timely manner . timely adjustments reduce the likelihood that the program administrator will make rent subsidy overpayments . program administrators are limited to requesting third - party verification on income the tenant may have received during the past 5 years for which the tenant was assisted . rental assistance programs . hud estimated that it paid $3.4 billion in gross improper rent subsidies in fiscal year 2000 ( out of about $19 billion in outlays ) , prompting a hud initiative called rhiip to address the causes of payment errors .