character . in contrast , many officials and stakeholders we interviewed said that the general prohibition against power tools is not a complicating factor because crosscut saws are as efficient or nearly as efficient as chain saws , and chain saws are heavier to transport . several officials told us that accessing wilderness trails , often located deep in the backcountry , requires considerable time and effort . for example , officials from one forest said that it may take hours to drive to a wilderness trailhead , take 1 to 2 days to hike to the site needing maintenance , and require crews to stay overnight — adding to the cost and complexity of backcountry trail maintenance . the forest service's trail maintenance efforts are also complicated when trails are located in areas affected by insect or disease outbreaks , wildland fire , and other natural events . national forests in some western states have suffered heavily from a mountain pine beetle epidemic , which has left many dead or dying trees that are starting to fall , sometimes across or near trails . officials from one forest told us their forest's entire trails program does little beyond removing hazardous trees because beetles have killed so many trees . officials in other parts of the country told us that their trail maintenance programs were being affected by other insects , such as the hemlock woolly adelgid , or by diseases , such as laminated root rot in douglas - fir trees . wildland fire also complicates trail maintenance . according to officials , a number of steps may be needed before a trail can be reopened after a wildland fire , such as removing hazardous trees , relocating drainage features , and stabilizing rocks . in addition , a number of forest officials told us that other natural events , such as tornadoes , hurricanes , floods , and windstorms , sometimes complicated their trail maintenance . for example , in the pacific northwest , officials from two forests told us that storms may cause flooding and landslides that easily wash out trails because of the region's loose volcanic soils . additional factors complicating the forest service's trail maintenance activities include the absence of a career path or training program for trails staff , which can limit agency expertise ; burdensome data collection efforts ; and certain administrative procedures that take time away from conducting maintenance on the ground . career path , training . many officials noted that the forest service has no career path or training programs for trails staff , which makes it difficult for the agency to develop and retain professional expertise and leadership for the trails program . for example , because full - time , permanent trails positions do not always exist at the district or forest levels , the agency often hires temporary or permanent - seasonal employees to maintain trails . these employees , however , often work for only one or two summers , requiring local officials to hire and train new trails employees the following season .