i for more details ) . since manufacturers of dietary supplements are not required to provide reports of adverse events to fda , the agency relies on voluntary postmarket reporting of adverse events to better understand the safety of dietary supplements . some individual adverse event reports are especially valuable to fda because they include enough information to help fda determine if the adverse event was likely caused by the supplement . these reports include information about the receipt of medical care , health care professionals' attribution of adverse events to the consumption of dietary supplements , the consumer's appropriate use of the products , the consumer's use of other products , underlying health conditions and other alternative explanations for the adverse event , and the consistency of symptoms with the documented effects of the dietary supplement . fda , through the department of justice , can take enforcement action in court against dietary supplements that are adulterated to remove them from the market . a dietary supplement is considered adulterated under a number of circumstances , including when it presents a “significant or unreasonable risk of illness or injury” under the conditions of use recommended or suggested in its labeling , or under ordinary conditions of use if there are no suggestions or recommendations in the labeling , or bears or contains any “poisonous or deleterious substance” which may render it injurious to health under the conditions of use recommended or suggested in its labeling . instead of going to court , fda may choose to take administrative action to prohibit the sale of dietary supplements it considers to be adulterated . fda can promulgate a regulation declaring a particular dietary supplement to be adulterated . fda has not taken this action with any dietary supplement . fda can also issue an advisory letter explaining why it considers the dietary supplement to be adulterated . the advisory letter provides guidance to the industry regarding fda's opinion and notifies the public that fda may take legal action against firms or individuals that do not follow the letter's advice . fda has done this for two dietary supplement ingredients , comfrey and aristolochic acid . in addition , although it has never been done , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) may declare that a dietary supplement is adulterated because it poses an “imminent hazard” to public health or safety . in doing so , the secretary must initiate an administrative hearing to affirm or withdraw the declaration . ephedra has been associated with numerous adverse health effects . as we previously reported , case reports and scientific literature have suggested that ephedrine alkaloids can increase blood pressure in those with normal blood pressure , predispose certain individuals to rapid heart rate , and cause stroke , among other things . we also reported descriptions of adverse events associated with ephedrine alkaloids that affected the central nervous system , such as seizures , mania , and paranoid psychoses . fda has received reports of adverse events associated with dietary supplements containing ephedra , including heart attack , stroke , seizure , psychosis , and death , that are consistent with the scientific literature .