the other two contractors are not anc firms . when acquiring services , a federal agency's first course of action is typically to develop an acquisition strategy . ideally , this would involve examining and weighing several alternatives . a score from 91 to 100 is considered excellent performance , 81 to 90 is very good , 70 to 80 good . the two firms told us they monitor their compliance with the required 50 / 50 split . the army's screening process is unreliable because of lack of adherence to army policy , a time lapse of as much as 2 years from the start of interim employment until detailed nationwide background checks are completed ; and a reliance on job applicants to self - report accurate information on their employment application forms . the combined effect of these weaknesses has put the army at risk of staffing its gates with contract security guards who are not qualified for the job and in fact has resulted in applicants with criminal histories , including felons , being employed as guards . we have previously reported on , and made recommendations concerning , the inadequacy of screening measures used for contract employees with access to military installations and other sensitive areas . army policy requires all prospective contract guards to undergo a two - part screening process — an initial screening conducted by the contractor followed by a thorough , more detailed screening conducted by the federal government . table 3 highlights the activities required for each part of the process and who is responsible for conducting the various screening activities . ima requires contractors to conduct local agency checks before offering interim employment to prospective employees . training , such as firearms training and weapons qualifications , cannot begin until the local agency checks have been completed and the results are favorable . if the results are unfavorable , employment is not offered . weaknesses in the screening process have led to risky situations , as the following examples illustrate: a contractor had permitted guards to take firearms training and start working even before their local agency checks were completed . in april 2005 , the army found that 61 guards had been put to work at one installation even though they had records relating to criminal offenses , about two dozen of which involved felonies or domestic violence and abuse cases . one of the guards had an active warrant and was arrested while performing his duties . the army found similar circumstances at another installation in august 2005 with a different contractor . twenty - eight guards were identified in the army's crime records center database as having records relating to criminal offenses , including assault , larceny , possession and use of controlled substances , and forgery . at another location , we found that paperwork to initiate national agency checks had not been submitted for any of the 128 guards hired during a 2-year period . the contractor had been responsible for initiating and submitting these checks between december 2003 and march 2004 , but did not follow through and was out of compliance with the terms of its contract .