fha faces risks resulting from its operations . fha's loan volume grew significantly from 2006 to 2010 . in 2006 , fha insured almost half a million loans , totaling $70 billion in mortgage insurance . by 2010 , it insured 1.7 million loans , or about $319 billion in mortgage insurance . during the same time period , fha's single - family staff increased 8 percent , from 932 employees in 2006 to 1,011 employees in 2010 , while increases in key workload areas often surpassed 100 percent: staff in the homeownership centers' processing and underwriting division grew at a slower rate ( 22 percent ) than key workload items , particularly volume - driven loan reviews ( which increased by more than 100 percent ) . increases in contractor staff and workload related to management of foreclosed or real estate - owned properties were substantial , but noncontractor staff levels increased at more modest levels . loss mitigation actions more than doubled from 2006 to 2010 , while loss mitigation staff levels remained relatively constant . although fha has taken steps to assess credit and operational risks facing its single - family insurance programs , its current risk - assessment strategy is not comprehensive because it is not integrated across the agency and lacks annual assessments and mechanisms to anticipate changing conditions . to address credit risk and help improve the financial condition of the fund ( which is supported by borrower premiums ) , fha raised premiums and made or proposed policy or underwriting changes . fha agreed , stating that it would develop a formal workforce plan and had efforts underway to develop a succession plan . we released a report today about ginnie mae , which has experienced a substantial increase in the volume of its business since 2007 as the volume of federally insured or guaranteed mortgages increased . ginnie mae is a wholly owned government corporation in hud , which guarantees the timely payment of principal and interest on mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) backed by pools of federally insured or guaranteed mortgage loans , such as fha loans . as of 2010 , ginnie mae guaranteed more than $1 trillion in outstanding mbs composed primarily of fha - insured mortgages . the growth in outstanding ginnie mae - guaranteed mbs resulted in an increased financial exposure for the federal government . nonetheless , ginnie mae's revenues exceeded its costs , and it has accumulated a capital reserve of about $14.6 billion . ginnie mae has taken steps to better manage operational and counterparty risks and has several initiatives planned or underway . therefore , we recommended that fha develop workforce and succession plans for the office of single family housing . fha implemented two initiatives focused on succession planning . the first , begun in 2010 , was intended to help ensure that , at any given time , at least two additional supervisors , managers , or executives could perform the work of each supervisor , manager , or executive . however , this does not apply to staff positions beyond management . for example , in 2010 ginnie mae increased the minimum net worth requirement for issuers of ginnie mae - guaranteed mbs to $2.5 million .