we did not verify data provided by sba . for our second objective , to obtain views on the reasons for the lower - than - expected sdb certifications , we interviewed officials from sba , doj's office of the assistant attorney general for civil rights , as well as officials from the u. s. chamber of commerce , the women's business enterprise national council , the national minority supplier development council , and the national small business united . also , we sent letters to 30 representatives from federal agencies' office of small disadvantaged business utilization requesting their view on reason for the lower - than - expected sdb certifications . of the 30 federal agency representatives , we received views from commerce and doj within the time frame specified in our letter , which we have included in this report . we did not validate the factors cited by these organizations for explaining the lower - than - expected certifications , nor was there empirical evidence available to validate or refute these views . also , we did not evaluate the performance and implementation of the sdb program to achieve the governmentwide goal or its effectiveness in certifying sdbs . we conducted our review in washington , d.c. , from july through september 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report for 30 days . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and interested members of congress . we will also send copies to the honorable aida alvarez , administrator , small business administration ; the administrator , general services administration ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you have questions regarding this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512- 8984 . major contributors to this assignment were hilary sullivan , geraldine beard , william woods , and sylvia schatz . the first copy of each gao report is free . additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . orders by mail: u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 orders by visiting: room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders by phone: ( 202 ) 512-6000 fax: ( 202 ) 512-6061 tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . web site: http: / / www.gao.gov / fraudnet / fraudnet.htm e - mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 1-800-424-5454 ( automated answering system ) .