appropriate use of indicators . indicators for measuring progress were generally appropriate in about 80 percent of the evaluations . as a result , successes or failures identified by these evaluations are likely to be directly relevant to assessing achievement of the evaluated programs' goals . we found more limitations in the implementation of evaluations than in their design . on average , about 60 percent of evaluations generally met each of the criteria related to this aspect of quality — sampling , data collection , and analysis . limitations we identified revealed that conducting evaluations overseas can pose challenges for evaluators . for example , travel to remote areas with safety and security concerns may limit an evaluator's ability to conduct appropriate sampling and collect primary data for the study . also , insufficient local resources to implement certain methodologies , such as implementing survey instruments , or a lack of local administrative data on the study population may constitute additional obstacles to sampling and data collection . about 40 percent of evaluations had limitations in , or provided insufficient information about , their sampling methodology . to address our objectives , we identified the six major agencies administering the most foreign assistance on the basis of obligations reported to the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) u.s. overseas loans and grants database for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 . the six agencies we identified are usaid , the department of state ( state ) , the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the department of defense ( dod ) . for the three agencies that are not focused exclusively on foreign aid or foreign affairs ( hhs , usda , and dod ) , we limited our scope to selected programs . ( see app . at hhs we examined evaluations of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) programs implemented by hhs's centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . at usda we examined evaluations for the food for progress and mcgovern - dole food assistance programs , implemented by the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) . at dod we examined evaluations prepared for the global train and equip ( gt&e ) program . while our previous review of agency evaluation policies did not identify dod - wide evaluation policies , we did identify gt&e as having relevant policies to guide its evaluations . to identify evaluations completed in fiscal year 2015 , the most recently completed fiscal year as we undertook our review , we requested that each agency provide a list of all foreign aid evaluation reports completed in that year . we did not separately review agency files to identify if agencies had additional evaluations beyond those listed in the registries . to assess the reliability of the agency evaluation lists , we reviewed the documents provided to ensure that each was a completed evaluation and to confirm that the date of the document fell within our specified timeframe . if necessary , we followed up with agency officials to clarify the date or status of the document .