driver's licenses . however , because data provided on hotel residents did not contain fema registration numbers , we were unable to determine the magnitude of duplicate payments . to assess accountability over fema debit cards , we interviewed officials from fema , department of treasury's financial management service ( fms ) , and jpmorgan chase . to assess the usage patterns of fema debit cards , we data mined debit card purchases and identified transactions that appeared to be unrelated to emergency disaster needs . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted our audit and investigations from february 2006 through june 8 , 2006 . for example , all payments made to registrations containing bogus damaged property addresses also failed the primary residence test because the registrants could not have lived there at the time of the disaster . additional details on the 39 registrants in our sample where we found a problem are as follows: payments to registrants whose damaged property address was not their primary residence – twenty six payments failed the primary residence test . these include individuals who had never lived at the damaged property , did not live at the damaged property at the time of the disasters , or used bogus property addresses on their registrations . we made these determinations after reviewing publicly available records , conducting site visits , and interviewing current residents and / or neighboring residents . we provide additional details related to failures in this attribute in table 2 . registrant received $2,000 in expedited assistance , $2,358 in rental assistance , and more than $15,000 in personal property replacement . registrant originally claimed damage at a street address several houses away from the damaged property address currently in fema's database . at some point in the disaster assistance process , the registrant made changes to the damaged property address . for example , one sample registrant submitted a registration containing the same damaged and current property addresses as those used previously by another registrant . both registrations received payments for rental assistance for $2,358 in september 2005 . payments to registrations with bogus property addresses – three payments in our sample were made to registrations containing bogus property addresses . for example , we found that one individual used several pieces of bogus information to receive expedited assistance . specifically , the registrant used a ssn that was valid but the name did not match the name in records maintained by the social security administration . the registrant also used a damaged property address in the 3000 block that was determined to be invalid through our on - site inspection , as street numbers on that street only went up to the 1000s . after the initial payment , the registration was withdrawn voluntarily by the registrant . in effect , this registrant was able to use completely bogus information to receive $2,000 from fema and then withdraw the registration to avoid further scrutiny .