gao - 10-879t . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2010 . department of homeland security: dhs needs to comprehensively assess its foreign language needs and capabilities , and identify shortfalls . gao - 10-714 . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2010 . language access: selected agencies can improve services to limited english proficient persons . gao - 10-91 . washington , d.c.: april 26 , 2010 . these agencies concurred with our recommendations and are taking steps to address them . my comments today are based on gao reports issued from june 2009 through june 2010 regarding foreign language capabilities at dhs , dod , and state and selected updates made in june through july 2010 . these reports include our assessment of dhs's efforts to assess its foreign language capabilities and address potential shortfalls in three of its largest components — u.s . coast guard , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) ; and our assessment of the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) efforts to deliver services to lep persons ; as well as our reports and congressional testimony on dod's and state's efforts to develop foreign language capabilities . specifically , my statement addresses the extent to which ( 1 ) dhs has assessed its foreign language needs and existing capabilities , identified any potential shortfalls , and developed foreign language programs and activities to address potential shortfalls ; ( 2 ) fema has conducted a needs assessment to help ensure access to its services for lep persons ; and ( 3 ) dod and state have developed comprehensive approaches to address their foreign language capability challenges . to analyze foreign language needs , capabilities , and shortfalls at dhs , we reviewed operations in three dhs components and seven offices . we selected the u.s. coast guard , cbp , and ice because they constitute a broad representation of program areas and their missions include law enforcement and intelligence responsibilities . we selected san antonio and laredo , texas ; artesia , new mexico ; new york and buffalo , new york ; miami , florida ; and san juan , puerto rico to visit , identify and observe foreign language use at select dhs components . we also examined documentation on foreign language needs and capabilities , including dhs's strategic and human capital plans ; and quadrennial homeland security review report . further , we interviewed knowledgeable dhs officials in dhs's chief human capital office ( chco ) and conducted interviews with component officials and officers for all the locations we visited to obtain information on existing capabilities and potential foreign language capability shortfalls . as part of our review of fema , we examined the extent to which it implemented executive order 13166 consistent with the department of justice's guidance , which includes assessing the needs of the lep populations that agencies serve . to review dod's plans for addressing its foreign language challenges , we analyzed dod's defense language transformation roadmap , reviewed the military services' strategies for transforming language and regional proficiency capabilities , and assessed the range of efforts intended to help identify potential gaps .