these themes are presented in this report . we contacted an additional 32 market participants and industry representatives for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study . in these instances , we were not able to schedule an interview . in some cases , our request for an interview was declined , our telephone contacts were not returned , or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials . in addition to the information collected through interviews , we also conducted technical , legal , and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the internet backbone market . ( see app . ii for detailed information on ip address allocations ) . while the method of allocating ip addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently , some of the isps and end users with whom we spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller entities to switch backbone providers . these are all common characteristics of tier 1 backbone providers . because tier 1 providers are viewed as a special class of backbone providers , the existence of approximately 40 national backbone providers may not fully reveal the competitiveness of this market . instead , it appears that only the 5 to 8 tier 1 backbone providers are viewed as competitors for primary backbone connectivity . however , most of the isps and end users with whom we spoke nonetheless stated that the market is competitive and they have significant choice of provider . it appears that even if the “relevant” market for primary backbone connectivity is the tier 1 providers , that market segment may be viewed as competitive . a remaining concern regarding the “tiered” segmentation of the market is the potential for the number of tier 1 providers to decline or for one of these providers to become dominant . for example , the recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers . we were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the internet is engineered . in particular , several of those with whom we spoke noted that internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts” basis — that is , internet traffic is routed according to a set of protocols aimed at providing the best routing possible at a given time . however , the internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times — as are telephone networks — and the quality of internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion . several of the market participants we interviewed were particularly concerned about their ability to understand where and why problems have occurred . several of the company officials we interviewed expressed concern that there would be consolidation among the tier 1 providers and thus noted the importance of antitrust oversight of this industry . moreover , both an fcc working paper and the antitrust division of doj have noted that in industries such as the internet backbone market , interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive .