but , they were unsuccessful in resolving the concerns . additional procedures implemented in january 2000 , requiring the sharing of certain fbi investigative case summaries , creating a core group , and instituting the core group critical - case briefing protocol helped to improve the situation by making the criminal division aware of more intelligence investigations with possible criminal implications . subsequently , the core group and the critical - case briefing protocol were discontinued . however , in april 2001 , a revised core group was created with a broader coordination role . it is too early to tell how effective a mechanism the new core group process will be for overseeing the requirement for notification . nevertheless , other impediments remain . the differing interpretations comprise the main impediment to coordination . intelligence investigators fear that the fisa court or another federal court could find that the criminal division's advice to the investigators altered the primary intelligence purpose of the fisa surveillance or search . such a finding could lead to adverse consequences for the intelligence investigation or the criminal prosecution . as such cases involve highly sensitive national security issues , this is no small matter and caution is warranted . the department suggested that we emphasize to a greater extent throughout our report the sensitivity and complexity of the issues . in addition , it provided additional language for the report to reflect the issues' sensitivity and complexity . we agree that the issues discussed are sensitive and complex , however , we believe the report adequately conveys these points and , thus , we did not revise our report to address the department's suggestion . doj suggested a factual correction to recognize that two decision memorandums were submitted to the attorney general ; one in october 2000 , and a second in december 2000 . on pages 22 and 23 of our report , we discuss the submission of both memorandums . concerning doj's suggestion that we note the options that these memorandums presented , we did not adopt this suggestion as doj had opted not to provide us with the details of its options when we met to discuss the memorandums . oipr officials said that , based in part on the attorney general's review team's findings and to ensure greater compliance with the 1995 procedures , oipr managers began emphasizing at weekly meetings with oipr attorneys , and in a february 2001 e - mail reminder to them , the importance of coordinating relevant intelligence investigations with the criminal division . according to oipr officials , oipr attorneys were instructed that when they reviewed fbi fisa applications , case summary memorandums , or other fbi communications , they were to be mindful of oipr's obligation to identify and report to the criminal division fbi investigations involving appropriate potential violations . when the oipr attorneys identify fbi investigations in which there is evidence of violations that meet the criteria established in the 1995 guidelines , they are to notify oipr management . management then is to contact both the fbi and the criminal division to alert them that in oipr's opinion , the notification requirement had been triggered .