we interviewed officials from acf and opa . we also interviewed officials from the 10 states that received the largest share of federal funding ( together accounting for 51 percent of the total funding in fiscal year 2005 ) through the state program for abstinence - until - marriage education . to describe efforts by hhs , states , and researchers to assess the effectiveness of abstinence - until - marriage education programs , we focused on efforts that examined the extent to which these programs achieved their program goals . in general , these goals include teaching adolescents to abstain from sexual activity until marriage in order to avoid unintended pregnancies , stds , and related health problems . as part of our review , we compared these efforts to the design characteristics that experts have identified as important for a scientifically valid study of program effectiveness . we reviewed journal articles and other published reports , agency budget submissions , program announcements , agency and grantee performance reports , federal register notices , agency web sites , and other documents related to abstinence - until - marriage education . we also interviewed officials from acf , opa , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation ( aspe ) , and 10 states that received the largest share of federal funding for abstinence - only education through the state program in fiscal year 2005 . we focused our review on efforts to assess the scientific accuracy of materials and the effectiveness of the programs during fiscal year 2006 . we conducted this work from october 2005 through september 2006 and during april 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to scientific experts , studies that include experimental or quasi - experimental designs should also collect follow - up data for a minimum number of months after subjects receive an intervention . in addition , experts have reported that studies should have a sample size of at least 100 individuals for study results to be considered scientifically valid . studies should assess or measure changes in biological outcomes or reported behaviors instead of attitudes or intentions . according to scientific experts , biological outcomes — such as pregnancy rates , birth rates , and std rates — and reported behaviors — such as reported initiation and frequency of sexual activity — are better measures of the effectiveness of abstinence - until - marriage programs , because adolescent attitudes and intentions may or may not be indicative of actual behavior . many of the efforts by hhs , states , and other researchers that we identified in our review lack at least one of the characteristics of a scientifically valid study of program effectiveness .