such a specification previously had not been available . according to nist officials , the first version of the interoperability specification , completed in august 2000 , did not include sufficient detail to establish interoperability among vendors' disparate smart card products . the officials stated that this occurred because representatives from nist , the contractors , and other federal agencies had only a very limited time to develop the first version . version 2 , released in june 2002 , is a significant improvement , providing better definitions of many details , such as how smart cards should exchange information with software applications and card readers . the revised specification also supports dod's cac data model in addition to the common data model developed for the original specification . however , it may take some time before smart card products that meet the requirements of version 2 are made available , because the contractors and vendors ( under the smart access common id contract ) will have to update or redesign their products to meet the enhanced specification . further , potential interoperability issues may arise for those agencies that purchased and deployed smart card products based on the original specification . while version 2 addressed important aspects of establishing interoperability among different vendors' smart card systems , other aspects remain unaddressed . for example , the version 2 specifications for “basic services interface” provide for just 21 common functions , such as establishing and terminating a logical connection with the card in a specified reader . other fundamental functions — such as changing personal id numbers and registering cards when they are issued to users — are not included in the basic services interface . for such functions , vendors must use what are known as “extended service interfaces.” because vendors are free to create their own unique definitions for extended service interfaces and associated software , interoperability problems may occur if interface designs or software programs are incompatible . nist officials stated that , at the time the specification was finalized , it was not possible to define a standard for the functions not included in the basic services interface because existing commercial products varied too widely . we also interviewed officials from wga . in addition , the guidelines do not address interoperability for important technologies such as contactless smart cards , biometrics , and optical memory stripes . gsa and nist officials indicated that federal agencies are interested in adopting contactless and biometric technologies but that more needs to be done to evaluate the technologies and develop a standard architectural model to ensure interoperability across government . the government has not yet adopted industry - developed contactless and biometric standards , which are generally not extensive enough to ensure interoperability among commercial products from different vendors . according to one nist official , a thorough risk assessment of optical stripe technology needs to be conducted first , because the security issues for a “passive” technology such as optical stripes are different from those of “active” chip - based smart cards . although there is no work under way to include optical stripe technology as an option within the government smart card interoperability specification , the guidance does not preclude the use of this technology .