prices are now publicly reported . the market participant caused an artificial price . proof of an attempted manipulation requires sufficient evidence of ( 1 ) an intent to affect the market price and ( 2 ) some overt act in furtherance of that intent . like the test for manipulation , the test for attempted manipulation depends upon the facts and circumstances of a particular market and its participants . we did not find any studies or court cases that have concluded that there has been manipulation on the cme spot cheese market or nce . an intent to raise or lower cme spot cheese market prices could be based on a variety of incentives . for example , farmers that produce milk used to manufacture cheese benefit when the price of cheese on the cme spot cheese market is high because the cme spot cheese market influences a broad array of cheddar cheese prices that are included in the pricing formula for class iii milk . alternatively , a company that largely sells cheese purchased from others could benefit from low cme spot cheese market prices . this is because most cheese plants from which it buys would be using the lower cme cheese prices to set their contract price , but it would sell its cheese at a price not based on cme prices . these factors alone do not imply that price manipulation has occurred — in fact , price manipulation has not been proven — but these incentives appear to contribute to ongoing questions about the susceptibility of the market to manipulation relative to one with more trading or more market participants comprising the majority of trades . further , identifying actual or attempted manipulation on the cme spot cheese market can be difficult for a number of other reasons . according to usda , it is outside of usda's authority to “proactively consider” proposals to change federal milk marketing order provisions . we have , therefore , clarified our recommendation . to review how the cme spot cheese market impacts federal minimum milk prices , we obtained and reviewed federal laws and united states department of agriculture ( usda ) regulations governing the federal milk pricing formulas . we also reviewed academic analysis of the role the spot cheese market has in milk pricing . is the class iii milk futures price consistent with supply and demand factors in the cheese industry ? how is the monthly class iii milk price released by usda behaving compared to the cme spot cheese market and other cash prices ? are the largest class iii milk futures traders engaged in trades on the cme spot cheese market that affect the monthly class iii milk price released by usda ? do the class iii milk futures traders have an incentive to engage in losing trades on the cme spot cheese market in order to benefit a large futures position ? in its market surveillance activities , cftc surveillance staff may use many sources of daily market information . some of this information is publicly available , including data on the overall supply , demand , and marketing of the underlying commodity ; futures , option , and cash prices ; and data on trading volume and open contracts .