we did not make any recommendations . under a vat , businesses pay tax on the value they add to the goods and services they purchase from other businesses . vat liability is typically calculated in industrialized countries using what is known as the credit - invoice method . under this method , businesses apply the vat rate to their sales but claim a credit for vat paid on purchases of inputs from other businesses ( shown on purchase invoices ) . a threshold is a type of exemption that excludes businesses below a certain size from collecting and remitting vat and from being able to claim input tax credits . businesses with sales below the threshold are not required to charge vat on their sales and cannot claim input tax credits for vat paid on purchases . businesses with annual sales above the threshold level are required to register with the tax agency , and collect and remit the vat . one issue the united states would face if it adopted a national vat is its interaction with retail sale taxes levied by states and localities . although there are several countries with a federal system of government , canada is the only country that we identified that has a national vat administered alongside a variety of subnational consumption taxes . the difference between the vat collected on sales and the credit for vat paid on input purchases is remitted to the government . figure 1 illustrates a vat with a 10 percent rate . a lumber company cuts and mills trees and has sales of $50 to a furniture maker . assuming no input purchases from other businesses , to keep the illustration simple , the company adds the tax to the price of the goods sold and remits $5 in tax to the government . the purchase invoice received by the furniture maker would list $50 in purchases plus $5 in vat paid . if the furniture maker has sales of $120 to a retail store , $12 of vat would be added to the sales price but the furniture maker could subtract a credit for the $5 vat paid on purchases and remit $7 to the government . the retailer would receive an invoice showing purchases of $120 and $12 of vat . similarly , if the retailer then has sales of $150 , $15 of vat would be added but the retailer could subtract a credit for the $12 paid on purchases and remit $3 to the government . in total , the government would receive vat equal to 10 percent of the final sales price to consumers . thus , a 10 percent vat is equivalent to a 10 percent retail sales tax in terms of revenue . under both taxes , the final consumer ultimately bears the economic burden of the tax ( $15 ) , except in a vat , the tax is collected in stages , not just in the final sale . our study countries' experiences with noncompliance suggest that even a conceptually simple vat — one that applies a single tax rate to all goods and services — would have compliance risks and would generate significant administrative costs and compliance burden .