metadata . metadata are information about datasets , such as content , source , accuracy , method of collection , and point - of - contact . metadata are used to facilitate the search of and access to datasets within a data library or clearinghouse , and enable potential users to determine the data's applicability for their use . national spatial data clearinghouse . the clearinghouse is intended to be a centralized geospatial metadata repository that contains geospatial metadata records from federal agencies , state and local governments , and academic and private sector organizations that can be searched to determine whether needed geospatial data exist and can be shared . federal agencies are required to identify their existing and planned geospatial investments in the clearinghouse , and search the clearinghouse for cost - saving opportunities before acquiring geospatial data . in 2003 , fgdc created the geospatial one - stop to provide “one - stop” access to geospatial metadata from a centralized database and search function . in october 2011 , the geospatial one - stop was retired , and fgdc initiated a pilot project , known as the geospatial platform , which was envisioned to provide shared and trusted geospatial data , services , and applications for use by government agencies , their partners , and the public . according to interior officials , interior is the managing partner of the geospatial platform . as of august 2012 , there were approximately 835,000 geospatial metadata records in the central repository , of which about 373,000 were from federal sources . partnerships . partnerships are efforts aimed at involving all stakeholders ( eg , federal , tribal , state , local government , and academic institutions ) in the development of nsdi . in november 2010 , omb issued supplemental guidance specifically regarding how agencies are to manage data themes.guidance expands upon and clarifies some of the language and responsibilities contained in omb circular a - 16 in order to facilitate the adoption and implementation of a geospatial asset management capability . to fulfill its responsibilities , fgdc is governed by a steering committee — an interagency decision making body that provides leadership and policy direction in support of the development of nsdi . the secretary of the interior chairs the committee ; the vice - chair is the chief architect of the office of e - government and information technology of omb . all departments or agencies responsible for geospatial data themes , or that have activities in geographic information or geospatial data collection or use , are required to be members of fgdc . thirty - two agencies are members of the steering committee and are to be represented by their senior agency officials for geospatial information.officials are responsible for overseeing , coordinating , and facilitating their respective agency's implementation of geospatial requirements , policies , and activities . fgdc is supported by the office of the secretariat , which consists of about 10 people located in u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) who do the day - to - day work of supporting , managing , and coordinating the activities of fgdc . the secretary created the committee as a federal advisory committee under the federal advisory committee act .