monitoring . omb and gsa do not have a finalized plan to monitor the implementation of newpay . we have previously identified key questions for agencies that are planning and implementing transformations . in that work , we found that agencies need to monitor and evaluate their efforts to identify areas for improvement . we have also reported that effective monitoring plans should include performance goals and milestones , transparent reporting tools to help manage stakeholder expectations , and a process for capturing lessons learned to improve the management of subsequent phases . omb and gsa staff said they are working on a plan to help them implement newpay . however , it is not yet complete and they did not provide us with a draft to review . they said their plans continue to evolve and they anticipate having an implementation plan by spring 2019 . the lack of a finalized plan with the elements listed above hinders omb and gsa's ability to provide sufficient oversight for this transition . having such a plan would provide various benefits to the newpay implementation effort . first , a monitoring plan that includes performance goals and milestones would help omb and gsa track how many and how well customer agencies are transitioning from one provider to another . similarly , setting performance goals related to continued delivery of services during the transition could help omb and gsa more quickly identify gaps and make adjustments as needed . specifically , omb and gsa could more effectively monitor how the new approach for purchasing payroll , and work schedule and leave management systems integrates with current hr systems . additionally , transparent reporting tools , such as web - based reporting on key milestones , could help omb and gsa demonstrate that they are aware of challenges and are addressing them as they arise . greater reporting transparency could also help build momentum , show progress , and help justify continuing investments in reforming shared services efforts . finally , a process for capturing lessons learned based on newpay could help omb and gsa improve the process for subsequent initiatives and further minimize disruptions to agency delivery of services during these future transitions . without a monitoring plan with performance goals and milestones , transparent reporting tools , and a process for capturing lessons learned , it will be more difficult for omb and gsa to provide oversight of the transition and its effects on providers and customers , including whether there are interruptions to delivery of services . a monitoring plan could help omb and gsa avoid gaps in service or costly delays as agencies transition to the new model for obtaining payroll and work management services . roles and responsibilities . omb and gsa have also not identified or documented some key roles and responsibilities related to the implementation of newpay . identifying a newpay smo is a crucial first step , since the smo is supposed to play a key role driving standards and holding customers and providers accountable for performance . however , omb and gsa have not announced which agency will serve as the smo . further , they have not identified which agencies or officials will serve on the newpay review board .