we do not agree . our report identifies the challenge of determining the direct impact from framework use and notes that nist's website provides the sector organizations with access to various framework resources , to include sector - specific implementation guidance and case studies , as well as insights from organizations using the framework . hence , organizations can report on improvements from use of the framework using multiple initiatives . further , the department stated that suggesting government collection and reporting of information regarding adoption or improvements erodes the voluntary character of the framework . we do not agree with this statement . our report recognizes the voluntary character of the framework but also notes that , without collecting and reporting such information , critical infrastructure sectors may not fully understand the benefits and value of the framework to better protect their critical infrastructures from cyber threats . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix v. in written comments , the department of health and human services concurred with the recommendation in our report and stated that it would work with the appropriate entities to refine and communicate best practices to the sector . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix vi . in written comments , the department of homeland security concurred with the recommendation in our report . the department stated that , once it receives the results of the survey on framework adoption that it sent to small - and mid - sized it sector partners , it will determine the feasibility of issuing similar surveys to other sectors . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix vii . in written comments , the department of the treasury neither agreed nor disagreed with the recommendation in our report . the department stated that it will assess using the identified initiatives and their viability for collecting and reporting sector - wide improvements from use of the framework with input from the scc and financial regulators . the department added , however , that it does not have the authority to compel financial institutions to respond to inquiries regarding the sector's use of the framework or resulting improvements . we acknowledge the lack of authority but believe that implementing the recommendation to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the framework's use by the critical infrastructure sector is essential to the success of protection efforts . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix viii . in written comments , the environmental protection agency concurred with the recommendation in our report . the agency stated that it will coordinate with its scc to investigate options to collect and report sector - wide improvements from use of the cybersecurity framework that are consistent with statutory requirements and the sector's willingness to participate . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix ix . in written comments , the general services administration concurred with the recommendation in our report and stated that it is working with the department of homeland security to develop a plan to address the recommendation . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix x . in comments sent via e - mail , the department of transportation's director of audit relations and program improvement stated that the department concurred with the recommendation in our report .