ii. ) the share of a snf's patients who were covered by medicare was not a factor in whether facilities increased their nursing time . snfs that relied more on medicare would have received a larger increase in revenue due to the nursing component change , and might have been better able than others to raise staffing ratios . however , we found that freestanding snfs in which medicare paid for a relatively large share of patients increased their nursing time by 1.3 minutes per patient day — less than snfs with somewhat smaller shares of medicare patients , and not substantially more than snfs with the smallest share of medicare patients . ( see table 2. ) similarly , snfs' financial status was not an important factor affecting changes in nursing time . although snfs with higher total margins in 2000 — that is , those with revenues substantially in excess of costs — might have been best able to afford increases in nursing staff , those with the highest total margins did not raise their staffing substantially more than others . changes in nursing time were minimal , regardless of snfs' financial status in 2000 . for snfs in the three groups with the highest margins , increases were about 3 to 4 minutes per day , compared to 2 minutes per day for those with the lowest margins . ( see table 3. ) snfs with relatively low initial staffing ratios — which may have had the greatest need for more staff — increased their staffing ratios substantially , while snfs that initially were more highly staffed had a comparable decrease in staffing . among freestanding snfs that had the lowest staffing ratios in 2000 , staffing time increased by 18.9 minutes per patient day . ( see table 4. ) nearly all of the increase — over 15 minutes — was due to an increase in nurse aide time . lpn time increased by 3.2 minutes and rn time by 11 seconds on average . among facilities with the highest staffing ratios in 2000 , staffing decreased by 17.7 minutes . for these snfs , as for those with the lowest staffing ratios , most of the overall change occurred among nurse aides: aide time decreased by over 10 minutes in 2001 , while lpn and rn time decreased by 2.7 and 4.6 minutes , respectively . despite the staffing increases among lower - staffed facilities , our analysis indicates that these staffing changes may not have resulted from the nursing component payment increase . we found that similar staffing changes occurred between 1999 and 2000 — prior to the nursing component increase . low - staffed facilities increased their staffing by 15.2 minutes per patient day in 2000 , while high - staffed facilities decreased their staffing by 19.8 minutes . the changes that occurred during the two periods were similar , suggesting that the payment increase probably did not cause the change in the latter period . unlike most facilities nationwide , snfs in four states — arkansas , nebraska , north dakota , and oklahoma — increased their staffing by 15 to 27 minutes per patient day , on average .