but , this was not the case . ( see fig . about 2010 , operators will be expected to begin reassessing some segments of their pipelines for corrosion under the 7-year reassessment requirement while they are completing baseline assessments of other segments — called “the overlap.” it is important to note that the reassessment intervals under the industry consensus standards , the 7-year reassessment requirement for corrosion , and phmsa's regulations for time - dependent threats represent the maximum number of years between reassessments . if pipeline conditions dictate more frequent reassessments — for example , 5 or fewer years — then pipeline operators must do so to comply with phmsa's regulations . in addition , between reassessments , operators must continually ensure that their gas transmission pipelines are safe . phmsa's regulations require all operators — whether or not they are located in highly populated or frequently used areas to patrol their pipelines , survey for leakage , maintain valves , ensure that corrosion - preventing cathodic protection is working properly , and take prevention and mitigation measures to prevent excavation damage . phmsa , within the department of transportation , attempts to ensure the safe operation of pipelines through regulation , industry consensus standards , research , education ( eg , to prevent excavation - related damage ) , oversight of the industry through inspections , and enforcement , when safety problems are found . phmsa employs about 165 people in its pipeline safety program , about half of whom are pipeline inspectors who inspect operators' implementation of integrity management programs for gas and hazardous liquid ( eg , oil , gasoline , and anhydrous ammonia ) pipelines , in addition to other more traditional compliance programs . phmsa currently has 22 inspectors trained to conduct integrity management inspections , of which 9 are devoted exclusively to the program . in addition , phmsa expects to be assisted by about 180 inspectors in 46 states and the district of columbia in overseeing intrastate natural gas transmission pipelines . periodic reassessments of pipeline threats are beneficial because threats — such as the corrosive nature of the gas being transported — can change over time . baseline assessment findings conducted to date and the generally safe condition of gas transmission pipelines suggest that the 7-year requirement appears to be conservative . most operators of gas transmission pipelines reported to phmsa that their baseline assessments have disclosed 340 problems for which immediate repairs have been made . this is encouraging because these pipeline segments are supposed to be the riskiest and few have been systematically assessed until now . regarding the industry safety record , the industry is generally safe and no corrosion - related incidents resulting in deaths or injuries have occurred in the past 5-1 / 2 years ( from january 2001 through early july 2006 ) anywhere in the nation , let alone in highly populated or frequently used areas . it is therefore likely to be safe in most cases to allow longer maximum intervals that coincide with industry consensus standards . phmsa and state pipeline agencies plan to inspect all operators' integrity management activities , which should serve as a safeguard if longer reassessment intervals for corrosion are permitted .