online services . in april 2013 , we recommended that irs develop a long - term online strategy that should , for example , develop business cases for all new online services . in march 2016 , irs officials reported that irs's future state initiative is intended to provide better service to taxpayers through multiple channels of communication , including online . we have not yet assessed irs's future state initiative . however , a long - term comprehensive strategy for online services should help ensure that irs is maximizing the benefit to taxpayers from this investment and reduce costs in other areas , such as for irs's telephone operations . comprehensive customer service strategy . in fall 2015 , treasury and irs officials said they had no plans to develop a comprehensive customer service strategy or specific goals for telephone service tied to the best in the business and customer expectations . these officials told us that the agencies' existing efforts were sufficient . however , we continue to believe that , without such a strategy , treasury and irs can neither measure nor effectively communicate to congress the types and levels of customer service taxpayers should expect and the resources needed to reach those levels . therefore , in december 2015 , we suggested that congress consider requiring that treasury work with irs to develop a comprehensive customer service strategy . in april 2016 , irs officials told us that the agency has established a team to consider our prior recommendations in developing a comprehensive customer service strategy or goals for telephone service . during the filing season many taxpayers learn that their private information has been stolen and they have been victims of idt refund fraud . this generally occurs when the taxpayer attempts to file a tax return only to learn that one has already been filed under the taxpayer's name . as we reported in august 2014 , thieves committing idt refund fraud take advantage of irs's “look - back” compliance model . under this model , rather than holding refunds until completing all compliance checks , irs issues refunds after conducting selected reviews , such as verifying identity by matching names and social security numbers and filtering for indications of fraud . however , we found that the wage information that employers report on the form w - 2 , wage and tax statement ( w - 2 ) , has generally been unavailable to irs until after it issues most refunds . according to irs , pre - refund matching would potentially save a substantial part of the billions of taxpayer dollars currently lost to fraudsters . however , in response to our recommendation , irs took a number of steps . first , in november 2015 , irs reported that it had developed a database to track leads submitted by financial institutions and the results of those leads . irs also stated that it had held two sessions with financial institutions to provide feedback on external leads provided to irs . increasing electronically - filed ( e - file ) w - 2s . in december 2015 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 amended the tax code to accelerate w - 2 filing deadlines to january 31 . this represents important progress .