the impact of more recent mergers is unknown . while we have not performed modeling on mergers that occurred since 2000 , and thus cannot comment on any potential effect on wholesale gasoline prices at this time , these mergers would further increase market concentration nationwide since there are now fewer oil companies . we are currently in the process of studying the effects of the mergers that have occurred since 2000 on gasoline prices as a follow up to our previous report on mergers in the 1990s . also , we are working on a separate study on issues related to petroleum inventories , refining , and fuel prices . ( 2 ) what effects have mergers had on market concentration and wholesale gasoline prices ? our analysis of mergers during the 1990s differs from the approach taken by the ftc in reviewing potential mergers because our analysis was retrospective in nature — looking at actual prices and estimating the impacts of individual mergers on those prices — while ftc's review of mergers takes place necessarily before the mergers , which is prospective . to address these questions , we relied on information developed for a previous gao report on mergers in the u.s. petroleum industry , the gao primer on gasoline markets , and a previous testimony on gasoline prices and other aspects of the petroleum industry . we also reviewed reports and other documents by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) on the u.s. petroleum industry . in addition , we obtained updated data from eia . this work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we make the following observations: the price of crude oil is a major determinant of gasoline prices . a number of other factors also affect gasoline prices including ( 1 ) increasing demand for gasoline ; ( 2 ) refinery capacity in the united states that has not expanded at the same pace as demand for gasoline in recent years , which coupled with high refinery capacity utilization rates , reduces refiners' ability to sufficiently respond to supply disruptions ; ( 3 ) gasoline inventories maintained by refiners or marketers of gasoline that have seen a general downward trend in recent years ; and ( 4 ) regulatory factors , such as national air quality standards , that have induced some states to switch to special gasoline blends that have been linked to higher gasoline prices . finally , consolidation in the petroleum industry plays a role in determining gasoline prices . for example , mergers raise concerns about potential anticompetitive effects because mergers could result in greater market power for the merged companies , potentially allowing them to increase and sustain prices above competitive levels ; on the other hand , these mergers could lead to efficiency effects enabling the merged companies to lower prices . the 1990s saw a wave of merger activity in which over 2,600 mergers occurred in all segments of the u.s. petroleum industry . almost 85 percent of the mergers occurred in the upstream segment ( exploration and production ) , while the downstream segment ( refining and marketing of petroleum ) accounted for 13 percent , and the midstream ( transportation ) accounted for about 2 percent .