( see table 1. ) regardless of whether the nonformulary drug approval process was perceived as easy or difficult , the majority of prescribers told us that their requests were generally approved . according to our survey results , 65 percent of prescribers sought approval for nonformulary drugs in 1999 . these are known as “open” classes . to manage its pharmacy benefit nationwide , va established the pharmacy benefits management strategic healthcare group ( pbm ) . pbm is responsible for managing the national formulary list , maintaining databases that reflect drug use , and monitoring the use of certain drugs . pbm also facilitates the addition and deletion of drugs on the national formulary on the basis of safety and efficacy data , determines which drugs are therapeutically interchangeable in order to purchase drugs through competitive bidding , and develops safeguards to protect veterans from the inappropriate use of certain drugs . visn directors are responsible for implementing and monitoring compliance with the national formulary and ensuring that a nonformulary drug approval process is functioning at each of their medical centers . although visn and medical center directors are held accountable in annual performance agreements for meeting certain national and local goals , attaining formulary goals has not been part of their performance standards . while va has made significant progress in establishing a national formulary , its oversight has not been sufficient to ensure that it is fully achieving its national formulary goal of standardizing its drug benefit nationwide . in our january 2001 report , we found three factors that have impeded formulary standardization: ( 1 ) medical centers we visited omitted some national formulary drugs from their local formularies , ( 2 ) visns varied in the number of drugs they added to local formularies to supplement the national formulary without appropriate oversight , and ( 3 ) medical centers inappropriately added or deleted drugs in closed classes . nevertheless , most prescribed drugs were on the national formulary , and prescribers and patients were generally satisfied with the national formulary . the first factor impeding standardization is that medical centers omitted some national formulary drugs from their local formularies . almost 3 years after va facilities were directed to make all national formulary drugs available locally , two of the three medical centers we visited in spring of 2000 omitted required drugs from the formularies used by their prescribers . at one medical center , about 25 percent ( 286 drugs ) of the national formulary drugs were not available as formulary choices . these included drugs used to treat high blood pressure , mental disorders , and women's medical needs . at the second medical center , about 13 percent ( 147 drugs ) of the national formulary drugs were omitted , including drugs used to treat certain types of cancer and others used to treat stomach conditions . from october 1999 through march 2000 , health care providers at these two medical centers had to obtain nonformulary drug approvals for over 22,000 prescriptions for drugs that should have been available without question because they are on the national formulary .