sec . 654 ( 16 ) requires states to submit apds for mandated statewide automated data processing and information retrieval systems . also covered by requirements set forth in 45 c.f.r . sec . sec . 95.611 requires states to obtain prior written approval of apds for automated data processing systems if the system is expected to exceed $5 million ( $1 million if noncompetitively acquired from a nongovernment source ) . sec . 654 ( 16 ) requires states to annually update their apds . also covered by requirements set forth in 45 c.f.r . sec . 95.611 , as explained in the child welfare column . sec . 95.611 requires states to annually update their apds when the project has a total acquisition cost of $5 million or , in the case of “as needed” apd updates,when the change causes an increase of more than $1 million , a schedule extension of 60 days or more for major milestones , a significant change in the procurement approach , a change in system concept or scope , or a change to the approved cost allocation methodology . see child support enforcement requirement 45 c.f.r . sec . 95.611 requires states to submit rfps for approval for purchases of automated data processing equipment or services if it exceeds $5 million when competitively acquired and $1 million when non - competitively acquired . see child support enforcement requirement 7 c.f.r . sec . 277.18 ( c ) requires states to obtain prior written approval of apds for automated data processing systems with an expected cost exceeding $5 million ( $1 million if noncompetitively acquired from a nongovernment source ) . if the request involves electronic benefits transfer systems , there is no threshold . sec . 277.18 ( e ) requires states to annually update their apds if the expected cost of the project is expected to exceed $5 million or , in the case of “as needed” apd updates,when the change causes an increase of more than $1 million , a schedule extension of 60 days or more for major milestones , a significant change in the procurement approach , a change in system concept or scope , or a change to the approved cost allocation methodology . sec . 277.18 ( c ) requires states to submit rfps for approval for purchases of automated data processing systems with an expected cost exceeding $5 million if competitively bid and $1 million if not competitively bid . if the request involves electronic benefits transfer systems , there is no threshold . acf / child support enforcement45 c.f.r . sec . 95.611 requires states to submit contracts for approval for purchases of automated data processing equipment or services if the system is expected to exceed $5 million when competitively acquired and $1 million when noncompetitively acquired . approval is required of a contract modification if it includes an increase of more than $1 million or more than a 120-day schedule change . since the cost allocation principles that are articulated in omb circular no . a - 87 are statutorily based , they are not subject to agency discretion .