see app . i for the number of data elements required for each measure. ) hospitals submit their quality data electronically , over the internet , to a clinical data warehouse operated by a cms contractor . increasingly , the information in patients' medical records that provides the basis for hospital quality data submissions may be stored and accessed in electronic form in information technology ( it ) systems . different values for discharge status that represent patients who were discharged to any setting other than those listed in footnote e , including home care , skilled nursing facility , and hospice . private insurer uality data . the leapfrog group is a consortium of large private and public health care purchasers that publicly recognizes hospitals that have implemented certain specific uality and safety practices , such as computerized physician order entry . the projected reduction in fiscal year 2006 and fiscal year 2007 medicare payments ( rounded to the nearest $1,000 ) represents the amount that the hospital's revenue from medicare would have decreased for that fiscal year had the hospital not submitted uality data under the annual payment update program . these estimates are based on information on the number and case mix of medicare patients served by these hospitals during the previous period . this is the information that was available to hospital administrators from cms at the beginning of the fiscal year . the actual reduction would ultimately depend on the number and case mix of the medicare patients that the hospital actually treated during the course of that fiscal year . the projected reduction for fiscal year 2007 was substantially larger because that was the first year in which the higher rate of reduction mandated by the deficit reduction act of 2005 — from 0.4 percentage points to 2.0 percentage points — took effect . abstractor starts searching through paper records , then looks for additional information in electronic records ( eg , for echocardiogram results ) hospital copies , checks completeness of , and ships requested patient records uarter if the number of eligible patients met a certain threshold . otherwise , the hospital was reuired to abstract uality data for all patients who met the inclusion criteria for any one of the four conditions . hospitals could also choose not to sample , even if it were permitted under the cms sampling procedures . licensed practical nurse ( lpn ) medical records coder and rn with physician support 20 minutes ( average ) none beyond reviews by cms contractor uarters of discharges from april 2005 through march 2006. uarter of discharges from january through march 2006 . to examine how hospitals collect and submit quality data , and to determine the extent to which information technology ( it ) facilitates those processes , we conducted case studies of eight individual acute care hospitals that collect and submit quality data to the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . we chose this approach to obtain an in - depth understanding of these processes as they are currently experienced at the hospital level . for background information on the requirements that the hospitals had to satisfy , we reviewed cms documents relevant to the annual payment update ( apu ) program .