personnel . army documentation shows and depot officials stated that they would likely hire contractors to meet workload demands and the depot could add shifts if the army decided to adjust the pace of recapitalization to what it considers an optimal pace . depot officials also told us they would try to hire contractors with some patriot experience and place them alongside more experienced personnel in order to preserve work quality , as they have done in response to previous surges in reset work . however , the army recognizes that letterkenny faces challenges in expanding its workforce due to a limited pool of available workers in the area around the depot . developing skilled patriot maintenance personnel is also difficult . an army study of the organic industrial base found that 11 of the 15 most critical personnel positions at letterkenny are directly associated with patriot maintenance and officials noted that , due to the complexity of the system , it can take up to 5 years for patriot maintenance personnel to become proficient . facilities and equipment . depot officials stated that if the army decided to adjust the pace of recapitalization to what it considers optimal , they would likely need to review , among other things , the tools , equipment , and facilities needed to support such an adjustment , as well as supply availability . they also told us that letterkenny already has proposed expanding its facilities to meet projected future work , and the depot has planned for the plant equipment it will need to continue maintaining the patriot system as upgrades are incorporated . however , they noted that it takes a full year to recapitalize the patriot radar , including 3 months of testing , and that letterkenny has one of only two radar test sites . given the time required and the single test site , if the army wanted to recapitalize more than one battalion a year , program officials stated that current conditions probably would not support doing so . unexpected damage . army officials cited some instances where equipment sent to the depot arrives in worse than expected condition , either due to damage incurred during transport or because unit personnel did not accurately report the condition of the equipment prior to turning it in . for example , in december 2017 letterkenny officials documented that a battalion's missile launcher was returned to the depot with unexpected severe corrosion on power cables , and certain equipment items , such as generators , were completely inoperable . officials cited another instance where a radar was pressure - washed prior to its return to the depot , causing extensive damage . these kinds of unexpected conditions result in greater repair work than anticipated for depot employees . supply chain challenges . officials at letterkenny told us that their forecasts for parts orders have not been consistently met via army and department of defense supply chain processes , but that the depot was taking steps to improve its own forecasting . an official also noted that problems can arise if sole - source suppliers for critical parts go out of business , or if they have to order parts that are no longer regularly produced by vendors due to obsolescence .