iii ) . labor considers these measures to reflect veterans' outcomes for the entire one - stop system , as they constitute outcomes for all veterans who access the employment service , dvop , and lver programs . furthermore , they are the best approximation of a total count of veterans who access the one - stop system that the current data will allow . on the other hand , data on veterans served by other one - stop programs are not well integrated . states report data to labor on wia participants who exit the programs , including veterans , using the workforce investment act standardized record data ( wiasrd ) system . although wiasrd contains sufficient information to produce separate veteran outcome data for wia programs , states are not required to produce separate veteran reports and are not accountable for meeting veteran goals in those programs . in addition , fewer than half the states reported that they routinely match wia and employment service records to attain an unduplicated count of veterans served by those programs . consequently , veterans who access two different employment services may be counted twice in some cases . data for taa participants are reported to labor in yet another data system , which does allow states to report on the veteran status of participants , but labor officials told us the agency does not currently use veteran outcomes from that program for any purpose . vets does not include the veteran outcome data from wia or taa in its annual report to congress , and labor officials told us they are exploring ways to better use the data . in addition , data are not always collected on job seekers who use employment service or wia resources without assistance from program staff . these self - assisted job seekers — including veterans — access services such as labor market or career information either in one - stop centers or on home computers , but do not receive active assistance from program staff . historically , some states have collected information on these job seekers , while others have not . in our survey , 73 percent of states reported that they capture information on all veterans who receive self - assisted services through the employment service , while 82 percent of states reported doing so for all veterans who receive self - assisted wia services . labor has encouraged — but not mandated — states to collect information on this group of job seekers , but agency officials acknowledged that states continue to vary in how they report such data . labor officials have expressed concern that requiring veterans who receive self - assisted services to register for the programs might discourage some of them from pursuing the services they need . labor and some state officials we surveyed reported that statutory differences in the definitions of veterans for various employment programs make it difficult to standardize data across programs . for the purposes of the dvop and lver programs , an eligible veteran is statutorily defined as an individual who served on active duty for more than 180 days . labor also uses this definition for the employment service .