travel order not signed . we estimated that 2 percent of the premium class transactions involved situations where a subordinate approved a superior's travel . although these limited instances do not necessarily indicate the existence of a significant systemic problem , allowing subordinates to approve their supervisors' premium class travel is synonymous to self - approval and reduces scrutiny of premium class requests . our internal control standards state that “transactions and other significant events should be authorized and executed only by persons acting within the scope of their authority . this is the principal means of assuring that only valid transactions to exchange , transfer , use , or commit resources and other events are initiated or entered into. another internal control weakness identified in the statistical sample was that the justification used for premium class travel was not always provided , not accurate , and / or not complete enough to warrant the additional cost to the government . as previously stated , premium class travel is not an entitlement . in fact , recent changes to the dod regulations state that premium class travel , in the context of lengthy flights , should only be used when exceptional circumstances warrant and that alternatives should be explored to minimize unnecessary premium class travel . in reviewing whether premium class travel was justified , we looked at whether there was documented authorization and , if there was , whether the authorization for premium class travel was supported by evidence of a valid reason . as shown in table 2 , an estimated 72 percent of premium class transactions were not authorized and therefore could not have been justified . an additional 2 transactions in the statistical sample were authorized but not justified in accordance with dod's criteria . in one instance for example , although the flight time exceeded 14 hours , the traveler had a layover in route , which should have precluded the traveler from being authorized premium class travel . table 3 contains specific examples of unauthorized travel from both our statistical samples and data mining work . we also estimated that 6 percent of premium class transactions were related to instances where the travel order authorizing business class was not signed at all or the travel order authorizing first class was not signed by the service secretary or his designee , as required by dod regulations . however , because his first class travel was not authorized by the under secretary of the navy , as required by navy regulations , we contacted the traveler to obtain further information on his condition . we estimate that the total cost of these flights if all flown in coach class would have been about $7,000 . according to the traveler , his condition was not so severe that he would meet the stringent first class criteria of being “so handicapped or otherwise physically impaired that other accommodations cannot be used.” consequently , the traveler told us he was no longer authorized to use first class . traveler #6 in table 4 was a deputy assistant secretary at dod who flew premium class on 10 flights from september 2000 through september 2001 at a cost of approximately $48,000 .