gao - 10-940t . washington , d.c.: july 21 , 2010 . combating nuclear smuggling: dhs has made some progress but not yet completed a strategic plan for its global nuclear detection efforts or closed identified gaps , gao - 10-883t , washington d.c.: june 30 , 2010 . supply chain security: feasibility and cost - benefit analysis would assist dhs and congress in assessing and implementing the requirement to scan 100 percent of u.s. - bound containers . gao - 10-12 . dndo agreed with this recommendation but has not developed such a plan . also within dhs , customs and border protection ( cbp ) has the lead for deploying , operating , and maintaining systems to detect nuclear and radiological materials entering the country through land borders , seaports , and other ports of entry . cbp also has a broad mission to detect more traditional contraband , such as drugs and guns ; to prevent the inflow of inadmissible aliens ; and to conduct its operations in a way that does not impede the flow of commerce . to detect nuclear materials , cbp , in coordination with dndo , has deployed over 1,400 radiation portal monitors ( rpm ) at u.s. ports of entry . most of the rpms are installed in primary inspection lanes through which nearly all traffic and shipping containers must pass . these monitors alarm when they detect radiation coming from a package , vehicle , or shipping container . cbp then conducts further inspections at its secondary inspection locations to identify the cause of the alarm and whether it is a reason for concern . while these rpms are sensitive and have been effective at detecting radiation , they also have limitations . in particular , in may 2009 we reported that rpms are capable of detecting certain nuclear materials only when these materials are unshielded or lightly shielded . in contrast , advanced radiography can be used to detect dense material that may be consistent with the presence of certain nuclear materials in vehicles and cargo containers , and cbp already uses radiography to more closely investigate the contents of a vehicle or cargo container that has been selected for secondary inspection at a u.s. port of entry . however , according to cbp officials , only a small percentage of vehicles or cargo containers are subjected to secondary inspections . dndo began working on the caars program in 2005 with the intention that through advanced radiography and improved algorithms ( software ) , caars would be used by cbp to automatically detect and identify highly shielded nuclear material in vehicles and cargo containers in both primary and secondary inspection lanes at u.s. ports of entry . thus , through caars , dndo expected that cbp would be able to detect more heavily shielded nuclear material in nearly all vehicles and cargo containers going through primary inspection lanes , and therefore , close a gap in the nuclear detection architecture . in september 2006 , dndo awarded a contract for the caars program to research , develop , acquire , and deploy advanced radiography imaging technology designed to detect highly shielded nuclear material being smuggled through u.s. ports of entry .