program as scheduled . ( see fig . nationally , there were some differences between male and female students in the reasons for leaving job corps . establish rules that all centers in the region will implement and require outreach and admissions contractors to provide students with detailed information on these rules prior to enrollment . offer more recreational and learning activities during evenings and weekends . prioritize tutoring for students with tests scores in the lowest quartile to improve academic achievement and retention . develop and deploy professional development for staff who help students during unstructured times and influence their retention , such as residential and recreational staff . enhance coordination between these staff and instructors . create a more positive student culture based on shared norms , rather than rules and discipline , through activities such as training of job corps staff , peer counseling for poorly performing students , and facilitating group discussions each day for students to address concerns . assess student interests and aptitude more thoroughly to select a career training option during the career preparation period . provide intensive drug counseling for students who test positive for drugs upon entering the program . strengthen collaboration between academics and career training in the industry area of health care , such as the vocabulary needed for training . enroll students in this industry area as a cohort rather than the traditional progression of open - entry , open - exit for each student . dianne blank , assistant director , and wayne sylvia , analyst - in - charge , managed all aspects of this assignment . also , matthew saradjian and ashanta williams made significant contributions to this report in all aspects of our work . in addition , shana wallace provided methodological assistance ; stuart kaufman assisted in the design of the two national surveys ; catherine hurley analyzed responses from the national surveys ; mimi nguyen provided graphic design assistance ; jessica botsford provided legal support ; jessica orr provided writing assistance ; and sara edmondson verified our findings . job corps: links with labor market improved but vocational training performance overstated . gao / hehs - 99-15 . washington , d.c.: november 4 , 1998 . job corps: vocational training performance data overstate program success . gao / t - hehs - 98-218 . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 1998 . job corps: participant selection and performance measurement need to be improved . gao / t - hehs - 98-37 . washington , d.c.: october 23 , 1997 . ( see fig . in program year 2007 , a somewhat higher percentage of female students left the program as scheduled having completed program requirements ( orderly completion ) . furthermore , a higher percentage of female students were dismissed for violating the program's policy for unauthorized absences , or awol , while a higher percentage of male students were dismissed from the program for violating program policies , such as those related to violence and drug and alcohol use ( discipline ) in program year 2007 . ( see fig . three major factors affect the recruitment and retention of residential students , particularly female residential students , according to job corps officials .