this assumption may not always be the case . doe manages over 100 construction projects with estimated costs over $90 billion and 97 nuclear waste cleanup projects with estimated costs over $230 billion . doe is the largest civilian contracting agency in the federal government , spending about 90 percent of its budget on contracts . it has about 14,000 employees to oversee the work of more than 93,000 contractor employees . while other doe program offices have recently made progress , the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , which is responsible for maintaining the safety and reliability of the nuclear weapons stockpile , remains on our high - risk list for continued weaknesses in contract and project management . as the largest component organization within doe , the nnsa has an annual budget of approximately $9 billion for the management and security of the nation's nuclear weapons , nuclear nonproliferation , and naval reactors programs . for the past 2 years , we have been reporting on the lack of sufficient action by nnsa as well as specific projects that continue to face contract and project management challenges . specifically , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 requires dod to develop a strategic human capital plan , update it annually through 2010 , and address eight requirements . the national defense authorization act for 2007 added nine requirements to the annual update to shape dod's senior leader workforce . in february 2009 , we reported while dod's 2008 strategic human capital plan update , when compared with its 2007 plan , showed progress in addressing the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 requirements , it only partially addressed each of the act's requirements . for example , dod identified 25 critical skills and competencies — referred to as enterprisewide mission - critical occupations , which included logistics management and medical occupations . the update , however , did not contain assessments for over half of the 25 occupations , and the completed assessments of future enterprisewide mission - critical occupations did not cover the required 10-year period . also , dod's update only partially addressed the act's requirements for a plan of action for closing the gaps in dod's civilian workforce . although dod recently established a program management office whose responsibility is to monitor dod's updates to the strategic human capital plan , the office , at the time of our review , did not have and did not plan to have a performance plan that articulates how the legislative requirements will be met . until such a plan is developed , dod may not be well positioned to design the best strategies to meet its civilian workforce needs . regarding plans for dod's senior leader workforce , dod's 2008 update and related documentation addressed four of the nine requirements in the fiscal year national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 , but only partially addressed the remaining five . for example , dod's update notes that the department has not completely addressed the requirement to assess its need for senior leaders .