nutrition education . havas and others evaluated a special intervention designed to increase wic participants' consumption of fruits and vegetables . the special intervention — maryland's “5-a - day” program — was a series of three 45-minute group sessions taught by former wic participants , or “peer educators,” that incorporated special visual materials and included direct mailings to participants . the standard service generally included less than 10 minutes of nutrition education conversation between wic staff and participants when they picked up their food voucher every other month . compared to participants receiving the standard wic nutrition education program , participants exposed to the special intervention displayed a significant increase in nutrition knowledge and in the consumption of fruits and vegetables . alexandria , va.: u.s. department of agriculture , food and nutrition service , 1999 . mccunniff , michael d. , peter c. damiano , michael j. kanellis , and others . “the impact of wic dental screenings and referrals on utilization of dental services among low - income children.” pediatric dentistry , vol . 3 ( 1998 ) , pp . suarez , lucina , diane m. simpson , and david r. smith . “the impact of public assistance factors on the immunization levels of children younger than 2 years.” american journal of public health , vol . 5 ( 1997 ) , pp . major finding ( s ) scope ( timeframe ) major limitation ( s ) nutrition education lectures and facilitated group discussions were more effective than brochures at increasing participants' nutrition knowledge . facilitated group discussion was more effective than brochures at increasing participants' confidence in performing specific nutrition related behaviors . seven wic clinics in new mexico ( not specified ) havas and others , 1998 consumption of fruits and vegetables increased after an education program consisting of a series of three 45-minute group sessions taught by paid peer educators and incorporating special visual materials and a direct mailing to participants . 5 ( 1995 ) , pp . fox , mary kay , nancy burstein , jenny golay , and others . wic nutrition education assessment study: final report . alexandria , va.: u.s. department of agriculture , food and nutrition service , 1999 . sixteen wic clinics in maryland ( not specified ) gross and others , 1998 the duration of breastfeeding among african - american wic participants increased with peer counselor support or viewing promotional breastfeeding videos . four wic sites in baltimore , md . ( 1992 – 1994 ) wic participants increased the initiation of breastfeeding when exposed to ( 1 ) an enhanced education program with access to a hotline , ( 2 ) a free breast - pump loan program , ( 3 ) a hospital - based program with bedside support and counseling after delivery , ( 4 ) community coalitions , and ( 5 ) peer counseling provided by former participants . state of georgia ( 1992 – 1996 ) 1 . breastfeeding initiation and duration rates increased after volunteer peer counseling . breastfeeding initiation and duration rates in iowa ( not specified ) 1 . missing data ; selection bias 2 . lack of control group ; increased after paid peer counseling . michigan ( not specified ) 3 . lack of control group 4 .