ihs . ihs provided us with project - level obligations data from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 for tribal drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects from its project data system . in reviewing these data , we found data reliability issues that posed challenges to accurately reporting ihs's project obligations separate from other agencies' contributions to projects , which ihs also tracks in the system . we determined that the project - level obligations data from the project data system were not sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this objective . usda also awarded grants and loans to tribes or non - profit organizations working on behalf of tribes from non - tribal specific programs such as from its water and waste disposal program as well as the section 306c colonias , emergency community water assistance grant , predevelopment planning grants , special evaluation assistance for rural communities and households , and technical assistance and training programs . to determine the project obligations for those programs , we included projects that had an applicant or customer type as a tribe or tribal entity ( eg , an organization working on behalf of a tribe or tribes such as tribal health consortia or tribal utility authorities ) and projects that served a population of at least 50 percent tribal users . for these awards , we included the full amount of the award regardless of the percent of tribal users served . hud . hud provided us with project - level obligations data from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 for its indian community development block grant program from its performance tracking database . we worked with hud officials to identify projects that included drinking water and wastewater infrastructure and to identify the amount of the obligations used for those purposes to determine hud's overall fiscal year project obligations for tribal water infrastructure . reclamation . reclamation provided us with project - level obligations data from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 for the tribal portions of authorized water system projects , including projects authorized by enacted indian water rights settlements . for the indian water rights settlement project obligations , reclamation provided both mandatory and discretionary amounts . we included both rural water system projects and indian water rights settlements projects in reporting reclamation's overall fiscal year obligations . eda . eda provided us with project - level obligations data from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 for tribal projects funded by its public works , economic adjustment assistance , and planning programs from its operations planning and control system . to determine whether the eda projects included drinking water or wastewater infrastructure , we reviewed each project's description or scope of work for mention of a drinking water or wastewater infrastructure component . if we determined that the project included water infrastructure , we included the entire project's obligation amount for each fiscal year we report . in addition , to determine the extent to which agencies' funding addressed the most severe sanitation deficiencies , we identified programs that have documented goals in regulation and policy to fund projects that meet these needs , which the programs identify as the absence of safe drinking water or wastewater disposal facilities .