family support . cdc officials told us that grantees had to provide more support than initially anticipated to families to better ensure their participation . cdc officials told us that grantees addressed this challenge by allowing siblings to also attend or participate in the activities or by holding activities on weekends or after school to accommodate parents' work obligations . strategies should be designed to be flexible for families , as there are competing demands on the families participating in the demonstration projects , cdc officials explained . scope of cord project . after cord phase 1 , cdc officials shifted the scope of the cord project from prevention to the treatment of children who are overweight or have obesity , according to cdc officials . specifically , cdc designed cord phase 1 to require grantees to implement demonstration projects that integrated public health and primary care strategies by promoting children and their families' use of healthy behaviors and by modifying community environments . cord phase 1 grantees implemented strategies in two types of settings: ( 1 ) community and ( 2 ) health care settings . public health strategies are activities and programs delivered in community settings , such as schools and early care and education centers . grantees also implemented primary care strategies , which in general are bmi screenings or other activities implemented in health care settings , such as during physician visits in federally qualified health centers . while cord 1 grantees implemented strategies in both types of settings , the specific strategies that each cord phase 1 grantee implemented varied . ( see text box and app . i for additional information about the strategies cord 1 grantees implemented. ) examples of strategies childhood obesity research demonstration phase 1 grantees implemented california demonstration project public health strategies implemented included training staff at early care and education centers on health behavior change strategies and providing centers with large self - service water containers to promote increased water intake . primary care strategies implemented included body mass index ( bmi ) screenings for children participating in early care and education centers . bmi is a measure used to determine overweight and obesity . massachusetts demonstration project public health strategies implemented included training teachers in participating elementary schools on how to implement evidence - based health education curricula that encouraged learning about nutrition and physical activity . cdc officials noted that the implemented public health strategies , such as providing classroom - based nutrition and gardening curriculum or programs that promote physical activity , cost less than primary care strategies . specifically , cdc reported that the costs of public health strategies in early care and education centers ranged from $26 to $96 per child , the costs of some primary care strategies ranged from $164 to $181 per child , and the cost of more intensive family - based weight management programs ranged from $2,107 to $2,220 per child . cdc , in collaboration with other hhs agencies , has also taken some steps to promote the wider adoption of cord strategies in low - income communities .