( app . i lists all the licensees and their nuclear power plants. ) nrc requires licensees of nuclear power plants to comply with the price - anderson act's liability insurance provisions by maintaining the necessary primary and secondary insurance coverage . first , nrc ensures that licensees comply with the primary insurance coverage requirement by requiring them to submit proof of coverage in the amount of $300 million . second , nrc ensures compliance with the requirement for secondary coverage by accepting the certified copy of the licensee's bond for payment of retrospective premiums . all the nuclear power plant licensees purchase their primary insurance from american nuclear insurers . american nuclear insurers sends nrc annual endorsements documenting proof of primary insurance after the licensees have paid their annual premiums . nrc and each licensee also sign an indemnity agreement , stating that the licensee will maintain an insurance policy in the required amount . this agreement , which is in effect as long as the owner is licensed to operate the plant , guarantees reimbursement of liability claims against the licensee in the event of a nuclear incident through the liability insurance . the agency can suspend or revoke the license if a licensee does not maintain the insurance , but according to an nrc official , no licensee has ever failed to pay its annual primary insurance premium and american nuclear insurers would notify nrc if a licensee failed to pay . as proof of their secondary insurance coverage , licensees must provide evidence that they are maintaining a guarantee of payment of retrospective premiums . under nrc regulations , the licensee must provide nrc with evidence that it maintains one of the following six types of guarantees: ( 1 ) surety bond , ( 2 ) letter of credit , ( 3 ) revolving credit / term loan arrangement , ( 4 ) maintenance of escrow deposits of government securities , ( 5 ) annual certified financial statement showing either that a cash flow can be generated and would be available for payment of retrospective premiums within 3 months after submission of the statement or a cash reserve or combination of these , or ( 6 ) such other type of guarantee as may be approved by the commission . before the late 1990s , the licensees provided financial statements to nrc as evidence of their ability to pay retrospective premiums . according to nrc officials , in the late 1990s , entergy asked nrc to accept the bond for payment of retrospective premiums that it had with american nuclear insurers as complying with the sixth option under nrc's regulations: such other type of guarantee as may be approved by the commission . after reviewing and agreeing to entergy's request , nrc decided to accept the bond from all the licensees as meeting nrc's requirements . nrc officials told us that they did not document this decision with commission papers or incorporate it into the regulations because they did not view this as necessary under the regulations . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet .