security activities . the coast guard also conducts various activities to provide waterside security including boarding vessels , escorting vessels into ports , and enforcing fixed security zones , although they are not always able to meet standards related to these activities . through its operation neptune shield , the coast guard sets the standards for local coast guard units to meet for some of these security activities . although the coast guard units may receive some assistance from other law enforcement agencies in carrying out these security activities , coast guard data indicates that some units are not able to meet these standards due to resource constraints . however , the coast guard's guidance allows the captain of the port the latitude to shift resources to other priorities when deemed necessary , for example when resources are not available to fulfill all missions simultaneously . the planned decommissioning of five maritime safety and security teams — a domestic force for mitigating and responding to terrorist threats or incidents — may continue to strain coast guard resources in meeting security requirements . although remaining teams are to maintain readiness to respond to emerging events and are to continue performing routine security activities , such as vessel escorts , their ability to support local units in meeting operational activity goals may be diminished . the security of domestic ports also depends upon security at foreign ports where cargoes bound for the united states originate . to help secure the overseas supply chain , mtsa required the coast guard to assess security measures in foreign ports from which vessels depart on voyages to the united states and , among other things , recommend steps necessary to improve security measures in those ports . vessel tracking . in december 2009 , we reported that the coast guard was implementing two major unclassified systems to track a broad spectrum of vessels ; however , these systems generally could not track small vessels . the coast guard and other agencies have other technology systems , though — including cameras and radars — that can track small vessels within ports , but these systems were not installed at all ports or did not always work in bad weather or at night . even with systems in place to track small vessels , there was widespread agreement among maritime stakeholders that it is very difficult to detect threatening activity by small vessels without prior knowledge of a planned attack . nuclear material detection efforts . dhs has developed and tested equipment for detecting nuclear material on small vessels ; however , efforts to use this equipment in a port area have been limited to pilot programs . dhs is currently conducting 3-year pilot programs to design , field test , and evaluate equipment and is working with cbp , the coast guard , state , local , tribal officials , and others as they develop procedures for screening . these pilot programs are scheduled to end in 2010 , when dhs intends to decide the future path of screening of small vessels for nuclear and radiological materials . according to dhs officials , initial feedback from federal , state , and local officials involved in the pilot programs has been positive .