not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( a ) ) ( far 3.404 , 52.203-5 ) contractor must agree that it will provide a drug - free workplace ( far 23.504 ( a ) ) not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( a ) ) contractor must report on its affirmative actions to employ and advance covered veterans ( far 22.1302 ( a ) ) law's limitation on use of appropriated funds for contracts with entities not meeting veterans employment reporting requirements is not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( a ) ) contracts for services must prohibit contractor activities regarding , and require contractor policies to combat , severe forms of trafficking in persons , the procurement of commercial sex acts , and use of forced labor . ( far 22.1705 ) not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( a ) ) contract clause required providing that contractors employing laborers or mechanics are required to compensate them for overtime . ( far 52.222-4 ) requirements for a certificate and contract clause related to the act are not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( b ) ) contract clause requires prime contractors to ( 1 ) have in place and follow reasonable procedures designed to prevent and detect violations of the act ; and ( 2 ) cooperate fully with any federal agency investigating a possible violation of the act . ( far 3.502-2 ( i ) ) requirements for a clause and certain other requirements related to the act are not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( b ) ) contracts must include clause requiring use of u.s - flag air carriers by government contractors when available ( far 47.405 ) requirement for a clause related to the act is not applicable . ( far 12.503 ( b ) ) contracts must include clause precluding contractors from restricting direct subcontractor sales to the government . dollars . to address these objectives , we interviewed air force and army officials , to address these objectives , we interviewed air force and army officials , as well as contractor representatives ; performed a detailed analysis of the as well as contractor representatives ; performed a detailed analysis of the air force and army service contracts ; reviewed contractor performance air force and army service contracts ; reviewed contractor performance measurements , annual evaluations , and payment invoices ; and analyzed measurements , annual evaluations , and payment invoices ; and analyzed historical documents such as acquisition plans , briefings , and decision historical documents such as acquisition plans , briefings , and decision memorandums . we visited langley air force base ( afb ) , virginia , to view memorandums . we visited langley air force base ( afb ) , virginia , to view f - 15c simulator training ; shaw afb , south carolina , to view f - 16 training ; and the u. s. army aviation center , fort rucker , alabama to view the use of flight school xxi training helicopters ( th ) , the th - 67 virtual simulators and the blackhawk and chinook simulators . at each of these installations , we met with military officials and the contractor officials responsible for the training simulators .