gao - 16-31 . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2015 . ( see fig . of those 16 states , 11 managed which d - snps operate in the state , which is the foundation for promoting aligned enrollment , according to officials from the integrated care resource center . of our seven selected states , all of them had implemented at least one of the five approaches to encourage aligned enrollment in 2019 . the three most common approaches among our selected states were ( 1 ) managing which d - snps operate in the state ; ( 2 ) limiting d - snp enrollment to full - benefit , dual - eligible beneficiaries ; and ( 3 ) encouraging d - snp marketing to better support informed beneficiary decision - making . the details of the approaches implemented in each state varied widely . managing which d - snps operate in the state . five of the seven selected states ( arizona , new jersey , pennsylvania , tennessee , and virginia ) managed which d - snps operated in 2019 , but they varied in how they implemented this approach . for example , when virginia established its medicaid mltss program in 2017 , only one d - snp operated in the state , and virginia required the companies with medicaid mltss contracts to also start offering d - snps within 3 years . in contrast , when pennsylvania and tennessee implemented this approach , multiple d - snps already operated in each state . pennsylvania and tennessee required new d - snps to have aligned medicaid mcos , but allowed existing d - snps to continue operating . as a result , beneficiaries had the choice between d - snps that had aligned medicaid mcos and d - snps that did not have aligned medicaid mcos . medicaid officials in these two states told us they chose not to cancel existing d - snps that did not have aligned medicaid mcos , as doing so could have disrupted beneficiary - provider relationships . as a result of the selected states' differing approaches to managing which d - snps operated , the proportion of aligned to unaligned d - snps in each state varied . ( see fig . in 2018 , cms revised its marketing guidelines to prohibit look - alike plans from marketing themselves as designed for dual - eligible beneficiaries and as having a relationship with the state medicaid agency . one way that cms has done this is through its integrated care resource center , which has developed materials on how states can use their contracts with d - snps to align enrollment and promote integration . the integrated care resource center has also facilitated peer - to - peer assistance between states . for example , integrated care resource center officials said they facilitated conversations and assistance between state medicaid officials in new jersey and pennsylvania on d - snp marketing . medicaid officials in six of our selected states said they had utilized cms's technical assistance , and they had overall positive views of cms's assistance . cms reviews some aspects of the contracts between states and d - snps , including checking that the contracts include the eight required elements .