( see fig . given that in the long - term , medicare cost growth is now projected to grow at 1 percentage point faster than gdp , hi's financial condition is expected to continue to worsen after the 75-year period . by 2075 , hi's annual financing shortfall — the difference between program income and benefit costs — will reach 7.35 percent of taxable payroll . this means that if no action is taken this year , shifting the 75-year horizon out one year to 2076 — a large deficit year — and dropping 2001 — a surplus year — would yield a higher actuarial deficit , all other things being equal . moreover , hi trust fund solvency does not mean the program is financially healthy . under the trustees' 2001 intermediate estimates , hi outlays are projected to exceed hi tax revenues beginning in 2016 , the same year in which social security outlays are expected to exceed tax revenues . ( see fig . as the baby boom generation retires and the medicare - eligible population swells , the imbalance between outlays and revenues will increase dramatically . thus , in 15 years the hi trust fund will begin to experience a growing annual cash deficit . at that point , the hi program must redeem treasury securities acquired during years of cash surplus . treasury , in turn , must obtain cash for those redeemed securities either through increased taxes , spending cuts , increased borrowing , retiring less debt , or some combination thereof . finally , hi trust fund solvency does not measure the growing cost of the part b smi component of medicare , which covers outpatient services and is financed through general revenues and beneficiary premiums . part b accounts for somewhat more than 40 percent of medicare spending and is expected to account for a growing share of total program dollars . as the trustees noted in this year's report , a rapidly growing share of general revenues and substantial increases in beneficiary premiums will be required to cover part b expenditures . clearly , it is total program spending — both part a and part b — relative to the entire federal budget and national economy that matters . this total spending approach is a much more realistic way of looking at the combined medicare program's sustainability . in contrast , the historical measure of hi trust fund solvency cannot tell us whether the program is sustainable over the long haul . worse , it can serve to distort perceptions about the timing , scope , and magnitude of our medicare challenge . these figures reflect a worsening of the long - term outlook . last year a technical panel advising the medicare trustees recommended assuming that future per - beneficiary costs for both hi and smi eventually will grow at a rate 1 percentage point above gdp growth — about 1 percentage point higher than had previously been assumed . that recommendation — which was consistent with a similar change cbo had made to its medicare and medicaid long - term cost growth assumptions — was adopted by the trustees .