i and ii ) . servicemembers may also qualify to receive combat zone tax relief benefits when they are performing military duty outside of a combat zone or in a congressionally established qualified hazardous duty area if ( 1 ) duty in this area is in direct support of military operations in a combat zone or qualified hazardous duty area and ( 2 ) the duty qualifies a servicemember for hostile fire or imminent danger pay based on the risks and dangers related to the combat zone . if a servicemember travels to an area designated for imminent danger pay or combat zone tax relief benefits , and the travel begins during one month and concludes during another month ( known as cross - month travel ) , the servicemember receives 2 full months of the special pay and benefit . combat zone tax relief benefits can provide significant financial benefits , especially if a servicemember qualifies for this benefit on more than one occasion during a calendar year . the department of defense ( dod ) is responsible for designating imminent danger pay areas and certifying locations where military service is in direct support of combat zone operations . over the past few decades , dod has designated an increasing number of areas for imminent danger pay . we also did not obtain this information from the u.s. southern command or u.s pacific command because few countries and no sea areas in their areas of responsibility are designated for imminent danger pay or combat zone tax relief benefits . dod tracks the cost of imminent danger pay and servicemembers' compensation that qualify for combat zone tax relief benefits . while dod tracks and reports the cost of imminent danger pay to congress as part of its budget request , the department does not report the amount of servicemembers' compensation that qualifies for combat zone tax relief benefits . combat zone tax relief benefits could allow servicemembers to exclude a significant portion of their compensation from federal taxes . for example , enlisted personnel and warrant officers may exclude all military compensation earned during one month . for commissioned officers , compensation is free of federal income tax up to the maximum amount of enlisted pay plus any imminent danger or hostile fire pay received . in 2006 , the maximum amount of compensation for commissioned officers that is eligible for combat tax zone relief is $6,499.50 plus $225 imminent danger pay , or $6,724.50 per month . the defense finance and accounting service reports servicemembers' compensation that qualifies for combat zone tax relief benefits to the services' financial management offices . however , there is no requirement for dod to report this information to congress . the reporting of combat zone tax relief benefit data to congress could provide information on the extent of this benefit and aid congress in its oversight role .