nara plans to complete this increment by june 2010 . ● increments 4 and 5 are to provide additional era functionality , such as backup and restore functions and wider search capabilities , and provide full system functionality by 2012 . nara's progress in developing era includes achieving initial operating capability for the first two of its five planned increments . however this progress came after nara had experienced significant project delays and increased costs . nara also deferred functions planned for increment 1 to later increments . as we reported in 2007 , the initial operating capability for increment 1 was originally scheduled to be achieved by september 2007 . however , the project experienced delays due to factors such as low productivity of contractor software programmers , difficulties in securing an acceptable contract to prepare the site that was to house the system , and problems with software integration . these delays put nara's initial plan to use era to receive the electronic presidential records of the bush administration in january 2009 at risk . in response , nara and lockheed martin agreed to a revised schedule and strategy that called for the concurrent development of two separate systems , which could later be reintegrated into a single system: ● first , they agreed to continue development of the original system but focused the first increment on the transfer of electronic records into the system . another challenge is the growth in electronic presidential records . the presidential records act gives the archivist of the united states responsibility for the custody , control , and preservation of presidential records upon the conclusion of a president's term of office . the act states that the archivist has an affirmative duty to make such records available to the public as rapidly and completely as possible consistent with the provisions of the act . in response to these widely recognized challenges , the archives began a research and development program to develop a modern archive for electronic records . in 2001 , nara hired a contractor to develop policies and plans to guide the overall acquisition of an electronic records system . in december 2003 , the agency released a request for proposals for the design of era . in august 2004 , nara awarded two firm - fixed - price contracts for the design phase totaling about $20 million — one to harris corporation and the other to lockheed martin corporation . on september 8 , 2005 , nara announced the selection of lockheed martin corporation to build the era system . the contract with lockheed is a cost - plus - award - fee contract with a total value through 2012 of about $317 million . as of april 2009 , the life - cycle cost for era through march 2012 was estimated at $551.4 million ; the total life - cycle cost includes not only the development contract costs , but also program management , research and development , and program office support , among other things . through fiscal year 2008 , nara had spent about $237 million on era , including about $112 million in payments to lockheed martin .