and these are only the reported attacks . the director of the cert centers has estimated that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) there were no indications of penetration or attack , ( 2 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated , or ( 3 ) the organization was reluctant to report . figure 2 shows the number of incidents that were reported to the cert / cc from 1995 through 2003 . according to the national security agency ( nsa ) , foreign governments already have or are developing computer attack capabilities , and potential adversaries are developing a body of knowledge about u.s. systems and methods to attack these systems . the national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) reported in january 2002 that a computer belonging to an individual who had indirect links to osama bin laden contained computer programs that indicated that the individual was interested in the structural engineering of dams and other water - retaining structures . the nipc report also stated that u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies had received indications that al qaeda members had sought information about control systems from multiple web sites , specifically on water supply and wastewater management practices in the united states and abroad . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , warnings of the potential for terrorist cyber attacks against our critical infrastructures have increased . for example , in his february 2002 statement for the senate select committee on intelligence , the director of central intelligence discussed the possibility of a cyber warfare attack by terrorists . he stated that the september 11 attacks demonstrated the nation's dependence on critical infrastructure systems that rely on electronic and computer networks . further , he noted that attacks of this nature would become an increasingly viable option for terrorists as they and other foreign adversaries become more familiar with these targets and the technologies required to attack them . james woolsey , a former director of central intelligence , shares this concern , and on october 29 , 2003 , in a speech before several hundred security experts , he warned that the nation should be prepared for continued terrorist attacks on our critical infrastructures . moreover , a group of concerned scientists warned president bush in a letter that “the critical infrastructure of the united states , including electrical power , finance , telecommunications , health care , transportation , water , defense and the internet , is highly vulnerable to cyber attack . fast and resolute mitigating action is needed to avoid national disaster.” according to a study by a computer security organization , during the second half of 2002 , the highest rates of global computer attacks were for those aimed at companies that provide critical infrastructures such as power , energy , and financial services . further , a study that surveyed over 170 security professionals and other executives concluded that , across industries , respondents believe that a large - scale cyber attack in the united states will be launched against their industry by mid - 2006 .