we disagree . our criteria are consistent with dod's own criteria for identifying critical technologies , and only focus on those that are most significant to a program . given the program's cost and schedule risks and operational imperatives , we believe that appropriately identifying the critical technologies is an important step in acknowledging and mitigating program risk . dod also stated that achieving a trl 7 by milestone b would be unrealistic because of the difficulties in testing some systems in an operational environment prior to launching the submarine . we agree that in some cases testing at sea is not practical and testing in a relevant environment may be sufficient to demonstrate maturity . however , achieving a trl 7 is not only based on the test environment ; it is also based on demonstrating a prototype near or at the planned operational system configuration , which requires a design resembling the final configuration . the columbia class program has yet to complete this type of prototype for the key systems we identified . as we stated in the report some systems , like the propulsor , do not yet have a final design . while we do not expect the navy to test every critical technology on a submarine at sea to demonstrate maturity , we would expect testing of a prototype near or at the planned operational system configuration prototype in a relevant environment . for example , prototype testing of the electric drive at a land - based test facility would demonstrate maturity — but is not planned for several years — well after the submarine's design and potentially construction is underway . while such concurrency introduces cost , schedule and technical risk , we have previously reported that programs may choose to move forward with these risks , but should acknowledged and appropriately resource the program to address the risks should they materialize . as we stated in the report , this is not the case for the columbia class program: some risks have not been properly identified and the cost estimate does not fully account for the margin of technical and schedule risks facing the program . dod also provided a table of columbia class practices , reprinted with our comments in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or oakleys@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to the report are listed in appendix iv . this report examines ( 1 ) the status of key columbia class technologies and congressional reporting requirements on this status , ( 2 ) risks , if any , with the navy's planned approach for design and construction , and ( 3 ) whether expected funding levels for the columbia class will be adequate moving forward .