 perform key reconciliations . the marine corps did not have processes in place to reconcile key accounts such as fbwt . in addition , the marine corps had to make repeated attempts before it could reconcile the unadjusted trial balance to the adjusted trial balance . this reconciliation is an important step to verify that the sbr is accurate .  test beginning balances . a first - year sbr audit requires substantial testing to confirm beginning balances . navy officials noted that earlier audit readiness efforts were not sufficient to confirm beginning balances , and problems identified with the assignment of general ledger account numbers and mapping of transactions to the proper accounts will need to be resolved to ensure the auditability of beginning balances .  provide timely and complete response to audit documentation requests . the auditors reported that the marine corps , through its service provider , dfas , did not consistently provide timely and accurate audit documentation . without such documentation , the auditors were unable to determine whether a given transaction was authorized , whether the goods or services were received , whether the invoice was approved for payment , or whether the funds disbursed were correct .  verify that key it systems are compliant and auditable . the auditors informed the marine corps of numerous control weaknesses they identified in key systems , including some dod - wide systems , which affected auditability . the auditability of key systems , including military payroll systems , accounting systems , and financial reporting systems , is essential to achieving and sustaining an audit opinion . these five critical lessons from the marine corps sbr audit effort are all addressed in the fiar guidance as procedures that must be performed before an assessable unit can be considered ready for audit . as the army , navy , and air force move forward in developing and implementing their fips , in our report we recommend that they take into account the lessons learned during the course of pilot audit efforts , such as the marine corps sbr . navy financial management officials indicated that they are aware of the marine corps lessons and that they are updating their audit readiness plan to address all five critical lessons . army and air force officials indicated their awareness of some of these findings but only provided information on their efforts regarding fbwt reconciliations and erp implementations . as noted above , dod generally agreed with the need to effectively communicate lessons learned among its components . our report more fully describes dod's comments and our evaluation of them . with the fiar plan and related fiar guidance , dod has established a reasonable strategy and methodology for improving its financial management . however , it faces considerable implementation challenges and has much work to do if it is to meet the goal of audit readiness by the end of fiscal year 2017 .