dod has an alternative . with 90 percent of dod's remaining planned investment in jsf , it can adopt a knowledge - driven and evolutionary acquisition approach to reduce jsf program risks , recapitalize its aging tactical air force sooner , and deliver needed capabilities to the warfighter more quickly . the experiences of the f - 16 program — evolving and improving capabilities over time while providing the warfighter combat capability — provide a precedent for this . requirements for the first increment of jsf under this evolutionary approach would match a level supported by current knowledge of technologies and design . this would allow the testing of those reduced requirements to support a knowledge - based low - rate production decision sooner and allow delivery of a useful product and in sufficient quantities to start replacing the aging legacy fighter force . capabilities that demand as yet undemonstrated technologies , for example , advanced mission systems and software , would be included as requirements in subsequent future jsf aircraft increments — managed as separate development programs — as technology is demonstrated in the technology base and becomes available . this is our second report . specifically , we ( 1 ) determined whether the jsf program acquisition strategy captures critical knowledge in time to make production investment decisions and ( 2 ) identified an alternative to the current acquisition strategy to improve jsf program outcomes . the act also requires us to certify whether we had access to sufficient information to make informed judgments on the matters contained in our report . we were provided sufficient information to assess the plans to capture technology , design , and manufacturing knowledge for the three jsf variants , the evolutionary nature of the acquisition strategy , and the opportunities to improve outcomes . at the time of our review , the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) was still preparing its fiscal year 2007 budget request as well as conducting its independent assessment of the program cost estimate , which is not expected to be completed until sometime in 2006 . additionally , the quadrennial defense review was ongoing during our review , and we did not have insights into the potential outcomes or how the results of the study might affect the jsf program . we performed our work from june 2005 through march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . jsf is a joint , multinational acquisition program for the air force , navy , marine corps , and eight cooperative international partners . for example , the f - 22a avionics software performed successfully in the laboratory but experienced significant problems that delayed the program and increased costs once it entered actual flight testing in the f - 22a aircraft . jsf software and advanced electronics are more complex than the f - 22a's . while dod believes it can manage program risk by holding regular program reviews , dod's own experience has shown this approach is not effective .