blm . blm's office of law enforcement and security is charged with promoting the safety and security of employees and visitors , as well as environmental protection , across approximately 245 million acres of blm lands in 12 states . at the end of fiscal year 2018 , blm had 194 field law enforcement officers engaged in such duties . according to agency documentation , these law enforcement officers also coordinate with state agencies and county law enforcement officers on large - scale recreational events , such as burning man . these field law enforcement officers may also be tasked with conducting facility security assessments . fws . fws's division of refuge law enforcement helps ensure the safety and security of visitors , employees , government property , and wildlife and their habitats on approximately 150 million acres of land . at the end of fiscal year 2018 , fws had 231 field law enforcement officers on the agency's 567 wildlife refuges . according to agency documents , fws law enforcement officers serve as ambassadors by providing important services to the public beyond law enforcement , such as providing visitors with information and guidance regarding fishing , hunting , hiking , and wildlife viewing opportunities . these field law enforcement officers may also be tasked with conducting facility security assessments . forest service . the forest service's law enforcement and investigations division is charged with protecting natural resources , employees , and visitors on approximately 193 million acres of national forest system lands in 44 states . at the end of fiscal year 2018 , the forest service had 417 field law enforcement officers . additionally , law enforcement officers may be tasked with conducting facility security assessments . park service . the park service's division of law enforcement , security , and emergency services is charged with protecting resources , managing public use , and promoting public safety and visitor enjoyment across the agency's 85 million acres , 418 park units , 23 national scenic and national historic trails , and 60 wild and scenic rivers . at the end of fiscal year 2018 , the park service had 1,329 field law enforcement officers stationed at 240 of the park service's units . field law enforcement officers may also be tasked with conducting facility security assessments . the isc standard applies to all facilities in the united states occupied by federal employees for nonmilitary purposes , including federal land management agencies' facilities . therefore , the entirety of what occurred during the incident may not be captured in the data system . for example , according to one blm official we interviewed , if an incident involved a verbal threat and a physical assault , it would likely be recorded into the data system as an assault . there were trucks regularly parked outside their homes , with individuals holding anti - government beliefs , who appeared to be monitoring them and their families . one official stated that “they were holding us hostage in our own homes.” some incidents are investigated by state or local law enforcement and recorded in their data systems , rather than in land management agencies' systems .