learn budgeting . make regular payments to energy suppliers . negotiate arrearage forgiveness with energy service providers . the evaluation report did not — except in the calculation of energy burden — clearly identify major project assumptions . assumptions related to the calculation of household energy burden were discussed in some detail ( see below ) . the project was designed as a single group of reach participants receiving a variety of services . the study stated that financial constraints prevented using a control group . participant data were to be collected both before and after the project using a standard data collection instrument , questionnaires , or both . utility bills were to be obtained from energy suppliers . the information collected would then be used to assess changes in household self - sufficiency , knowledge of energy use , the effect of specific interventions , and changes in energy burden by comparing pre - reach data with post - reach data . the project focused on assisting households through case management services . caseworkers were to provide financial counseling and energy education and make referrals to other public assistance agencies for services dealing with home energy conservation , employment , training , day care , and improving language skills . energy assistance payments were to be the only immediate financial assistance provided — although 148 of 164 households ( over 90 percent ) reported receiving other public assistance . caseworkers also were to facilitate household access to an arrearage forgiveness program offered by a major utility company . the evaluation report noted that , during implementation , caseworkers provided intake to over 460 households that were either homeless or at risk of being homeless , and maintained contact with over 350 of these households . project participants were selected from low - income households eligible to receive energy assistance payments , and caseworkers recruited clients from assistance programs for the homeless . the report did not describe the selection procedure . as noted above , the project did not use a control group . according to the evaluation report , project results were difficult to quantify , and the true measure of success was the range of services provided in response to participants' needs . however , information gathered by case managers showed no change in self - sufficiency by project participants . the evaluation report addressed project performance in terms of the three main project goals . the evaluation report calculated the energy burden to households using a formula developed to measure energy costs , or debt , as a portion of income . on the basis of the results of the calculation , the evaluation report found that the energy burden — the proportion of household income represented by energy - related debt — decreased during the project from $345 ( 105 percent ) to $252 ( 64 percent ) . however , the evaluation report noted that complete data — both pre - and postproject data for the same households — were available for only five project participants . the report also stressed that the calculation was based on the unlikely assumption that income would remain the same over time and on unreliable energy bill data .