agency support for usgcrp . according to ostp , each agency pays its share of usgcrp's budget , which is determined by the amount of climate change research funding it reports . within the last fiscal year , approximately what percentage of your work time was spent on tasks directly or indirectly related to climate change ? in the following questions , we ask about how funding for climate change programs and activities is defined and reported within your organization and across the federal government . do you have sufficient knowledge or experience to answer the following questions about the methods employed by your organization to define and report climate change funding ? hence , the more climate research funding an agency reports , the higher its assessment for supporting the usgcrp office and other joint responsibilities . according to technical comments from ceq , omb , and ostp , this assessment was 0.35 percent in fiscal year 2010 . several stakeholders who were formerly involved in federal climate change funding decisions said that distributing the cost of funding usgcrp in this way provides an incentive for agencies to be cautious in how they report climate change activities . some respondents echoed this concern . in certain situations , agencies may report conservatively to , for example , pay a lower assessment . in other instances , agencies may take the opposite approach . for example , according to one stakeholder , some agencies over - report their climate change activities because they see an opportunity to take credit for leadership . omb staff acknowledged this may be the perception , but disagreed that agencies could manipulate official climate spending figures . according to technical comments from ceq , omb , and ostp , it is questionable whether official numbers can be manipulated in this way because omb reviews annual variations to ensure that criteria are being consistently applied over time . more likely , respondents are referring to informal data calls conducted by eop and interagency committees , according to the technical comments . respondents , available literature , and stakeholders identified several existing mechanisms intended to align climate change funding with strategic priorities . these sources identified two key factors that complicate these efforts: ( 1 ) the lack of a shared understanding of federal strategic priorities among federal officials and ( 2 ) the fact that existing mechanisms that could help align agency funding with priorities are nonbinding , limiting their effectiveness where they conflict with agency responsibilities and priorities . respondents identified existing mechanisms intended to help align climate change funding with priorities . several said that the budget development process aligns agencies' climate change funding with federal strategic priorities . for example , one said that funding is closely aligned with strategic priorities through the annual budget process , the research and development priority setting process , and interagency coordination meetings . many also said that current interagency processes harness a broad array of stakeholders , and that their participation leads to stronger alignment of funding and priorities , both across the federal government and within their organizations . omb , ostp , and ceq use executive - level guidance memoranda to define climate change priorities within the overall federal budget .