two points are relevant here . first , the comptroller general's government auditing standards , which auditors performing single audits are required to follow , requires auditors to “report the significant audit findings developed in response to each audit objective.” the standards also note that audit findings not reported , because of their insignificance , should be separately communicated to the auditee . the auditors included all of the findings discussed in our report in their single audit reports . our objective was not to evaluate the usefulness of audit findings or whether auditors made the right determination as to significance in including the 48 findings in the reports covered by our review . regarding the second point , the “management decisions – transportation” section of the report that we provided for comment identified management decision information for findings addressed by both “action” and “informational” memoranda . in using these different memoranda , transportation distinguished between serious or significant and other types of findings . we did not separately judge or evaluate the decision to use one or the other type of memoranda . however , omb circular a - 133 does not distinguish between the serious or other types of audit findings . it clearly states that actions are required on all audit findings . transportation's comments also discussed the agency's process for reviewing and tracking audit findings . they noted that the agency tracks significant findings in the joint oig / management tracking system until documentation is provided that action has been completed and stated that less significant actions are tracked locally . the draft report we provided for comment generally contained this same information and discussed the types of memoranda the agency used to communicate single audit findings to appropriate agency offices . we do not take issue with the agency's process . however , as our report states , our review of audit files , irregardless of whether the agency handled the audit findings with “action” or “informational” memoranda , found that the files generally did not contain documentation identifying agency evaluations of and conclusions on the adequacy of the corrective actions taken by recipients . transportation stated that our report recommends that each department create a new system or systems for communicating audit findings to top management . while our report recommends reporting to top management , it also notes that information for such reporting can come from such sources as agency analyses of single audit findings , agency databases , and the fac single audit database . we do not recommend or suggest that agencies develop new systems . agencies such as transportation , that uses a joint oig / management tracking system for significant findings , should use information obtained from that or other existing systems to summarize single audit results and the status of recipient corrective actions and communicate that information to top management . the final agency comment notes that documentation concerns alone are insufficient to demonstrate that agencies are ineffective at ensuring that grantees achieve the changes recommended by single audits to safeguard federal funds . our report does not make the point that agencies are ineffective if they do not maintain appropriate documentation .