this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions the members of the committee may have . this section contains credit and copyright information for images and graphics in this product , as appropriate , when that information was not listed adjacent to the image or graphic . page 6: photodisc ( money ) ; eyewire ( monitor and medical symbol ) . page 9: brandxpictures ( flag ) ; photodisc ( calculator and social security card ) . page 11: brandxpictures ( flag ) ; digital vision ( teacher ) ; dynamic graphics ( health care ) . page 12: brandxpictures ( flag ) ; dynamic graphics ( 1040 form ) ; dod ( soldiers ) . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . travel is critical to accomplishing our mission . our work covers a wide range of subjects of congressional interest , plays a key role in congressional decision making , and can have profound implications and ramifications for national policy decisions . our analyses and recommendations are based on original research , rather than reliance on third - party source materials . in addition , gao is subject to professional standards and core values that uniquely position the agency to support the congress in discharging its oversight and other responsibilities under the constitution . we use contracts to obtain expert advice and or assistance not readily available within gao , or when expertise is needed within compressed time frames for a particular project , audit , or engagement . examples of contract services include obtaining consultant services , conducting broad - based studies in support of audit efforts , gathering key data on specific areas of audit interest , and obtaining technical assistance and expertise in highly specialized areas . mission support programs provide the critical infrastructure we need to conduct our work . mission support activities include the following programs: information technology: our it plan provides a road map for ensuring that it activities are fully aligned with and enable achievement of our strategic and business goals . the plan focuses on improved client service , it reliability , and security ; it promotes effectiveness , efficiency and cost benefit concepts . in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , we plan to continue to modernize outdated management information systems to eliminate redundant tasks , automate repetitive tasks , and increase staff productivity . we also will continue to modernize or develop systems focusing on how analysts do their work . for example , we enhanced the weapons systems database that we created to provide the congress information to support budget deliberations . building management: the building management program provides operating funds for the gao headquarters building and field office locations , safety and security programs , and asset management . we periodically assess building management components to ensure program economy , efficiency and effectiveness .