unfair practices . the act prohibits the use of unconscionable or unfair practices , including trying to collect the wrong amount of debt ; adding unauthorized fees , interest or other charges to the debt ; or causing the consumer to incur collect - call telephone charges . fdcpa also dictates the process debt collectors must use during the initial communication with the consumer and the steps a consumer can take to dispute a debt . within 5 days of a collector's initial communication about a debt , the collector must send the consumer a written notice — a validation notice — that includes the amount of the debt , the name of the owner of the debt , and a statement informing the consumer that the debt is assumed valid unless the consumer disputes the debt in writing within 30 days . if the consumer disputes the debt within that period , the collector must cease collection efforts until the collector provides the consumer with verification of the debt . ftc has primary government enforcement authority under fdcpa — except to the extent that this enforcement authority is given to seven other federal agencies for entities under their jurisdiction . ftc has a number of enforcement options for those who violate fdcpa . ftc can seek a court order prohibiting defendants from engaging in conduct and requiring that they pay monetary relief , including restitution to consumers , disgorgement of ill - gotten gains , and civil penalties of $16,000 per violation . fdcpa also provides consumers with a private right of action — allowing them to bring civil actions and be awarded monetary damages if collectors engage in prohibited collection practices or otherwise do not adhere to the act's requirements . the ftc act , enacted in 1914 and amended on numerous occasions , gives ftc the authority to prohibit and take action against unfair or deceptive acts or practices . certain practices that violate fdcpa provisions may also violate section 5 of the ftc act , and ftc often will bring enforcement actions under both statutes in its cases against third - party debt collectors . in addition , ftc and federal depository regulators can use the ftc act to address unfair or deceptive debt collection practices by original creditors , who are not covered by fdcpa . the ftc act also authorizes ftc to obtain a court - ordered injunction to halt the activities of any entity that it believes is violating the laws it enforces , including fdcpa . fcra , enacted in 1970 , is designed to ensure the accuracy of information provided for “consumer reports” — reports containing information about an individual's personal and credit characteristics used to help determine eligibility for such things as credit , insurance , and employment . consumer reporting agencies assemble consumer reports using information provided by data furnishers that can include credit card issuers , debt collectors , and debt buyers . fcra requires that these data furnishers provide accurate information to consumer reporting agencies and specifies that information about delinquent accounts generally cannot remain on a consumer's credit report more than 7 years .