there is no comparable requirement to inspect foreign establishments . fda does not have authority to require foreign establishments to allow the agency to inspect their facilities . however , if an fda request to inspect is denied , fda may prevent the importation of medical devices from that foreign establishment into the united states . in addition , fda has the authority to conduct physical examinations of products offered for import and , if there is sufficient evidence of a violation , prevent their entry at the border . unlike food , for which fda primarily relies on inspections at the border , physical inspection of manufacturing establishments is a critical mechanism in fda's process to ensure that medical devices are safe and effective and that manufacturers adhere to good manufacturing practices . fda determines which establishments to inspect using a risk - based strategy . high priority inspections include premarket approval inspections for class iii devices , for - cause inspections , inspections of establishments that have had a high frequency of device recalls , and other devices and manufacturers fda considers high risk . the establishment's inspection history may also be considered . a provision in fdaaa may assist fda in making decisions about which establishments to inspect because this law authorizes the agency to accept voluntary submissions of audit reports addressing manufacturers' conformance with internationally established standards for the purpose of setting risk - based inspectional priorities . fda's programs for foreign and domestic inspections by accredited third parties provide an alternative to the traditional fda - conducted comprehensive postmarket quality system inspection for eligible manufacturers of class ii and iii medical devices . mdufma required fda to accredit third persons — which are organizations — to conduct inspections of certain establishments . in describing this requirement , the house of representatives committee on energy and commerce noted that some manufacturers have faced an increase in the number of inspections required by foreign countries and that the number of inspections could be reduced if the manufacturers could contract with a third - party organization to conduct a single inspection that would satisfy the requirements of both fda and foreign countries . fda recently announced proposals to address some of the challenges unique to conducting foreign inspections , but specific steps toward implementation and associated time frames are unclear . fda noted in its report on revitalizing ora that it was exploring the creation of a cadre of investigators who would be dedicated to conducting foreign inspections . however , the report did not provide any additional details or time frames about this proposal . in addition , fda announced plans to establish a permanent presence overseas , although little information about these plans is available . fda intends that its foreign offices will improve cooperation and information exchange with foreign regulatory bodies , improve procedures for expanded inspections , allow it to inspect facilities quickly in an emergency , and facilitate work with private and government agencies to assure standards for quality . fda's proposed foreign offices are intended to expand the agency's capacity for overseeing , among other things , medical devices , drugs , and food that may be imported into the united states .