gao - 06-176 . washington , d.c.: december 30 , 2005 . ( see fig . workforce administrators in 33 states also reported improvement in veterans' employment results . these respondents attributed the improvement both to the law's reforms and to other factors . the reform cited most often as helping veterans obtain employment was the increased availability of case management or other intensive services through the dvop program . other than the reforms themselves , administrators said veterans' employment was influenced by employer willingness or desire to hire veterans and by the strength of the local job market . ( see fig . in terms of barriers to employment , state administrators reported that federal contractor failure to list job openings at the local one - stop centers was a factor under most likely to delay or prevent some employment . other factors also presented obstacles to employment , the most frequent one being a poor local job market . this factor was cited nearly twice more often as other factors , such as non - transferability of skills or employer reluctance to hire veterans with national guard or reserve commitments . ( see fig . labor oversight and accountability for the dvop and lver programs has been affected by the lack of data available from local workforce offices in some states , as well as the lack of coordination among labor agencies in monitoring and sharing information gathered on program performance . while state vets directors responding to our survey most often reported that their monitoring role under jva has had a positive effect on local accountability , 19 directors reported their monitoring role either had no effect or a negative effect . our survey showed two main reasons for the lack of a stronger effect . lack of local level data . in our survey , state vets directors reported that performance data from local offices are not available in many states , limiting federal oversight and weakening local level accountability . state vets directors reported in our survey that among four different tools used to monitor local office performance , the most beneficial were analysis and use of data captured in states' performance reports , along with on - site reviews of local offices . under jva , states took on greater responsibility for assessing their own performance , and vets modified its monitoring practices in response by extending the time between site visits to local offices from 1 year to 5 years . vets directors in 21 states , however , noted that data were not available to monitor performance of local offices , and in these states , federal oversight may be limited to the on - site monitoring visits by vets directors required once every 5 years . lack of coordinated oversight . while labor agencies are jointly responsible for monitoring employment and training services , little or no effort has been made to coordinate oversight or use the monitoring results to target assistance to states and localities that are most in need . for example , while vets is responsible for monitoring performance of the dvop and lver programs , eta oversees other workforce programs that serve veterans as well as nonveterans , such as wia and wagner - peyser employment services .