work . ence to the corps , and relevant epa office of inspector to examine issues regarding civil and criminal litigation related to th federal creosote site , we collected case data from the public access to court electronic records system . we then qualitatively analyzed documents obtained from this system to identify the issues involved and the status of each case as well as the outcomes , if any , of the cases . however , because criminal investigations are ongoing and confidenti could not determine whether any additional criminal charges were under consideration , but relied solely on the publicly available information for charges that had been filed as of november 2009 . in addition to the individual named above , vincent p. price , assistant director ; carmen donohue ; maura hardy ; christopher murray ; ira nichols - barrer ; and lisa van arsdale made key contributions to this report . elizabeth beardsley , nancy crothers , alexandra dew , richard johnson , and anne stevens also made important contributions . contractor fraud . other response costs not included in construction estimates ( about $92 million ) remedial construction costs potentially related to greater contaminated soil quantities ( about $111 million ) . epa intentionally included only costs related to the construction and maintenance of the selected remedies rather than total sitewide costs in its early cost estimates , which follows its guidance , according to the agency . community impacts . the residential nature of the site and the importance of the rustic mall to the community also influenced epa's remedy selection , given the effects that different technologies and alternatives might have on the community . for example , according to epa , some of the substances that could be used to immobilize soil contamination in the ground were potentially more toxic than the creosote contamination . also , certain options that treated contamination in place or extracted it from the soil or groundwater would have emitted heat or gas that could have posed risks to residents and the community . moreover , epa determined that some options would have significantly disrupted the community because of the need to install equipment , wells , and piping throughout the residential and commercial areas . also , because epa was implementing a remedial action in a residential neighborhood at the site , it was concerned about the length of the cleanup and other timing impacts on the community . region 2 officials said that epa generally does not use certain alternatives unless the agency has the flexibility to accomplish remediation over a long time frame on the basis of the current land use ( eg , the site is abandoned ) . under these circumstances , epa could use a remedy like bioremediation of contaminated material in place , which would cause long - term disruption if implemented in a residential neighborhood .