withholding . withholding is a widely accepted practice to increase taxpayer compliance . under u.s. law , employers must withhold income tax from the wages paid to employees . withholding from salaries requires wage earners to pay enough tax during the tax year to assure that they will not face a large payment at year end . also , withholding can be required as a backup to information reporting if a payee fails to furnish a correct taxpayer identification number ( tin ) . tax administrations worldwide have enforcement programs to ensure that tax returns are accurate and complete and taxes are paid . among others , irs uses two principal enforcement programs . after tax returns have been filed , the automated underreporter program matches data on information returns ( usually on income ) provided by employers , banks , and other payers of income to data reported on taxpayers' tax returns . irs may contact taxpayers about any differences . the examination program relies on irs auditors to check compliance in reporting income , deductions , credits , and other issues on tax returns by reviewing the documents taxpayers provided to support their tax return . irs , like revenue agencies in many countries , administers tax expenditures . tax expenditures are tax provisions that grant special tax relief for certain kinds of behavior by taxpayers or for taxpayers in special circumstances . tax expenditures reduce the amount of taxes owed and therefore are seen as resulting in the government forgoing revenues . these provisions are viewed by many analysts as spending channeled through the tax system . for fiscal year 2010 , the u.s. department of the treasury reported 173 tax expenditures costing , in aggregate , more than $1 trillion . tax expenditures are often aimed at policy goals similar to those of federal spending programs , such encouraging economic development in disadvantaged areas and financing postsecondary education . in 2005 , we reported that all u.s. federal spending and tax policy tools , including tax expenditures , should be reexamined to ensure that they are achieving their intended purposes and designed in the most efficient and effective manner . the following examples illustrate how new zealand , finland , the european union ( eu ) , the united kingdom ( uk ) , australia , and hong kong have addressed well - known tax administration issues . our work does not suggest that these practices should or should not be adopted by the united states . new zealand , like the united states , addresses various national objectives through a combination of tax expenditures and discretionary spending programs . in new zealand , tax expenditures are known as tax credits . new zealand has overcome obstacles to evaluating these related programs at the same time to better judge whether they are working effectively . rather than doing separate evaluations , new zealand completes integrated evaluations of tax expenditures and discretionary spending programs to analyze their combined effects . using this approach , new zealand can determine , in part , whether tax expenditures and discretionary spending programs work together to accomplish government goals .