the airport interviews are not generalizable , but provide insights . tsa has several methods to inform passengers about its complaint processes , but does not have an agencywide policy or mechanism to ensure consistent use of these methods among commercial airports . for example , tsa has developed standard signs , stickers , and customer comment cards that can be used at airport checkpoints to inform passengers about how to submit feedback to tsa ; however , we found inconsistent use at the 6 airports we contacted . for example , customer comment cards were displayed in the checkpoints at 2 airports , while at 2 others the cards were provided upon request . however , we found that passengers may be reluctant to ask for such cards , according to tsa . tsa officials at 4 of the 6 airports also said that the agency could do more to share best practices for informing passengers about complaint processes . for example , tsa holds periodic conference calls for its customer support managers — tsa staff at certain commercial airports who work in conjunction with other local tsa staff to resolve customer complaints and communicate the status and resolution of complaints to air passengers — to discuss customer service . however , customer support managers have not used this mechanism to discuss best practices for informing air passengers about processes for submitting complaints , according to the officials we interviewed . policies for informing the public about complaint processes and mechanisms for sharing best practices among local tsa officials could help provide tsa reasonable assurance that these activities are being conducted consistently and help local tsa officials learn from one another about what practices work well . we conducted all of this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . chairman petri , ranking member costello , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . i look forward to responding to any questions that you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact steve lord at ( 202 ) 512-4379 or lords@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include jessica lucas - judy ( assistant director ) , david alexander , thomas lombardi , anthony pordes , and juan tapia - videla . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . in summary , tsa receives thousands of air passenger screening complaints through five central mechanisms , but does not have an agencywide policy , consistent processes , or a focal point to guide receipt and use of such information .