agencies are needed . gao / nsiad - 94-62 . washington , d.c.: february 7 , 1994 . base categories . this year , all of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base , forward operating site , and cooperative security location , which provided users a clearer picture of the infrastructure plans and requirements at these sites . the commands also supplemented the information on base categories with detailed data on the installations' capabilities , overall mission , population , and types of equipment and facilities located at each site . end state date . this year , all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date , which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame and thus provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives for their areas of responsibility . host nation funding levels . this year , all of the commands reported host nation funding levels at the project level for fiscal year 2009 and at the aggregate level for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 , which provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which u.s. funding is needed for facility requirements . effects of other defense activities . this year , all of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans . for example , both u.s. european command and u.s. central command described how the development of u.s. africa command would affect their commands and the increased need to coordinate efforts in the future . until this year , the overseas master plans have not discussed residual value even though we have recommended that they should . in response to this recommendation , osd and command officials stated that residual value could not be readily predicted and therefore should not be assumed in the master plans . these officials also reported that residual value is based on the reuse of property being turned over to the host nation , which is limited for most categories of military facilities and is often reduced by actual or anticipated environmental remediation costs . however , we have always maintained that since these issues vary by host nation and may not be clear to all users of the plans , osd should require commands , at a minimum , to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation and report the implications for u.s. funding requirements . this year , u.s. european command described the difficult and lengthy process to return and negotiate the value of facilities to address our prior recommendation . the command noted that attempting to forecast residual value would not be prudent fiscal planning because of the uncertainties in receiving residual value , such as the negotiated price to be paid . after we received the u.s. european command plan , command officials provided data showing that the u.s. government has received approximately $656 million in residual value and payment - in - kind compensation since 1989 . payment - in - kind projects include installation of water , sewer , electrical , and communication lines , and quality of life projects , such as dormitories and neighborhood renovations .