other agencies were not required to implement the standard until june 2003 . according to some housing agency officials , the effect of this accounting requirement was relatively small . they also deduct amounts used for nonprogram expenses . in calculating their reserves , housing agencies may deduct amounts equal to noncash assets procured with administrative fee reserves . for example , if a housing agency were to purchase a vehicle for program purposes , it could deduct the purchase amount when calculating the year - end balance for that year . however , a housing agency may include amounts equal to noncash assets in their total reported reserve . housing agencies report their total administrative fee reserves to hud as a part of the fiscal - year - end settlement process . almost all of the housing agencies that were required to report their available administrative fee reserves as of january 31 , 2003 , have done so . however , because hud did not define the term “available” used in the 2003 appropriations resolution , housing agencies may have interpreted the term — and thus calculated their reserves — differently . our scope and methodology are discussed in greater detail in appendix i . the federal government's housing choice voucher program helps very - low - income families , the elderly , and the disabled pay for housing in the private market . the program , which has been operating for about 30 years , provides housing vouchers that individuals and families can use to rent houses or apartments in the private housing market if property owners participate in the program . voucher holders are responsible for finding suitable housing , which must meet the health and safety standards set by the local housing agency . voucher holders generally pay about 30 percent of their household income on the rent and utilities and the housing agency pays the remainder in subsidies that are paid directly to the property owners . the administrative fees housing agencies earn are not tied to the actual expenses of operating the housing choice voucher program . rather , the fees are based on a formula that takes into account the number of months that each voucher is actually in use ( i.e. , is used to pay for a rental unit under lease ) . the amounts used to calculate federal fiscal year 2003 fees were set in the federal register on may 6 , 2003 . in addition , housing agencies may also earn additional special administrative fees — for example , the “hard - to - house” fee for certain clients , such as persons with disabilities , who require help in locating housing . administrative fee payments are based on estimates of voucher use and are reconciled with actual earned amounts at the end of each housing agency's fiscal year . housing agencies' fiscal years are grouped into four cycles ending in march , june , september , and december that allow hud to more easily complete the fiscal - year - end settlement process , which generally is completed a few months after the close of a housing agency's fiscal year .