bechtel has been working to address these issues . however , a 2011 doe construction project review noted that , while bechtel continues to make progress resolving these issues , the estimated schedule to resolve this challenge has slipped . according to doe and bechtel officials , bechtel is still conducting analysis and is planning to complete the work to resolve this challenge by 2013 . incomplete understanding of waste — doe does not have comprehensive data on the specific physical , radiological , and chemical properties of the waste in each underground waste tank at hanford . in the absence of such data , doe has established some parameters for the waste that are meant to estimate the range of waste that may go through the wtp in an effort to help the contractor design a facility that will be able to treat whatever waste – – or combination of wastes — is ultimately brought into the wtp . in 2006 , an independent review team stated that properly understanding the waste would be an essential key factor in designing an effective facility . in 2010 , the consortium for risk evaluation with stakeholder participation , pnnl , and the safety board reviewed the status of doe's plans to obtain comprehensive data on the characteristics of the waste , and each concluded that doe and bechtel did not have enough information about the waste and would therefore need to increase the range of possible wastes that the wtp is designed to treat in order to account for the uncertainty . officials at pnnl reported that not having a large enough range is “a vulnerability that could lead to inadequate mixing and line plugging.” the safety board reported that obtaining representative samples of the waste is necessary to demonstrate that the wtp can be operated safely , but that doe and its contractors have not been able to explain how those samples will be obtained . doe has developed implementation plans to address the safety board's recommendations . in addition , doe itself has raised significant concerns about wtp safety culture . in 2011 doe's office of health , safety , and security conducted an independent assessment of the nuclear safety culture and management of nuclear safety concerns at the wtp . as a result of this assessment , doe determined that most doe and bechtel wtp staff at the wtp believed that safety is a high priority . however , doe also determined that a significant number of doe and bechtel staff expressed reluctance to raise concerns about safety or quality of wtp facilities design because wtp project management does not create an atmosphere conducive to hearing concerns or for fear of retaliation . employees' willingness to raise safety concerns without fear of retaliation is an essential element of a healthy safety culture and creating an atmosphere where problems can be identified . doe's assessment also determined that doe has mechanisms in place to address safety culture concerns . for example , according to a january 2012 issued doe office of health , safety , and security report on the safety culture and safety management of the project , the project has an employee's concerns program and a differing professional opinion program that assist staff to raise safety concerns .