september 2001 . the navy issues a stop - loss policy for a variety of officer and enlisted occupational specialties , and subspecialties to include personnel in special operations / special warfare , security , law enforcement , cryptology , and explosive ordnance disposal as well as selected physicians , nurses , and linguists . march 2002 . the navy modifies its existing stop - loss policy , adding new specialties and removing others . after the changes , selected linguists and personnel in security , law enforcement , and cryptology were subject to the stop - loss restriction . august 2002 . the navy ends its stop - loss policy . the air force exercises its stop - loss authority on september 22 , 2001 , by imposing a servicewide stop - loss on all air force personnel . unlike the army , the air force's initial policy affected active , reserve , and air national guard members . the air force's significant stop - loss policy changes are listed below . september 2001 . the air force implements a servicewide , stop - loss policy . january 2002 . marine corps reservists cannot be extended beyond the completion of 24 cumulative months of activated service . furthermore , the first general officer in a marine's chain of command can exempt marines from the stop - loss policy . may 2003 . the marine corps lifts its stop - loss policy . the services use recruiting and retention strategies together to achieve their programmed end strengths . if retention is better than expected in a particular year , then the reserve components may achieve their desired end strengths without achieving their recruiting goals . while the services can effectively meet their yearly programmed end strengths through a wide range of recruiting and retention combinations , long - term overreliance on either recruiting or retention can eventually cause negative impacts for a service or service component . a service or component that repeatedly misses its recruiting goals will need to retain a higher - than - planned percentage of its personnel each year . this will eventually lead to a force that is out of balance . either too many people will be promoted and the component will end up with too many senior personnel and not enough junior personnel or promotion rates will decline . decreased promotion rates tend to lead to increased attrition rates , which would lead to end strength problems if a component were already having problems meeting its recruiting goals . appendix vi showed that the services have employed a variety of stop - loss policies since september 11 , 2001 . one was among the smallest . specifically we visited the following sites: fort stewart , georgia ; fort hood , texas ; fort mccoy , wisconsin ; fort lewis , washington ; and fort mcpherson , georgia . we also interviewed army officials from the following locations: u.s. army forces command , fort mcpherson , georgia ; first u.s. army , fort gillem , georgia ; fifth u.s. army , fort sam houston , texas ; army installation management activity , arlington , virginia ; and army contracting agency , fort mcpherson , georgia .