compensation commission . oios also conducted audits of the three u.n. contracts for inspecting commodities coming into iraq and for independent experts to monitor iraq's oil exports . we identified a total of 702 findings contained in the reports across numerous programs and sectors . weaknesses and irregularities were common in planning and coordination , procurement , and asset and cash management . appendix i contains the summary data of our analysis and a description of our scope and methodology . our summary below focuses on key findings for the areas that received the most audit coverage — activities in northern iraq and the u.n . compensation commission . we also highlight findings from the audits of the inspections contracts . the oios audits that reviewed u.n. activities in northern iraq found problems with planning and coordination , procurement , and asset and cash management . in 2004 , oios reported that u.n. - habitat had not adequately coordinated with other u.n. agencies in providing essential services for its housing projects . for example , u.n. - habitat provided high - capacity generators but had not contacted the u.n. development program — the entity responsible for the power sector — to provide electric power connections . oios also found that about 3,200 houses were unoccupied for extended periods due to a lack of coordination with agencies providing complementary services . an august 2000 report noted a lack of planning that resulted in the questionable viability of some oil for food projects in northern iraq . for example , six diesel generators were procured in an area where diesel fuel was not readily available . in addition , local authorities would not accept a newly constructed health facility subject to flooding . a december 2000 report also noted that highways and a sports stadium were built in violation of criteria established by the security council and the iraqi government . in november 2002 , oios reported that almost $38 million in procurement of equipment for the u.n. - habitat program was not based on a needs assessment . as a result , 51 generators went unused from september 2000 to march 2002 , and 12 generators meant for project - related activities were converted to office use . in addition , oios reported that 11 purchase orders totaling almost $14 million showed no documentary evidence supporting the requisitions . in 2002 , oios found that the u.n - habitat program lacked a proper asset inventory system and that no policies and procedures governing asset management were evident . as a result , the value of assets was not readily available . in one case , $1.6 million in excess construction material remained after most projects were complete . oios also reported that a lack of effective cash management policies meant that project funds were misused or put at risk . in a march 2000 audit , oios reported that the u.n. development program's country office used $500,000 in project funds for office expenses without authorization or proper documentation . a february 2002 audit found that the office in erbil put at risk $600,000 to $800,000 in cash due to a lack of cash management policies .