reg . 17,227 ( apr . of the property for sale would be greater than the expected sales proceeds . more recently , gsa has instituted new requirements for electronics recyclers listed on the gsa schedule . in february 2011 , gsa began requiring proof of certification under either r2 or e - stewards for new vendors seeking to provide recycling or disposal services for used electronic products under gsa's environmental services schedule . according to gsa officials , they also identified 5 vendors , out of the 58 vendors on the schedule at that time , that were performing recycling or disposal services for used electronic products and provided these vendors with modified contract terms — making r2 or e - stewards certification within 6 months a condition for performing these services under the gsa schedule . in january 2007 , executive order 13423 established goals for federal agencies to improve the management of their used electronic products . among other things , the executive order required that agency heads ( 1 ) establish and implement policies to extend the useful life of agencies' electronic equipment and ( 2 ) ensure the agency uses environmentally sound practices with respect to the disposition of the agency's electronic equipment that has reached the end of its useful life . furthermore , the instructions for implementing the executive order , issued on march 28 , 2007 , called for each agency to develop and submit to ofee by may 1 , 2007 , an electronics stewardship plan to implement electronics stewardship practices for all eligible owned or leased electronic products . among other things , the plans were to address how agencies will ensure that all electronic products no longer needed by an agency are reused , donated , sold , or recycled using environmentally sound management practices at end of life . the implementing instructions called for agencies' plans to comply with gsa procedures for the transfer , donation , sale , and recycling of electronic products ( discussed above ) , as well as any applicable federal , state , and local laws and regulations ; and use national standards , best management practices , or a national certification program for electronics recyclers . the implementing instructions for executive order 13423 also directed each agency and its facilities to participate in the fec or to implement an equivalent electronics stewardship program that addresses the purchase , operation and maintenance , and end - of - life management strategies for electronic products consistent with the fec's recommended practices and guidelines . in october 2009 , executive order 13514 built on the previous executive order but included slightly different goals for electronics stewardship . executive order 13514 calls for agencies to develop , implement , and annually update strategic sustainability performance plans to specify how they intend to achieve the goals of the order . agencies were required to submit fiscal year 2010 plans to ceq and omb by june 2010 . executive order 13514 , however , did not supersede or revoke the earlier executive order , and that order's goals and requirements remain in effect .