tough choices are inevitable . today you are focusing on budget process improvements , so i will start there . we need a process that does two things better than the processes we have used in the past . the budget process needs ( 1 ) better transparency and controls about the fiscal exposures / commitments that the federal government is considering making and ( 2 ) better signals and incentives to address the fiscal exposures / commitments the federal government has already made . gao has encouraged reforms that would help move forward on both fronts . transparency of existing commitments would be improved by requiring that the office of management and budget ( omb ) report annually on fiscal exposures , including a concise list , description , and cost estimates , where possible . omb should also ensure that agencies focus on improving cost estimates for fiscal exposures . this should complement and support continued and improved reporting of long - range projections and analysis of the budget as a whole to assess fiscal sustainability and flexibility . others have also embraced this idea for better reporting of fiscal exposures . last year senator voinovich proposed that the president report each january on the fiscal exposures of the federal government and their implications for long - term financial health . the president's fiscal year 2005 budget proposes that future presidents' budgets report on any enacted legislation in the past year that worsens the unfunded obligations of programs with long - term actuarial projections , with cbo being required to make a similar report . senator voinovich's bill would require gao to review the president's report on fiscal exposures for completeness , quality and the long - range fiscal outlook . senator lieberman has also introduced legislation to require better information on liabilities and commitments over both a 75-year and indefinite time horizon . such reporting would be a good starting point . senator lieberman's bill provides for a point of order against bills that adversely affect the net present value of overall liabilities and commitments by more that a specified amount . better information on existing commitments and promises must be coupled with estimates of the long - term discounted net present value cost of any new proposed commitments . ten - year budget projections have been available to decision makers for many years . we must build on that regime but also incorporate longer - term estimates of net present value costs for spending and tax commitments comprising longer - term exposures for the federal budget beyond the 10-year window . better reporting is just a starting point , however . while social security and medicare drive the long - term spending outlook , decisions are made about a whole host of other programs with long - term implications too small to drive the long - term outlook . a budget is all about how to allocate available resources . budget decisions reflect a number of factors including beliefs about the appropriate role of government in various areas , judgment about the likely success of a program in achieving certain goals , and the cost of a program .