as of november 2013 , that analysis has not been completed . however , irs acknowledged that standardized account entries can sometimes lead to increased efficiencies and lower costs , and taxpayers and irs can benefit by the elimination of redundancy in its processes . irs stated that as it continues to evaluate the compliance suite to determine its full capabilities , it will ( 1 ) explore whether the introduction of standardized account entries into the ia process will yield increased efficiencies and lower costs ; and ( 2 ) evaluate whether there are unnecessary redundancies in its current processes that can be eliminated without adversely affecting tax administration . each tax filing season is an enormous undertaking . in the 2013 filing season , the internal revenue service ( irs ) processed over 140 million individual income tax returns , issued more than 100 million refunds worth over $280 billion , and received over 90 million telephone calls . in fiscal year 2013 , irs budgeted more than $2 billion for processing such returns and providing taxpayer services . during the filing season , irs also begins its efforts to verify that tax returns are in compliance with income reporting requirements . two examples of compliance issues that typically surface during the filing season are ( 1 ) failure to pay a balance due on time , and ( 2 ) failure to file a return . taxpayers who are unable to pay a balance due on time can make payments through an installment agreement ( ia ) — which allows taxpayers to pay their tax debt in scheduled ( usually monthly ) payments . since failure to file a return cannot be detected until after the tax filing deadline and irs determines that the taxpayer may have a filing obligation , timely notification of taxpayers can be a challenge . according to irs , in fiscal year 2012 , it cost 23 cents to process an e - filed return , as opposed $3.36 for returns filed on paper . in june 2013 , we found that most information reports are not received by irs until well after the april tax return filing deadline . irs does a second match in march of the following year for taxpayers who filed an extension . according to irs officials , not all potential non - filer cases identified are selected for notification and review ; irs prioritizes cases based on factors such as income , the potential to collect taxes due , and whether the taxpayer is an irs or other federal employee . after the first match in october , irs sends notices to non - filers in november and december requesting the return or a justification for not filing . irs begins to send notices to cases from the second match between march and july . table 5 shows that , in tax year 2010 ( the year for which the most current data are available ) , irs identified over 7.4 million potential non - filer cases . of these , irs selected more than 3.2 million cases for review and sent notices to those non - filers requesting the return .