training for maxhr implementation . dhs's new human capital management system , known as maxhr , represents a fundamental change in many of the department's human capital policies and procedures that will affect a large majority — approximately 110,000 — of its civilian employees . maxhr covers many key human capital areas , such as pay , performance management , classification , labor relations , adverse actions , and employee appeals , and will be implemented in phases affecting increasing numbers of employees over the next several years . dhs correctly recognizes that a substantial investment in training is a key aspect of effectively implementing maxhr , and in particular , the new performance management system it establishes . usefulness of performance measures . we have previously reported several key characteristics of effective strategic and management plans , including the need for performance measures . appropriate performance measures along with accompanying targets are important tools to enable internal and external stakeholders to effectively track the progress the department is making toward achieving its training goals and objectives . to this end , organizations may use a variety of performance measures — output , efficiency , customer service , quality , and outcome — each of which focuses on a different aspect of performance . the dhs training strategic plan contains few specific performance measures for its goals or strategies and all of these are output measures . for example , the plan makes use of output measures in its requirement that certain actions , such as the development of a new management directive or the chartering of a team , be completed by the end of fiscal year 2006 , and in establishing a deadline for when reports need to be completed in order to be included in the 2007 plan . in contrast to output measures like these , which gauge the level of activity or effort by measuring whether a particular thing is produced or service performed , other types of measures , such as measures of customer satisfaction or program outcomes , focus on the impact or results of activities . by appropriately broadening the mix of measures it uses and more clearly identifying targets against which dhs can assess its performance , dhs can improve the usefulness of its plan . after we completed our audit work , dhs training officials informed us that they decided to delay the development of performance measures until the rollout of the plan , when they could be developed by individual teams , as needed . they subsequently informed us that these teams will be held accountable to establish further performance measures that are outcome based and results oriented . dhs's human capital strategic plan again provides an illustration of how the department's training strategic plan might begin to work toward the inclusion of different types of performance measures . in cases where the hpt analysis concludes that training is warranted , a training analysis is performed to determine the specific training interventions . for example , in implementing activities related to the maritime transportation security act , the coast guard analyzed its training needs through the hpt process to determine training necessary to help maritime inspectors reduce the exposure of ports and waterways to terrorist activities .