the department of state and uspto agreed with our recommendation . while our observations on uspto's ip attachés overseas are largely positive , our prior work has also demonstrated that the long - term success of operations abroad requires attention to human capital planning . in particular , we observed that other agencies attempting to establish a presence abroad had to make additional efforts to ensure that they could recruit and retain sufficient personnel with the technical and cultural expertise that is important in those posts . these considerations may be important as uspto makes decisions about the scale and permanence of this program . madam chairwoman , thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee to summarize our work on ip protection . gao has performed a number of studies on both domestic and international efforts to protect ip since my last testimony on this subject before this committee in 2004 . as i have noted in my statement , we believe that the pro - ip act enacted last year has taken a number of positive steps to clarify the structure of ip agency coordination , and congress has also tasked the coordinator to provide information we believe will be useful in oversight of u.s. agency efforts . our most recent report also suggests that efforts such as those of the uspto to place specialist attachés abroad has had a positive impact in the posts we visited because of their expertise and focus on this issue . notwithstanding these positive developments , our work suggests that ip enforcement will continue to be a daunting task and that the u.s. agencies still need to demonstrate that they can collaborate effectively over the long term to help address these challenges . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact loren yager at ( 202 ) 512-4347 , or yagerl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include christine broderick ( assistant director ) , jeremy latimer , catherine gelb , nina pfeiffer , and ryan vaughan . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the pro - ip act of 2008 eliminates the old structure for coordinating ip efforts and creates a new interagency advisory committee composed of eight federal entities . the responsibility of the ipec , among other things , is to lead the committee in the development of a joint strategic plan to reduce counterfeiting and other types of ip infringement , and to assist in the implementation of the joint strategic plan when requested by the advisory committee members .