we do not believe that such a discussion is necessary . what are the costs and benefits of the model ? how well does the model meet hcfa's implementation criteria ? hcfa stated that its goal is to complete the assessment of the psc models by october 2001 and to develop a more clearly defined long - term strategy for fiscal year 2002 . hcfa's written comments describing its plan contain new information that is substantively different from the draft version it provided us during the course of our review . although the new information lacks sufficient detail for us to fully assess its plan , we agree that it is an important step . however , it is difficult for us to assess the evaluation questions without more precise definitions of the terms used , such as the “desired outcomes” for each of the models and the “implementation criteria.” in our view , these questions are too vague to provide a meaningful basis for determining which psc models are most effective . moreover , we question whether hcfa will be able to complete its analysis of the models by october 2001 because it will not have had the opportunity to fully test all the psc models . for example , although the task order that requires the psc to perform all prepayment and postpayment reviews was awarded last year , the test of its ability to effectively perform prepayment reviews is not scheduled to begin until october 2001 — the same month hcfa stated that its analysis would be complete . in responding to our second recommendation , hcfa said it agreed that it should develop improved performance evaluation criteria for individual task orders . however , hcfa pointed out that it has already identified some performance measures in several task orders , such as the statistical analysis center and the comprehensive error rate task orders . we described the performance measures used on these two task orders in our draft report and believe that they represent positive steps . however , as we noted , the majority of the task orders still lack clearly defined performance evaluation criteria . hcfa also said that we should recognize that there are two different methods for evaluating contractor performance — a basic approach that assesses general performance in areas such as quality or timeliness and performance - based contracting which focuses more on outcome than on process . hcfa said we should discuss the two methods it is using for the psc task orders . regardless of which method is used , an effective evaluation of contractor performance depends on the development of well - defined performance measures and standards . our report recognizes both the difficulty of developing these criteria and hcfa's initial efforts to do so . as we noted in our report , most of the performance dimensions hcfa has developed thus far are not well defined and lack measurable standards . we believe that hcfa will not be able to effectively evaluate the pscs until it develops clearly defined performance criteria . finally , hcfa took issue with our statement that it lacks clear goals and objectives for the pscs .