turkey . uscirf recommended turkey for cpc designation for the first time in 2012 , but according to state officials , state did not agree with the recommendation . the ambassador and uscirf had both traveled to turkey in the previous 3 years . uzbekistan . state had designated uzbekistan as a cpc for several years and had waived sanctions against it . the ambassador had traveled to uzbekistan in the last year . vietnam . state had funded an international religious freedom program in the country . state removed vietnam from the cpc list in 2006 , making it one of only two countries that state had ever removed from the cpc list . the ambassador had traveled there in the last year . while in each country , we interviewed state embassy officials , including the u.s . ambassador to the country and the international religious freedom officer . we also interviewed representatives from host governments , ngos , and religious communities . in two countries we visited , we also met with officials from third - country embassies . to address our first objective , we reviewed the provisions of the act and identified the primary responsibilities that the act established for state . we also analyzed state documents , including cables , grant materials , state's annual international religious freedom report , the 2003 state inspector general's report of inspection: bureau for democracy , human rights and labor , and the inspector general's 2005 compliance follow - up review on the bureau for democracy , human rights and labor . we also met with state officials , including staff from the office of international religious freedom , all three ambassadors - at - large for international religious freedom — two former and one present — and senior level officials such as an assistant secretary and two under secretaries in washington , d.c. we requested that state provide us with cables to demonstrate the type of activities it undertook from january 2009 through october 2012 to ( 1 ) promote or improve international religious freedom and ( 2 ) document international religious freedom issues . state provided us with 183 unclassified cables , five of which were duplicates . state also identified more than 100 additional classified cables that pertained to cpcs , but state did not provide those cables to us in time for us to analyze them for this report . this analysis does not provide a full list of all religious freedom – related activities that state conducted worldwide during this time period , because ( 1 ) not all activities are reported in cables ; ( 2 ) state may not have located all the relevant cables sent during this time period ; and ( 3 ) we did not receive the classified cables in time for us to analyze them for this report . see appendix iii for a summary of our analysis of the cables . in response to our request that state identify all of its grants related to international religious freedom , state provided us with a list of 27 grants that it had grouped either globally or by region of the world .