( see fig . between 2007 and 2009 , a financial crisis in the u.s. subprime mortgage market gradually extended to other developed countries and became a global financial crisis , which in turn generated a global economic crisis impacting developed and developing countries — including lics — with varying degrees of intensity . prior to , and partly in parallel with the financial crisis , global food and fuel prices increased sharply between mid - 2007 and mid - 2008 . in some cases this exacerbated the impact of the financial crisis and some governments banned food exports . although international food and fuel prices dropped precipitously as the global financial crisis unfolded in late 2008 , they have resurged to record highs again in 2011 , igniting concerns about a repeat of the 2008 food crisis and its negative impact on poor people in developing countries , particularly lics . ifis and global leaders have launched a coordinated international response to the crises . in march 2009 , the world bank announced a comprehensive crises response framework that could channel additional donor contributions to poor countries to bolster ongoing world bank activities . to help ensure that ifis would have sufficient resources to respond to the crises , in april 2009 the group of twenty ( g - 20 ) world leaders committed to measures designed to increase ifi resources available to lics , including through voluntary bilateral contributions to the world bank's crises response framework . the g - 20 also endorsed the imf's intention to increase financing for lics , including from resources derived from proceeds of imf gold sales . lics , the majority of which are in sub - saharan africa , comprised a population of about 810 million people at the outset of the crises in 2007 . most lics depend to some extent upon imports of food and fuel , and about half are classified as fragile states challenged by weak capacity , poor governance , political instability , ongoing violence or the legacy of past conflict , as shown in fig . according to ifis , these factors can render countries vulnerable to crises driven by fluctuations in international food and fuel prices . online , hover over a country name in the table for more information . for print version , see appendix ii , page 53 . in food - importing countries , imports of basic foodstuffs outweighed exports over the past 3 years , according to the un food and agriculture organization . we define net energy consumers as those countries for which net energy production was less than consumption in 2009 . the world bank uses the term “fragile” to refer to countries with particularly weak policies and institutions , as well as those with the presence of a un or regional peace - keeping or peace - building mission during the past 3 years . the world bank and imf provide financial and technical assistance to member countries . two world bank institutions — ida and ifc — assist lics . ida , the primary world bank financer to lics , provides no - interest loans and grants to eligible countries that have limited or no access to international credit markets .