iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . second attempt to create an oil for food program . iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . what precluded the sanctions committee from taking action ? who assessed the reasonableness of prices for commodity contracts negotiated between the iraqi government and suppliers and what actions were taken ? how were prices for commodities assessed for reasonableness under fast - track procedures ? much of the information on surcharges on oil sales and illicit commissions on commodity contracts is with the iraqi ministries in baghdad and national purchasers and suppliers . we did not have access to this data to verify the various allegations of corruption associated with these transactions . subsequent investigations of the oil for food program should include a statistical sampling of these transactions to more accurately document the extent of corruption and the identities of companies and countries that engaged in illicit transactions . this information would provide a basis for restoring those assets to the iraqi government . subsequent evaluations and audits should also consider an analysis of the lessons learned from the oil for food program and how future humanitarian programs of this nature should be structured to ensure that funds are spent on intended beneficiaries and projects . for example , analysts may wish to review the codes of conduct developed for the cpa's oil for food coordination center and suppliers . in addition , u.n. specialized agencies implemented the program in the northern governorates while the program in central and southern iraq was run by the central government in baghdad . a comparison of these two approaches could provide insight on the extent to which the operations were transparent and the program delivered goods and services to the iraqi people . evolving policy and implementation decisions on the food distribution system and the worsening security situation have affected the movement of food commodities within iraq . as a result , warehouse stocks are low , and iraq has less than a month's supply of several food items , including staple grains , and no buffer stock . the food distribution system created a dependency on food subsidies that disrupted private food markets . the cpa has taken steps , such as appointing inspectors general , to strengthen accountability measures in iraq's ministries . the cpa's failed plans to privatize the food ration system and delayed negotiations with wfp on food procurement and distribution resulted in diminished stocks of food commodities and localized shortages in early 2004 . the cpa administrator discussed eliminating iraq's food distribution system and providing recipients with cash payments based on plans submitted to the cpa in summer 2003 that asserted that the system was expensive and depressed the agricultural sector . as a result , the ministry of trade began drawing down existing inventories of food . in december 2003 , as the security environment worsened , the administrator decided not to reform the ration system . in january 2004 , the cpa negotiated a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with wfp and the ministry of trade that committed wfp to procuring a 3-month buffer food stock by march 31 , 2004 , and assuming the delivery of food to hub warehouses inside iraq through june 2004 .