some networks have consolidated some revenue operations . networks and facilities have also used contracting , but these contracting efforts have primarily been small - scale and aimed at addressing immediate problems . few facilities have contracted out an entire process of revenue operations . ( see table 2. ) ( see fig . va expected its collections to increase as a result of its reasonable charges billing system , which was implemented in september 1999 . under this system , va began using itemized billing for the services provided — rather than charging flat fees , as it had done prior to 1999 . according to a va analysis , in the first 8 months of fiscal year 2001 , va treated about the same number of patients but collected 34 percent more dollars than the comparable period in fiscal year 1999 before reasonable charges were implemented . although the implementation of the reasonable charges billing system has increased va's collections over the past year , va faces a number of long - standing problems in managing its revenue operations . in addition , va's collections performance falls short of private sector benchmarks . inadequate intake procedures , lack of sufficient physician documentation , shortage of qualified coders , and insufficient automation diminish va's collections . patient intake: to determine which veterans have insurance , va must rely on voluntary disclosure of insurance by veterans . nationally , va bills insurers for only 16 percent of patients treated but reports that substantial numbers of veterans have probably not disclosed their insurance . medical documentation: about 74 percent of surveyed facilities reported that weaknesses in physicians' documentation of care for billing purposes limits collections . one official was concerned that his facility could not meet its timeliness goal unless clinical staff provided more timely documentation for billing . he also noted that not all billable care could be charged to insurers because of incomplete or insufficient documentation . a va contractor this year estimated that va could collect $459 million more nationally if physicians' oversight of resident physicians was properly documented . however , the contractor also found that some physicians were concerned that spending more time on documenting care for billing purposes would take away from the time spent with patients . coding: va has acknowledged its difficulty maintaining sufficient staff who can correctly code medical procedures and services for billing . a 2000 study also found these problems and attributed them to competition from other employers for coders , low va entry - level wages , and va's frequent problems with retaining and promoting qualified and proficient staff . at three sites we visited , for example , revenue officials noted that they had difficulties hiring experienced coders at va salaries . billing: a va - sponsored 2001 study of the possible uses of commercial software found limitations in va's current billing software that led to manual processes . as a result , there is an increased probability of errors , slower production , and lower collections . a contractor who provided services to both va and private sector hospitals also told us that va's process for creating bills and identifying errors is less automated than the private sector .