we have modified the report to reflect dod's decision . this resulted in the reconfiguration of planning and implementation schedules . air force officials also stated that they had begun to develop performance measures to assess impact when a new dod effort to establish a secure , joint information environment was put in place . therefore , the air force had to adjust their implementation plans and postpone the development of their measures to ensure actions taken on this initiative conformed to the new dod requirement . while the focus of dod's effort was to quickly identify funds that could be reinvested into other higher priority programs , military department and socom officials explained that because the initial effort to identify efficiency initiatives occurred late at the end of the cycle they used to build their fiscal year 2012 budget submission , their effort focused on tracking savings targets and not on developing measures to evaluate impact . in the subsequent budget cycles that included the mdur initiatives , the focus remained on identifying areas for reductions in spending . dod officials agreed that additional measures could be useful to evaluate impacts — beyond savings — of their efficiency initiatives . our prior work concluded that such measures can assist managers in determining whether desired outcomes were being achieved or if adjustments were needed , such as in the scope of the initiative or to the nature or timing of implementation actions . without a systematic way to evaluate the impact of its efficiency initiatives , dod is limited in its ability to assess whether the efficiency initiatives have improved the effectiveness or efficiency of its programs and activities . over the past few years , in light of mounting fiscal pressures , dod has continued to identify and implement efficiency initiatives with certain goals in mind , including achieving cost savings and seeking opportunities to enhance the efficiency or effectiveness of its programs and activities . dod's recent efforts to refine its approach for tracking and reporting on its current efficiency initiatives has the potential for providing greater oversight to decision makers on progress of the military departments and socom on the status of their implementation efforts . however , its efforts to date do not sufficiently ensure that leaders have the information they need to fully assess the impact these initiatives are having on dod's programs and activities . having a systematic way to evaluate the impact of its efficiency initiatives beyond cost savings could provide dod the ability to determine whether or not its initiatives are improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs and activities while also achieving savings . such information could also inform dod as to whether actions are needed to make adjustments to the scope of any given initiative and related programmatic actions necessary for implementation . to enhance dod's ability to determine whether its efficiency initiatives are having the desired effect of improving efficiency and effectiveness , we recommend that the secretary of defense require the military departments and socom to develop approaches for evaluating the impact of their efficiency initiatives , such as establishing performance measures or other indicators , collecting related performance information , and using this information to measure progress in achieving intended outcomes associated with their initiatives until implemented .