icann does not fund the operation of the root servers . figure 3 illustrates this example . within the root zone , one of the servers is designated the authoritative root ( or the “a root” server ) . the authoritative root server maintains the master copy of the file that identifies all top - level domains , called the “root zone file,” and redistributes it to the other 12 servers . currently , the authoritative root server is located in herndon , virginia . in total , 10 of the 13 root servers are located in the united states , including 3 operated by agencies of the u.s. government . instead , they are supported by the efforts of individual administrators and their sponsoring organizations . table 1 lists the operator and location of each root server . because much of the early research on internetworking was funded by the department of defense ( dod ) , many of the rules for connecting networks were developed and implemented under dod sponsorship . for example , dod funding supported the efforts of the late dr. jon postel , an internet pioneer working at the university of southern california , to develop and coordinate the domain name system . dr. postel originally tracked the names and numbers assigned to each computer . he also oversaw the operation of the root servers , and edited and published the documents that tracked changes in internet protocols . collectively , these functions became known as the internet assigned numbers authority , commonly referred to as iana . federal support for the development of the internet was also provided through the national science foundation , which funded a network designed for academic institutions . two developments helped the internet evolve from a small , text - based research network into the interactive medium we know today . first , in 1990 , the development of the world wide web and associated programs called browsers made it easier to view text and graphics together , sparking interest of users outside of academia . then , in 1992 , the congress enacted legislation for the national science foundation to allow commercial traffic on its network . following these developments , the number of computers connected to the internet grew dramatically . in response to the growth of commercial sites on the internet , the national science foundation entered into a 5-year cooperative agreement in january 1993 with network solutions , inc. , to take over the jobs of registering new , nonmilitary domain names , including those ending in .com , .net , and .org , and running the authoritative root server . at first , the foundation provided the funding to support these functions . as demand for domain names grew , the foundation allowed network solutions to charge an annual fee of $50 for each name registered . controversy surrounding this fee was one of the reasons the united states government began its efforts to privatize the management of the domain name system . working under funding provided by the department of defense , a group led by drs . paul mockapetris and jon postel creates the domain name system for locating networked computers by name instead of by number .