pub . 111-383 ยง 323 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( 2011 ) . military departments because together they constituted the majority of in - sourcing actions in fiscal year 2010 . for the purposes of this review , we selected a non - probability sample of commands from each military service , which included at a minimum the largest two commands in each service by volume of in - sourcing actions in fiscal year 2010 . the sample of commands is not generalizable to all military department major commands . to determine the process dod used to prepare the report and the extent to which the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and the military departments assured themselves of the reliability of the data , we reviewed our prior work on standards for internal control in the federal government . we also reviewed dod - issued guidance on the in - sourcing process , and met with officials in ousd ( p&r ) responsible for preparing the report , as well as representatives of each of the three military departments responsible for compiling data for the report . we analyzed the data contained in the report to identify patterns in the in - sourcing actions of the military departments , and met with representatives of each military department and the selected major commands to identify the reasons for those patterns . we used these data to portray the distribution of in - sourcing actions across the military departments and other dod agencies , as well as the distribution of in - sourcing rationales in the military services and within certain major commands . although we found issues with some of the command - level data , such as some erroneously reported in - sourcing rationales , and are making a recommendation to this effect , we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing broad percentages about in - sourcing actions . to determine the extent to which dod's fiscal year 2010 in - sourcing decisions were aligned with the department's recent strategic workforce plans , we reviewed dod guidance on in - sourcing implementation and our prior work on strategic workforce planning , as well as office of personnel management standards for assessing human capital planning . in addition , we compared information reflecting dod's fiscal year 2010 in - sourcing decisions with its fiscal year 2009 update to its 2006-2010 strategic workforce plans.responsible for preparing both the in - sourcing report and the strategic workforce plans , as well as officials in the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics' office of human capital initiatives , to determine what steps were taken to align in - sourcing efforts with strategic workforce plans . we also interviewed officials in ousd ( p&r ) we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 to february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .