as a result , some users did not receive the correct training . the army also faced challenges in its ability to deliver training as close as possible to the date of implementation because of the decentralized execution strategy at each deployment site . in order to prepare users , the army used a master training calendar and standard training curriculum . although this training was standardized across the second deployment sites , execution of lmp implementation was decentralized . additionally , lmp program management officials stated that they had developed changes to their testing strategy and that tests are scheduled to begin in may 2010 . lmp program management officials also stated that they intended to conduct selective testing using actual depot - specific data and that this testing is scheduled to begin in august 2010 . however , according to lmp program management officials , the exact processes to be tested and the materials associated with supporting the tests have yet to be developed . with respect to training , lmp program management officials told us that the training for the third deployment will be conducted by a cadre of personnel from each of the major deployment sites , and that members of this cadre would both serve as instructors to users at the locations as well as assist sites with implementing lmp . lmp program management officials stated that they were in the process of completing instruction for the cadre of trainers , and that lmp users had already begun receiving instruction on the lmp process . during a meeting with dod and army officials , a representative from one of the sites preparing for the third deployment stated that while the instructors had changed from contractors to the cadre of trainers , lmp users were still being taught with the same training materials from the second deployment . additionally , according to the army's schedule for the third deployment of lmp , the army plans to update training for users in june 2010 and begin delivery of training to users in july 2010 . accordingly , because these events have yet to occur , we were unable to determine whether they adequately addressed the issues we identified during the second deployment related to data testing and training . implementation of enterprise resource planning systems , like lmp , is a complex endeavor , and based on the second lmp deployment , the army has improved its ability to manage implementation . because the army improved its management processes based on lessons learned during the first deployment of lmp at tobyhanna army depot , the army was successful in mitigating some of the previous issues . furthermore , the second deployment of lmp also demonstrated the potential to provide benefits for the army , such as providing better visibility of inventory and asset management . however , despite the improvements and the benefits that were achieved , the deployment sites still faced challenges related to data quality and training , which limited their ability to use lmp as intended . additionally , the army's lack of a comprehensive set of performance metrics prevented it from measuring whether the intended lmp functionality had been achieved at the depots .