this appendix has two main sections . the first presents additional information about estimated station expenditures in the areas of staffing , ppe , and personnel retention in fiscal year 2003 , and the second contains additional information about the changes that occurred between fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . using a combination of estimated and actual expenditure data , we determined that estimated fiscal year 2003 costs for staffing , ppe , and personnel retention efforts at stations amounted to at least $291 million . the coast guard could not provide us with the actual amount of fiscal year 2003 appropriation funds spent on station staffing because the agency's automated databases do not fully identify personnel expenditures at the station level . however , using a combination of budget and personnel data , officials were able to estimate that in fiscal year 2003 the coast guard incurred costs of $277.6 million to support 5,474 active duty station personnel . this estimate does not include costs for the 1,657 reserve personnel assigned to stations in fiscal year 2003 , nor does it include the costs of volunteer auxiliary personnel who assisted in station operations during the year . the coast guard did not calculate estimated expenditures for reservists because of the complex and labor - intensive nature of the analysis . coast guard officials determined that the agency spent approximately $7.5 million in fiscal year 2003 on ppe for station personnel . as shown in table 2 , the cost of a total basic ppe outfit in fiscal year 2003 was $1,296 . the cost of a cold weather ppe outfit , which is used by personnel working at stations where the outdoor temperature falls below 50 degrees fahrenheit , was $1,431 . ( figure 1 shows a station crew member in cold weather ppe. ) a may 2002 coast guard commandant directive emphasized the importance of proper supplies and use of ppe as one of the top priorities of coast guard management . in this directive , the commandant cited an internal research report that attributed 20 percent of the total risk facing boat personnel to exposure to extreme weather conditions . the directive also states that the use of appropriately maintained ppe could improve coast guard's operational capability . the coast guard provided data demonstrating how it promotes personnel retention through a variety of direct and indirect incentives . direct incentives include financial benefits that personally benefit the individual , while indirect incentives include projects , such as facility improvements , that may indirectly contribute to retention by increasing staff morale . coast guard officials provided expenditure data for selected direct incentives provided to station personnel in fiscal year 2003 because officials could not quantify the total amount of funds expended on direct incentives . likewise , the total amount expended on indirect incentives cannot be readily identified because of the numerous and varied nature of the efforts . coast guard's direct financial incentives include selective reenlistment bonuses . during fiscal year 2003 , the coast guard spent $5.9 million on 312 selective reenlistment bonuses for station personnel — $4.2 million of this went to boatswain's mates while the remaining $1.7 million went to machinery technicians .