medigap . about one - quarter of medicare's beneficiaries have medigap , the only supplemental coverage option available to all beneficiaries when they initially enroll in medicare . prior to 1992 , insurers were free to establish the benefits for medigap policies . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra 1990 ) required that beginning in 1992 , medigap policies be standardized , and obra authorized 10 different benefit packages , known as plans a through j , that insurers could offer . the most popular medigap policy is plan f , which covers medicare coinsurance and deductibles , but not prescription drugs . it had an average annual premium per person of about $1,200 in 1999 , although in some cases plan f cost twice that amount . among the least popular medigap policies are those offering prescription drug coverage . these policies are the most expensive of the 10 standard policies — they averaged about $1,600 in 1999 , and some cost over $5,000 . beneficiaries with these policies pay most of the cost of drugs because the medigap drug benefit has a deductible and high cost sharing and does not reimburse policyholders for drug expenses above a set limit . dod provides health care to active - duty military personnel and retirees , and to eligible dependents and survivors through its tricare program . prior to 2001 , retirees lost most of their military health coverage when they turned age 65 , although they could still use mtfs when space was available , and they could obtain prescription drugs without charge from mtf pharmacies . in the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 ( ndaa 2001 ) , congress established two new benefits to supplement military retirees' medicare coverage: pharmacy benefit . effective april 1 , 2001 , military retirees age 65 and over were given access to prescription drugs through tricare's national mail order pharmacy ( nmop ) and civilian pharmacies . retirees make lower copayments for prescription drugs purchased through nmop than at civilian pharmacies . retirees continue to have access to free prescription drugs at mtf pharmacies . for retirees age 65 and over , fehbp supplements medicare , paying beneficiaries' medicare deductibles and coinsurance in addition to paying some costs not covered by medicare , such as part of the cost of prescription drugs . over two - thirds of fehbp policyholders are in national plans ; the remainder are in local plans . national plans include plans that are available to all civilian employees and retirees as well as plans that are available only to particular groups , for example , foreign service employees . in the fehbp , the largest national plan is blue cross blue shield , accounting for about 45 percent of those insured by an fehbp plan . other national plans account for about 24 percent of insured individuals . the national plans are all preferred provider organizations ( ppo ) in which enrollees use doctors , hospitals , and other providers that belong to the plan's network , but are allowed to use providers outside of the network for an additional cost .