state's plan . almost all states limit tax benefits to the account owners , but one state extends those benefits to grandparents , aunts , and uncles who contribute to the plan . officials in some states we interviewed said they provide additional tax benefits , for example , one state offers an exemption from the state inheritance tax . others allow contribution amounts that exceed the annual deduction limit to be carried over to the following year's return . we provided a draft of this report to education , treasury , and irs for comment . the agencies provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of education , secretary of the treasury , commissioner of internal revenue , relevant congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at sagerm@gao.gov or 202-512-6806 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our review examined: ( 1 ) the percentage and characteristics of families enrolling in 529 plans , ( 2 ) the plan features and other factors that affect participation in 529 plans , and ( 3 ) the extent to which savings in 529 plans affect financial aid awards . to answer these research objectives , we analyzed government data ; interviewed state 529 plan officials from select states as well as industry representatives and academic experts ; reviewed plan documents and analyzed industry data ; conducted a literature review ; interviewed federal , state , and institutional financial aid officials ; and reviewed department of education ( education ) and internal revenue service ( irs ) documents as well as relevant federal laws , regulations and guidance . we assessed the reliability of the data we used by reviewing documentation , interviewing knowledgeable officials , and conducting electronic testing on relevant data fields . we found the data we reviewed reliable for the purposes of our analyses . we conducted this performance audit from november 2011 to december 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to determine the percentage and characteristics of families enrolling in 529 plans , we reviewed data from the 2010 survey of consumer finances ( scf ) ; the 2007-2008 national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas ) ; and 2007-2010 statistics of income ( soi ) federal tax data .