no such study has been done . another reason for uncertainty about the full impacts of a strike on a community is that the impact of a strike on passengers' travel decisions is often unknown . for example , while more than 100 communities lost comair service to and from cincinnati during the strike , all of these communities had service to cincinnati from another airline . what has been the impact of airline strikes on communities ? what have been the impacts of the length of negotiations and the occurrence of nonstrike work actions on passengers ? in addition to these questions , you also requested information on states using binding and last offer arbitration for essential employees and the number of times congress has intervened in railroad labor negotiations in the last 25 years . see appendix i for data on states using binding arbitration and congressional interventions in railroad negotiations . to determine the trends of labor negotiations , we analyzed data on negotiations , strikes , and nonstrike work actions from airlines , labor unions , the national mediation board ( nmb ) , industry groups , and academic experts . we also interviewed officials with major u.s. airlines , labor unions , the nmb , industry groups , and academic experts . to determine the impact of strikes on communities , we reviewed available published studies from academics and other experts , and we analyzed data on airline schedules . to determine the impact of nonstrike work actions , we defined such actions as those in which airlines obtained either temporary restraining orders or injunctions against unions to prevent various actions . we then analyzed data from the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) on airline operational performance and passenger service . except where noted , all data collected were current as of december 2002 . because of various data limitations , our analyses are restricted to major u.s. passenger airlines . we did not evaluate the efficacy or effectiveness of the railway labor act or the impact of any possible changes to the act . appendix ii contains a more complete description of our scope and methodology . all the major airlines have some union representation of at least part of their labor force . the various crafts or classes that unions typically represent include pilots , flight attendants , mechanics , and dispatchers . sometimes unions also represent customer service agents and clerical workers , aircraft and baggage handling personnel , and flight instructors . the extent of unionization among the major carriers varies significantly . at delta , unions represent the pilots and two small employee groups ; at southwest , on the other hand , unions represent 10 different employee groups . different unions may represent a given employee craft or class at different airlines . for example , the air line pilots association ( alpa ) represents pilots at united , but the allied pilots association represents american pilots . table 1 summarizes the representation of different crafts or classes at the major airlines . in general , airline labor contracts include three major elements: wages , benefits , and work rules .