some deficient bridge projects can be cost - prohibitive . some state officials explained that certain large - scale bridge projects — often the most traveled , urban bridges on interstate corridors — are too expensive to be implemented with hbp funds alone , especially costly “mega” projects that have an estimated total cost greater than $500 million . state dots use a variety of criteria , tools , and methods to select among potential bridge projects . officials in the six states we visited use criteria such as bridge condition ratings , average daily traffic over bridges , local transportation priorities , or funding availability when prioritizing and selecting among potential bridge projects . some states have also developed tools and approaches beyond those required by the hbp — such as bridge management systems , element - level inspections , state - specific condition ratings , and various prioritization approaches — to help them gauge bridge conditions and further inform their selection of bridge projects for funding . for example , all of the states we visited have adopted , or are considering , some form of bridge management system for gathering and analyzing bridge data to help manage their bridge assets and more efficiently allocate limited hbp resources among competing bridge priorities . states use these systems to predict future bridge conditions , estimate bridge maintenance and improvement needs , determine optimal policies for rehabilitation and replacement , and recommend projects and schedules within budget and policy constraints . fhwa has actively encouraged , but has not required , states to use bridge management systems , in part , by providing state transportation officials with relevant training and technical support . we believe that the evidence obtained meets these standards . bridge safety first emerged as a high - priority issue in the united states in the 1960s , following the collapse of the silver bridge between ohio and west virginia , which killed 46 people . that collapse prompted national concerns about bridge conditions and safety and highlighted the need to repair and replace bridges before they collapse . congress responded by establishing two major federal bridge programs: ( 1 ) the national bridge inspection program ( nbip ) to ensure periodic safety inspection of bridges and ( 2 ) what is now known as the hbp to provide a funding mechanism to assist states in replacing and rehabilitating bridges . both of these programs generally define applicable bridges as publicly owned , over 20 feet in length , and located on public roads . although the nbip and hbp are separate programs , they are linked by the data collected through bridge inspections . for example , bridge information gathered through nbip inspections is one factor used to determine the amount of hbp funding apportioned to states . the nbip establishes federal standards , known as the national bridge inspection standards , and program requirements for the proper safety inspection and evaluation of bridges . these standards establish by whom , with what frequency , and how bridge inspections are to be completed .