gao - 03-95 . ( see fig . is applied to... is applied to... an executive who performed the job of a “manager,” the least senior executive position , and had “met” some commitments contained in his or her performance agreement received a performance award of 2.5% of base pay . an executive who performed the job of an “assistant deputy minister,” the second most senior executive position , and had “exceeded” commitments contained in his or her performance agreement received a performance award of 15% of base pay . effective performance management requires the organization's leadership to make meaningful distinctions between acceptable and outstanding performance of individuals and to appropriately reward those who perform at the highest level . in doing so , performance management systems in high - performing organizations typically seek to achieve three key objectives: ( 1 ) they strive to provide candid and constructive feedback to help individuals maximize their contribution and potential in understanding and realizing the goals and objectives of the organization , ( 2 ) they seek to provide management with the objective and fact - based information it needs to reward top performers , and ( 3 ) they provide the necessary information and documentation to deal with poor performers . we reported that irs recognizes that it is still working at implementing an effective performance management system that makes meaningful distinctions in senior executive performance . tsa agreed with this recommendation . we reported in september 2002 that some agencies set targets for individual performance that were linked to organizational goals . for example , the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) identified targets with specific levels of performance for senior executives that were explicitly linked to vba's priorities for fiscal year 2001 and the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) strategic goals for fiscal years 2001 to 2006 . this dialogue began prior to the system's rollout and continued through initial implementation during which the association was actively involved in collecting feedback from executives as well as making recommendations . for example , as part of an assessment of canada's performance management program , based on consultations the association had with its membership after the first year of the program , the association identified several issues needing further attention , including the need to provide executives with additional guidance on how to develop their individual performance agreements , particularly with regard to identifying and selecting different types of performance commitments . this recommendation and others were shared with the government , and the official performance management program guidance issued the following year incorporated these concerns . the experience of successful cultural transformations and change management initiatives in large public and private organizations suggests that it can often take 5 to 7 years until such initiatives are fully implemented and cultures are transformed in a substantial manner . because this time frame can easily outlast the tenures of top political appointees , high - performing organizations recognize that they need to reinforce accountability for organizational goals during times of leadership transitions through the use of performance agreements as part of their performance management systems .