however , the pilot does not include any energy commodities . energy commodities are bought and sold on both the physical and financial markets . the physical market includes the spot market where products such as crude oil or gasoline are bought and sold for immediate or near - term delivery by producers , wholesalers , and retailers . spot transactions take place between commercial participants for a particular energy product for immediate delivery at a specific location . for example , the u.s. spot market for west texas intermediate crude oil is the pipeline hub near cushing , oklahoma , while a major spot market for natural gas operates at the henry hub near erath , louisiana . the prices set in the specific spot markets provide a reference point that buyers and sellers use to set the price for other types of the commodity traded at other locations . in addition to the spot markets , derivatives based on energy commodities are traded in financial markets . the value of the derivative contract depends on the performance of the underlying asset — for example , crude oil or natural gas . derivatives include futures , options , and swaps . energy futures include standardized exchange - traded contracts for future delivery of a specific crude oil , heating oil , natural gas , or gasoline product at a particular spot market location . for example , some traders , such as commodity index pools , use the futures markets to hedge commodity index positions they hold in the otc market . however , these traders also may have positions in the physical markets , which means the reports that ctfc receives on market activities , which do not include such off - exchange transactions , may not present an accurate picture of all positions in the market place for the commodity . some market participants and observers have concluded that large purchases of oil futures contracts by speculators could have created an additional demand for oil that could lead to higher prices . conversely , some federal agencies and other market observers took the position that speculative trading activity did not have a significant impact on prices . for example , an april 2005 cftc study of the markets concluded that increased trading by speculative traders , including hedge funds , did not lead to higher energy prices or volatility . this study also argued that hedge funds provided increased liquidity to the market and dampened volatility . still others told us that while speculative trading in the futures market could contribute to short - term price movements in the physical markets , they did not believe it was possible to sustain a speculative “bubble” over time , because the two markets were linked and both responded to information about changes in supply and demand caused by such factors as the weather or geographical events . in the view of these observers and market participants , speculation could not lead to artificially high or low prices over a long period .