modify selection criteria . both the reauthorization bills propose eliminating tifia's selection criteria and adding to the current eligibility requirements . 7 would expand eligibility requirements to include creditworthiness , regional significance , beneficial effects , and project readiness.eligibility requirements . measures to address program performance . project sponsors and advisors we interviewed said they would prefer more transparency in the evaluation of lois and a better explanation of how selection criteria are applied . several project sponsors and advisors expressed concern about the definitions of some criteria — in particular , the livability and sustainability clarifications — as well as how the criteria are applied to lois . however , altering or eliminating the selection criteria could modify the nature of the tifia program , changing it from a discretionary program where select projects receive assistance to more of an eligibility - based program where all eligible , creditworthy projects can receive assistance . dot supports retaining the statutory criteria to use in selecting projects to receive credit assistance . in this way , the tifia program would continue to provide assistance to projects that meet dot's national transportation goals . dot officials added that just because a project is creditworthy does not ensure that it will have positive transportation benefits . further , modifying or eliminating the selection criteria could be implemented in several ways , each entailing different trade - offs . importantly , returning to an open application cycle removes the competitive nature of the tifia program . if the tifia program's authorized budget authority remains at current levels or does not meet total demand , a project's order in line would determine whether it receives assistance , not its relative merit . further , if this option were adopted , dot would have to reconsider its current two - step selection process and determine the extent to which it has the discretion to distribute assistance based on geographic location , project readiness , or other factors not included in the statutory eligibility requirements . until recently , the innovative credit assistance offered by the tifia program to finance the construction of large - scale surface transportation projects was underutilized . however , demand for the program surged , in part because of the tightening of commercial credit markets and low federal treasury interest rates . tifia is increasingly becoming a more recognized approach for filling funding and financing gaps for complex transportation projects that can help to mitigate mobility and other transportation issues in many congested urban areas in the united states . dot , project sponsors , legal and financial advisors , and other stakeholders in the transportation industry have expressed strong support for the program , and members of congress have recently developed several reauthorization proposals aimed at greatly increasing the authorized budget authority for the program and modifying other aspects of the program to make it more accessible . dot has taken some steps to monitor and assess the program through its project oversight and credit monitoring of individual tifia credit agreements and , early in the program's tenure , by tracking and reporting on the private investment and leveraging effect of tifia to gauge its progress in meeting program goals .