information . acquiring information about how to start or maintain an asset management program was another challenge for small utilities that state srf and usda officials cited . for example , officials with a small water utility in new mexico said that the town leadership was unaware of asset management prior to applying for an infrastructure loan through a state program . funding . state srf and usda officials we interviewed said that small water utilities have difficulty obtaining funds or anticipate they will have difficulty obtaining funds to cover the start - up and maintenance costs associated with asset management . in describing challenges with funding asset management , for example , officials with a small water utility in new mexico told us that the utility did not have the funds to pay an engineering firm to develop the needed additional gis maps with the locations of their assets and would have to apply to a state infrastructure grant program for an additional $50,000 . human resources . according to the state srf and usda officials we interviewed , small water utilities do not have human resources to dedicate to asset management . for example , officials with a small water utility we visited in maine said that , at the time of our review , the maine department of transportation was completing a major road project in the state that affected the buried pipes for multiple communities , including the one in which this utility operated . these utility officials said that work on these pipes in addition to the routine day - to - day responsibilities of operating the utility left the small staff little time to work on asset management . similarly , an official with another small water utility in maine told us that one staff person was assigned to develop an inventory of the water utility's assets , and that finding the time was the greatest constraint to completing the inventory , coordinating with operations and maintenance staff , and implementing additional asset management practices . as a result , it took some time for the water utility operator and the utility's board to understand the asset management concept and implement the activities required as part of the state's loan program . political support . according to some of the state srf and usda officials we interviewed , small water utilities are challenged with garnering and maintaining the political support of elected officials and the local community to begin or maintain an asset management program or increase user rates or expend funds on repairs as a result of implementing an asset management program . for example , an official with a small water utility said that the town's council was supportive of the recommendations the utility operator made regarding the likelihood of failure for assets and the need to address those assets before they failed . however , the town council did not always implement the recommendations because , among other things , they said they wanted to avoid having to raise user rates to cover the costs .