ii. ) in commenting on our draft report and its recommendation to nsf , opm indicated that it would , as part of a revision of its ipa program guidance , reemphasize for all federal agencies the importance of establishing mechanisms to assess the program's success . ( see app . iii. ) as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate house and senate committees and subcommittees ; interested members of the congress ; the director , nsf ; the director , opm ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you have any questions or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . concerning the external intergovernmental personnel act's ( ipa ) mobility program , we were asked to provide information on ( 1 ) the national science foundation's ( nsf ) use of the program , ( 2 ) the nsf program's compliance with applicable laws and regulations , ( 3 ) the program's costs to nsf and its partnering institutions , and ( 4 ) the benefits that nsf has identified from participating in the program . to obtain information on nsf's use of the program , we interviewed the nsf officials responsible for implementing the agency's ipa program . we reviewed the program files for each nsf employee who had participated in the external ipa program from january 1995 through december 2000 . we systematically collected data on each external ipa assignment to facilitate our analysis . we also reviewed our past reports and testimony that relate to the ipa program . to determine how nsf's ipa program compared to those of other federal agencies , we analyzed the office of personnel management's ( opm ) database on governmentwide participation in the program for fiscal year 2000 . although we performed certain data reliability tests of the database and , working with opm , corrected numerous inconsistencies or errors in participation data that agencies had reported to opm , we did not verify the accuracy of the opm data . in estimating the average percentage of external ipa salary costs paid by federal agencies , we were unable to include data for the department of veterans affairs' program because that department did not provide data to opm in accordance with opm's instructions for coding incoming and external assignments . to assess compliance with applicable laws and regulations , we interviewed the opm officials who are responsible for developing governmentwide regulations and policies for the ipa program . we also interviewed officials from the general services administration's travel management policy staff who are responsible for travel regulations applicable to the program . we reviewed applicable legislation , regulations , manuals and handbooks , and other materials relating to the ipa program .