gao - 04-839t . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2004 . this action is still pending . in our report , we state that although the task force has taken positive steps toward addressing issues associated with enforcing the laws on personal imports , it has not fully developed a strategic framework that would allow the task force to address many of the challenges we identify in this report . our review showed that the task force has already begun to establish some elements of a strategic framework , but not others . for example , the commissioner's january 2004 memo laid out the purpose of the task force and why it was created . however , it has not defined the scope of the problem it is trying to address because , as discussed earlier , cbp and fda have yet to develop a way to estimate the volume of imported prescription drugs entering specific international mail and carrier facilities . in addition , while the task force and individual working groups have goals that state what they are trying to achieve , the task force has not established milestones and performance measures to gauge results . furthermore , the task force has not addressed the issue of what its efforts will cost so that it can target resources and investments , balancing risk reduction with costs and considering task force members' other law enforcement priorities . instead , according to a cbp official , working group projects are done on an ad hoc basis wherein resources are designated for specific operations . carrying out enforcement efforts that involve multiple agencies with varying jurisdictions is not an easy task , especially since agencies have limited resources and often conflicting priorities . according to our report , the challenges we identify could be more effectively addressed by using a strategic framework that more clearly defines the scope of the problem by estimating the volume of drugs entering international mail and carrier facilities , establishes milestones and performance measures , determines resources and investments needed to address the flow of imported drugs entering the facilities and where those resources and investments should be targeted , and evaluates progress . advancing such a strategic framework could establish a mechanism for accountability and oversight . our report acknowledges that such a strategic framework needs to be flexible to allow for changing conditions and could help agencies adjust to potential changes in the law governing the importation of prescription drugs for personal use . while acknowledging the complexities of enforcing the laws governing prescription drug imports for personal use , including the involvement of multiple agencies with various jurisdictions and differing priorities , our report concludes that current inspection and interdiction efforts at the international mail branches and express carrier facilities have not prevented the reported substantial and growing volume of prescription drugs from being illegally imported from foreign internet pharmacies into the united states . cbp and other agencies have taken a step in the right direction by establishing a task force designed to address many of the challenges discussed in this report .