va agreed with four of the recommendations . in addition , the department has addressed one of the recommendations — that it establish goals for system response time and use the goals as the basis for reporting system performance . however , the department has not yet fully addressed our remaining recommendations to ( 1 ) develop a plan with a time frame and a reliable cost estimate for completing vbms , ( 2 ) reduce the incidence of system defects present in new releases , ( 3 ) assess user satisfaction , and ( 4 ) establish satisfaction goals to promote improvement . continued attention to these important areas can improve va's efforts to effectively complete the development and implementation of vbms and , in turn , more effectively support the department's processing of disability benefit claims . fitara included provisions for federal agencies to , among other things , enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software , improve the risk management of it investments , consolidate data centers , and enhance cios' authorities . since its enactment , we have reported numerous times on va's efforts toward implementing fitara . va's progress toward implementing key fitara provisions has been uneven . specifically , va issued a software licensing policy and has generated an inventory of its software licenses to inform future investment decisions . however , the department did not fully address requirements related to it investment risk , data center consolidation , or cio authority enhancement . agency cio authority enhancements . agencies are required to provide omb with a data center inventory , a strategy for consolidating and optimizing their data centers ( to include planned cost savings ) , and quarterly updates on progress made . the law also requires omb to develop a goal for how much is to be saved through this initiative , and provide annual reports on cost savings achieved . enhanced transparency and improved risk management in it investments . omb and covered agencies are to make detailed information on federal it investments publicly available , and department - level cios are to categorize their major it investments by risk . additionally , in the case of major investments rated as high risk for 4 consecutive quarters , the act required that the department - level cio and the investment's program manager conduct a review aimed at identifying and addressing the causes of the risk . government - wide software purchasing program . cios at covered agencies are required to ( 1 ) approve the it budget requests of their respective agencies , ( 2 ) certify that it investments are adequately implementing incremental development , as defined in capital planning guidance issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , ( 3 ) review and approve contracts for it , and ( 4 ) approve the appointment of other agency employees with the title of cio . federal data center consolidation initiative . the general services administration is to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software and allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user .