sba agreed with these recommendations . however , it remains to be seen how comprehensive the agency's final disaster management plan will be and how it will help sba respond to a future disaster . sba was established by the small business act of 1953 to fulfill the role of several agencies that previously assisted small businesses affected by the great depression and , later , by wartime competition . sba's stated purpose is to promote small business development and entrepreneurship through business financing , government contracting , and technical assistance programs . in addition , sba serves as a small business advocate , working with other federal agencies to , among other things , reduce regulatory burdens on small businesses . sba also provides low - interest , long - term loans to individuals and businesses to assist them with disaster recovery through its disaster loan program — the only form of sba assistance not limited to small businesses . homeowners , renters , businesses of all sizes , and nonprofit organizations can apply for physical disaster loans for permanent rebuilding and replacement of uninsured or underinsured disaster - damaged property . small businesses can also apply for economic injury disaster loans to obtain working capital funds until normal operations resume after a disaster declaration . sba's disaster loan program differs from the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) individuals and households program ( ihp ) . for example , a key element of sba's disaster loan program is that the disaster victim must have repayment ability before a loan can be approved whereas fema makes grants under the ihp that do not have to be repaid . for example , in designing dcms , sba used the volume of applications received during the northridge , california , earthquake and other historical data as the basis for planning the maximum number of concurrent agency users that the system could accommodate . sba also did not completely stress test dcms prior to implementation to ensure that the system could operate effectively at maximum capacity . if sba had verified the equipment as required or conducted complete stress testing of dcms prior to implementation , its capacity to process gulf coast related disaster loan applications may have been enhanced . in the report we are releasing today , we found that sba did not engage in comprehensive disaster planning for other logistical areas — such as workforce or space acquisition planning — prior to the gulf coast hurricanes at either the headquarters or field office levels . for example , sba had not taken steps to help ensure the availability of additional trained and experienced staff such as ( 1 ) cross - training agency staff not normally involved in disaster assistance to provide backup support or ( 2 ) maintaining the status of the disaster reserve corps as i previously discussed . in addition , sba had not thoroughly planned for the office space requirements that would be necessary in a disaster the size of the gulf coast hurricanes .