development of watchkeeper . another mechanism that was expected to increase access to cop information was the dhs interagency operations center ( ioc ) program , which was delegated to the coast guard for development . this $74 million program began providing cop information to coast guard agency partners in 2010 using watchkeeper software . the iocs were originally designed to gather data from sensors and port partner sources to provide situational awareness to coast guard sector personnel and to coast guard partners in state and local law enforcement and port operations , among others . specifically , watchkeeper was designed to provide coast guard personnel and port partners with access to the same unclassified gis data , thereby improving collaboration between them and leveraging their respective capabilities in responding to cases . for example , in responding to a distress call , access to watchkeeper information would allow both the coast guard unit and its local port partners to know the location of all possible response vessels , so they could allocate resources and develop search patterns that made the best use of each responding vessel . in february 2012 , we reported that the coast guard had increased access to its watchkeeper software by allowing access to the system for coast guard port partners . however , the coast guard had limited success in improving information sharing between the coast guard and local port partners and did not follow its established guidance during the development of watchkeeper — a major component of the $74 million interagency operations center acquisition project . by not following its guidance , the coast guard failed to determine the needs of its users , define acquisition requirements , or determine cost and schedule information . specifically , prior to the initial deployment of watchkeeper , the coast guard had made limited efforts to determine port partner needs for the system . c4isr project . the c4isr project was designed to allow the coast guard's newly acquired offshore vessels and aircraft to both add information to the cop using their own sensors as well as view information contained within the cop , thereby allowing these assets to become both producers and consumers of cop information . however , in july 2011 , we reported that the coast guard had not met its goal of building the $2.5 billion c4isr system . specifically , we reported that the coast guard had repeatedly changed its strategy for achieving c4isr's goal of building a single fully interoperable command , control , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance system across the coast guard's new vessels and aircraft . further , we found that not all aircraft and vessels were operating the same c4isr system , or even at the same classification level , and hence could not directly exchange data with each other . the coast guard reported that it began development of cg1v in april 2010 to provide users with a single interface for viewing gis information , including the cop , and to align the coast guard's viewer with dhs's new gis viewer .