in this regard , h.r . 713 , introduced in the 109th congress , would create a tax credit for 50 percent of the cost incurred by eligible agricultural businesses for protecting hazardous chemicals or pesticides from unauthorized access . croplife america also has about 10 member facilities that formulate pesticides . croplife america also participates in the food and agriculture sector coordinating council . in april 2002 , nacd added security measures to the process , which require its members to develop security programs , scrutinize security measures taken by for - hire motor carriers , ensure that customers are purchasing chemicals for the appropriate use ( as prescribed by government regulations ) , and verify implementation of security measures by an independent firm designated by nacd . the second 3-year cycle for process verification began in january 2003 and ended in december 2005 . beginning in january 2006 , nacd's responsible distribution process includes a requirement that members conduct security vulnerability assessments . nacd developed its own vulnerability assessment methodology , and members will be expected to have completed their assessment by june 2006 . nacd has terminated the membership of 20 companies that failed to comply with the responsible distribution process requirements and to complete and pass the verification step . the national paint and coatings association ( npca ) represents manufacturers and suppliers of paints and coatings , including lacquers , stains , varnishes , and concrete . npca has over 350 associate and full - member companies , representing an estimated 700 paint manufacturing facilities that range from mom - and - pop stores to chain stores . approximately 50 of these facilities are rmp facilities . npca worked with its members to develop coatings care , a safety and environmental management system that includes security steps such as analyzing threats , vulnerabilities , and consequences and the implementation of security measures . coatings care also includes a vulnerability assessment methodology developed by a member company specifically for paint and coatings facilities that companies may elect to use , as well as examples of security checklists and best practices . member companies have 1 year from the time they become npca members to agree to follow the coatings care principles . however , npca does not require that members take steps to verify their compliance with coatings care security requirements . the national petrochemical and refiners association ( npra ) has about 450 member companies that include refiners and petrochemical manufacturers , suppliers , and vendors . almost all u.s. refiners are npra members , which represent about 98 percent of the total refining capacity in the united states . petrochemical manufacturing facilities use processes similar to those used in refineries and are often colocated at refineries . according to npra , a majority of the almost 150 refineries and 200 petrochemical manufacturing facilities in the united states are subject to mtsa . because refineries are currently considered to be part of the energy critical infrastructure sector , npra also participates in the oil and natural gas sector homeland security coordinating council , which meets regularly with a sector government coordinating council that includes dhs and the department of energy .