both engines were destroyed . the aircraft was out of service for 5 days ; repair costs were over $9 million . in an out - of - court settlement 3 years later , the port authority of new york and new jersey paid air france $5.3 million in compensation for losses . takeoff was aborted . direct public impacts . these impacts mainly take the form of program expenditures . the eis concluded that the current program alternative was likely to be the least costly to the public ( with the possible exception of the no - action alternative ) , whereas the nonlethal and the nonlethal - before - lethal alternatives would be more costly , because their damage control activities would likely take longer and have lower success rates . at the other extreme , the damage compensation alternative was judged to be “prohibitively expensive,” with budgeted funds , in effect , determining expenditure levels . in addition to funds for compensation , the administrative costs of verifying losses and processing claims would be considerable . the no - action alternative would not have an impact at the national level unless damage control were undertaken through other federal programs . if state and local governmental entities were to assume animal damage control responsibilities in the absence of a federal program , though , the costs to the public could be collectively comparable to or even greater than the costs of the current program . indirect public impacts . these impacts were considered in terms of each alternative's effects on other governmental costs . if , for example , a public airport were held liable by passengers for injuries resulting from an aircraft collision with birds , the cost of compensation would be an indirect effect . such incidents could be expected to occur most frequently if no governmental wildlife controls were undertaken ( i.e. , under the no - action alternative or the damage compensation alternative ) and least frequently under the current program alternative . for the other two alternatives , nonlethal only and nonlethal - before - lethal , clients' satisfaction would determine the ultimate impact . that is , if farmers and ranchers were dissatisfied with the approaches used under a federal program , they might demand more appropriate approaches by state , local , or other federal agencies , thus increasing the costs of other government entities . the eis concluded that , in terms of both avoided losses ( benefits ) and damage control expenditures ( costs ) , the existing damage control program was the most cost - efficient of the alternatives . the existing program offers several benefits , such as standardizing approaches to wildlife damage management and conducting and disseminating research leading to improvements in wildlife damage management . many of these advantages could be lost through a no - action alternative . a damage compensation alternative would provide some financial relief to producers for losses due to wildlife predation , but would neglect nonmarket considerations such as the health and safety of airline passengers .