sba conducted such an inspection in september 2005 . however , alternative ways of verifying the computer hardware were possible . for example , sba staff could have used its system utilities to view details of the hardware and operating system after the processors were installed and may have detected the incorrect processors and taken corrective actions in a more timely manner . finally , sba took issue with our finding that it actually took longer to process expedited approvals under a pilot program , compared with its average processing time frames for all approvals . the verified loss becomes the basis for the loan amount . once the loss verification is complete , an application moves to the application processing stage , where loan officers check for duplication of benefits and assess the applicant's credit history and ability to obtain credit elsewhere . loan officers also examine other applicant eligibility criteria , including compliance with child support obligations and history on other federal debt , such as student loans . loan officers use a financial analysis tool within dcms to determine if the applicant has the ability to repay the loan . as with preprocessing declines , sba generally refers home loan applicants denied a loan in application processing to fema for possible grant assistance under presidential disaster declarations . for secured loans , legal staff members review the draft loan authorization and agreement for sufficiency of collateral instruments and other legal concerns . they also create a loan closing checklist — a list of the requirements necessary to generate the loan closing and other legal documents . attorneys enter a legal concurrence into dcms , which obligates the loan funds through an interface with sba's accounting system . legal support staff members prepare closing documents and mail them to the applicant or nearest disaster recovery center . sba can make a maximum initial disbursement , without collateral , of up to $10,000 for physical disaster loans and $5,000 for economic injury disaster loans , once the agency receives signed closing documents from the applicant . sba can make a maximum initial disbursement of up to $25,000 for physical disaster loans with collateral — preferably real estate . sba generally makes subsequent disbursements on physical disaster loans based on the applicant's needs and how they spent prior disbursements . see appendix i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted our work between november 2005 and july 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the gulf coast hurricanes collectively represented the most costly natural disaster in recent u.s. history . as table 1 shows , the estimated property damage from these hurricanes exceeded $118 billion , nearly five times greater than the damage from the 1994 northridge earthquake and more than two and one - half times greater than the damage from the 2004 florida hurricanes . hurricane katrina was the first of these disasters , causing fatalities and damage in southern florida in late august 2005 before striking the northern gulf coast region . this region received the brunt of the storm , including extensive damage and significant loss of life in louisiana and mississippi .