area . not from wic ! is now 14 months and no longer needs this . email only please a posting from mid - june 2014: “ turn a year already , and we just bought her 7 brand new cans of . she no longer needs formula . selling each can for $10 . brand new , not open . 12.4 oz . exp . 1 march . 2016.” through our monitoring efforts , and through interviews with usda and state and local wic officials , we identified a number of key challenges associated with distinguishing between wic - obtained formula sales and other sales: each state's specific wic - contracted formula brand is typically available for purchase at retail stores by wic participants and non - wic participants alike , without an indicator on the packaging that some were provided through wic . there are a number of reasons why individuals may have excess formula . please text if interested ! a posting from early july 2014 included the brand , type , and container size in the title and stated: “i have 7 powder cans of they dnt expire for another year at least just got them from my wic n we ended up switching formulas so its $65.oo for pick up all 7 cans or $70 if i have to drive.” formula - fed wic infant participants each month , averaged across all ages . beyond the 346 posts that matched these three criteria , we found another 135 that met at least one , but not all , of the criteria . however , since we did not investigate any of these posts further , we do not know if any or all of these 481 posts were attempts to sell wic formula . a posting from mid - june 2014 stated: “$10 a can ! 14 - 12.9 oz cans of [brand name and type] formula . expiration date is - july 1 , 2015 . please take it all . i will not separate the formula ! for example , a wic participant may obtain the infant's full monthly allotment of formula at one time ; alternatively , non - wic parents may purchase formula in bulk at a lower cost to save money . in either case , if the infant then stops drinking that type of formula , parents may attempt to sell the unused formula . individuals posting formula for sale online are able to remain relatively anonymous , so wic staff may not have sufficient information to link the online advertisement with a wic participant . according to one wic official we spoke with , staff in that state identify approximately one posting a week with sufficient detail about the seller — such as name or contact information — for staff to pursue . a wic official from another state said that staff previously used phone numbers to identify wic participants posting formula for sale , but they believe participants then began to list other people's phone numbers on posts . advertisements for infant formula sales can be numerous online , and formula for sale originates from varied sources . for example , through our literature search , we found multiple news reports on stolen infant formula advertised for sale online .