cost . in general , each domestic office has its own organizational code , which allows the agency to identify costs for individual offices . office costs include salaries and benefits — regular salaries and wages ( including those paid for annual , sick , and compensatory leave ) , geographic differentials , overtime pay , holiday pay , cash incentive awards , and relocation expenses , among others ; infrastructure — rent for office and antenna space , parking , tenant improvements ( office expansions or remodeling ) , federal protective service fees , utilities , and repairs ; travel — travel for protective details , investigative cases , training , and support ( including conferences , office inspections , and recruitment ) ; and other — equipment ( eg , furniture and telephones ) , supplies , training and services , and rental and postage . these metrics are related to the agency's criminal investigation and protection missions ( see app . ii for the list of metrics and points ) . how do the domestic offices contribute to accomplishing the secret service's missions ? to what extent does the secret service use available data to ensure that its domestic field office structure meets its mission needs , and what data reliability challenges , if any , exist ? this report is a public version of a prior sensitive report that we provided to you . the secret service deemed some of the information in the prior report law enforcement sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information regarding the performance rank of individual offices and investigative travel patterns , among other things . the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , as it excludes such sensitive information , but it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report and the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine the costs of the secret service's domestic field office structure , we obtained data from the secret service on the costs for each domestic office by category ( eg , salaries and benefits and parking ) . we collected data for fiscal years 2009 through 2014 — the 6 most recent fiscal years for which full - year data were available at the time of our review . to assess the reliability of the secret service's cost data , we discussed with secret service officials how the data are entered and maintained in the secret service's financial system of record . we also reviewed the data for any obvious errors and anomalies . we identified inaccurate salary and benefit data and determined that the cost data were sufficiently reliable in the aggregate for our purposes , but not at the individual office level . we compared the secret service's practices for reviewing the reliability of its cost data against standards in standards for internal control in the federal government , which state that control activities should be effective and efficient in accomplishing the agency's objectives . as a result of the cost data limitation at the individual office level , we compared the costs of the secret service's 42 domestic field office districts rather than individual offices .