performance management . federal agencies have faced long - standing challenges developing modern , credible , and effective employee performance management systems and dealing with poor performers . employee engagement . specifically , our prior work found that the strongest drivers of engagement were similar across age groups and include constructive performance conversations and communication from management , career development and training , inclusion and involvement in decisions affecting employees' work , and work - life balance . the challenge for agencies , then , is to ( 1 ) overcome weaknesses in the performance management process , including rewarding strong performers and dealing with poor performers ; ( 2 ) create support for an inclusive work environment ; and ( 3 ) develop and implement strategies for prioritizing training during times of fiscal constraint . in the sections below , we highlight actions opm can take to implement open recommendations from our prior work and practices agencies can take to improve employee engagement . experts said that employees desire an environment where they can collaborate with their peers and feel a sense of comradery . in contrast , even a small number of poor performers can negatively affect employee morale and agencies' capacity to meet their mission , according to chcos and our previous work . in the 2017 fevs , 64 percent of federal employee respondents agreed that their supervisor provides them with constructive suggestions to improve job performance and 31 percent agreed that steps are taken to deal with poor performers . without effective performance management , agencies risk not only losing the skills of top talent , they also risk missing the opportunity to effectively address increasingly complex and evolving mission challenges . agencies can make performance management more effective with the following practices . improve selection and training of supervisors and managers . agencies can improve employee engagement by having a strong management team that can provide constructive performance conversations and deal with poor performers . this can be done by selecting managers who ( 1 ) are inclined toward and interested in supervision , and ( 2 ) have the ability to coach staff and provide constructive performance feedback . one way agencies can ensure they are selecting managers who want to manage is to establish a dual career ladder structure , which allows advancement opportunities for employees who have technical skills but are not inclined to manage . representatives of private consulting firms we interviewed use the dual career ladder and said it helps expand opportunities for employees to move around internally . we recommended in 2015 that opm determine if promising practices , such as the dual career ladder structure , should be more widely used across government . in november 2018 , opm officials said that the president's management agenda requires agencies to ensure first - line supervisors possess critical leadership competencies within the first year of appointment , either through selection or development . we will continue to monitor opm's actions in this area . agencies can also train managers to ensure they have skills to address poor performance . in february 2015 , we reported that supervisors may not possess confidence or experience in having difficult performance conversations , and they may not have skills or training on addressing poor performance .