construction workers . in 2016 , dhs approved 3,443 cw - 1 permits for construction workers , increasing from 1,105 in 2015 and 194 in 2014 ( see table 6 ) . new businesses . in 2016 , dhs approved 3,426 cw - 1 permits for three construction businesses , representing 26 percent of all approved permits . two of these businesses had not previously applied for cw - 1 permits . to collect information about the cnmi's three job training programs , we analyzed financial records showing cw - 1 vocational education fees that dhs transferred to the cnmi government in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 . we also reviewed the cnmi government's financial records that showed allocations of cw - 1 vocational education fees to three education entities in the cnmi: northern marianas college , northern marianas trades institute , and the cnmi's public school system . we interviewed administrators of these three entities and held discussions with groups of current or former participants of their job training programs . a total of 38 people participated in our three discussion groups , with groups ranging in size from 10 to 16 participants . participants were asked , among other things , about the goals of the job training programs and their expectations regarding the impact of the programs on them . participants in these groups represented nonprobability samples , and therefore , the views and experiences they reported may not be generalizable to all participants in cnmi job training programs . last , we reviewed a previous gao report , an independent audit of the northern marianas college for the period 2014 through 2015,and an independent audit of the cnmi's public school system in 2015 , the most recent reports available . to assess the results of the cnmi's two scholarship programs , we interviewed officials , gathered documentation , and analyzed data provided by the cnmi's scholarship office and the saipan higher education financial assistance program , the two organizations that provide funding to students to attend higher education and job training programs . the saipan higher education financial assistance program is supported by the municipality of saipan , office of the mayor . we did not collect similar information about the scholarship programs offered by the municipalities of rota or tinian . to examine the employment programs offered by the cnmi's department of labor under the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ) and the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) , we interviewed the cnmi's secretary of labor and case officers working at the cnmi's workforce investment agency and officials from dol's employment and training administration . we also analyzed the cnmi's wia performance data for program years 2012 through 2015 . we limited our scope to those program years because reporting requirements changed in program year 2016 , which began on july 1 , 2016 , as a result of the enactment of wioa . we also reviewed several gao reports about wia and wioa and the cnmi's 2016 wioa state plan . to review federal grants agreement between the u.s. and cnmi governments , we interviewed officials and reviewed documents provided by doi and the cnmi department of labor .