fsm and rmi responses . in its written comments on our draft report , the fsm national government agreed on the importance of the three issues that were the focus of our jemco - related recommendation to interior . the fsm identified activities under way to plan for the decrement and cited implementation of a contract to assess the national education system's ability to produce valid and reliable data , as well as efforts to review the quality of health indicators with government staff . the fsm remarked on our report's discussion of the possibility of achieving increased accountability over noncompact grant funds through a high - risk designation , noting that it was assured because the process involved in a high - risk designation is not an arbitrary one . in its written comments on our draft report , the rmi government stated its belief that it had submitted adequate plans to jemfac regarding the medium - term budget and investment framework and the decrement . the rmi generally agreed with our findings of data reliability problems in both the education and health sectors and cited challenges in data collection in both sectors , noting that its ministry of health was seeking external assistance to improve data quality . with regard to our recommendation that interior should consult with other agencies to determine whether the rmi meets the criteria to be designated as a high - risk grant recipient for noncompact funds , or whether other steps should be taken to improve accountability , the rmi stated that internal controls are now in place to detect and deter fraud , waste , and noncompliance with the fiscal procedures agreement or other u.s. federal regulations . for that reason , the rmi ministry of finance does not believe that any special conditions or restrictions for unsatisfactory performance or failure to comply with grant terms are warranted . we addressed several of the comments in the rmi's letter by adding or updating information in the report , or to note areas of rmi concern . in reprinting the letter in the report , we also provided specific responses to a number of the comments . improving oversight through jemco and jemfac . we recommended that interior take all necessary steps to improve the ability of jemco and jemfac to ensure that the fsm and rmi ( 1 ) complete satisfactory plans to address annual decrements in compact funds , ( 2 ) produce reliable indicator data used to track progress in education and health , and ( 3 ) address all single audit findings in a timely manner . we interviewed officials from the u.s . departments of the interior ( interior ) , health and human services , education , and state , the fsm national government and state governments , and rmi government . we also directly observed selected compact - funded education and health facilities in chuuk and pohnpei states in the fsm and majuro and kwajalein atolls in the rmi . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .