training . nearly one - fourth of state dots have provided training on fhwa practices to half or more of their technical staff , as follows: 12 state dots reported having trained about half , most , almost all , or all of their technical staff . 32 have trained some of their technical staff . 7 have trained few or none of their technical staff . coordination with local agencies . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 07-517sp . to determine the extent to which states assess the fitness of older drivers and what support the federal government has provided , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) within the u.s . dot , the national institute on aging ( nia ) and the administration on aging ( aoa ) within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the american association of motor vehicle administrators ( aamva ) — a nongovernmental organization that represents state driver licensing agencies . to obtain information on initiatives that selected states have implemented , we conducted case studies in six states — california , florida , iowa , maryland , michigan , and oregon — that transportation experts identified as progressive in their efforts to improve older driver safety . the scope of our work focused on older driver safety . prior gao work addressed the associated issue of senior mobility for those who do not drive . we conducted our work from april 2006 through april 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( for details of our objectives , scope , and methodology , see app . driving is a complex task that depends on visual , cognitive , and physical functions that enable a person to see traffic and road conditions ; recognize what is seen , process the information , and decide how to physically act to control the vehicle . although the aging process affects people at different rates and in different ways , functional declines associated with aging can affect driving ability . for example , vision declines may reduce the ability to see other vehicles , traffic signals , signs , lane markings , and pedestrians ; cognitive declines may reduce the ability to recognize traffic conditions , remember destinations , and make appropriate decisions in operating the vehicle ; and physical declines may reduce the ability to perform movements required to control the vehicle . a particular concern is older drivers with dementia , often as a result of illnesses such as alzheimer's disease . dementia impairs cognitive and sensory functions causing disorientation , potentially leading to dangerous driving practices . age is the most significant risk factor for developing dementia — approximately 12 percent of those aged 65 to 84 are likely to develop the condition while over 47 percent of those aged 85 and older are likely to be afflicted . for drivers with the condition , the risk of being involved in a crash is two to eight times greater than for those with no cognitive impairment .