ground forces . gao - 08-497t . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2008 . defense logistics: army has not fully planned or budgeted for the reconstitution of its afloat prepositioned stocks . gao - 08-257r . washington , d.c.: february 8 , 2008 . force structure: need for greater transparency for the army's grow the force initiative funding plan . gao - 08-354r . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2008 . force structure: better management controls are needed to oversee the army's modular force and expansion initiatives and improve accountability for results . gao - 08-145 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2007 . defense logistics: army and marine corps cannot be assured that equipment reset strategies will sustain equipment availability while meeting ongoing operational requirements . gao - 07-814 . washington , d.c.: september 19 , 2007 . additional explanation of each of these factors follows . at the time the army's cost estimate was developed , the army's modular designs were incomplete , so budget analysts were uncertain about the exact number of personnel and how many and what type of equipment items would be needed for modular units . for example , on the basis of lessons learned , the army has reconfigured some of the modular unit designs and has added additional capabilities for force protection and route clearance to counter specific threats faced by deployed units . further , because the number and composition of national guard units had not been developed , budget analysts made certain assumptions about how much funding would be required by national guard units to convert to the new modular designs . when the army began to implement its modular restructuring initiative , it planned for the national guard to establish 34 brigade combat teams plus an additional number of support brigades . the 2006 quadrennial defense review , however , recommended that the army establish only 28 brigade combat teams and convert the remaining units to support brigades . in addition , the army's original plan for equipping modular units also did not fully consider the equipping implications associated with the army national guard's changing role in supporting military operations . since 2001 , the army national guard's role has changed from a strategic reserve force to an operational force that is used to support a wide range of military operations at home and abroad . prior to 2001 , army national guard units were generally equipped with older equipment and at lower levels than comparable active duty units because it was assumed that they would have considerable warning and training time before deploying overseas . however , senior army officials have determined that the national guard's modular units should be structured like those in the active component and receive similar equipment since the guard has become an operational force that deploys along with active units . as a result , senior army officials have stated the army plans to request additional funds for army national guard equipment . in addition , the army national guard also has significant domestic missions , and equipment needs for those missions are uncertain . in january 2007 we issued a report on actions needed to address national guard domestic equipment requirements and readiness .