both programs were reauthorized in 2011 . the sbir / sttr reauthorization act of 2011 ( reauthorization act ) directed sba to allow agencies to participate in a pilot program , known as the administrative pilot program , that permitted the funding of administrative and certain other costs in fiscal years 2013 through 2015 . this administrative pilot program , as outlined in the reauthorization act and policy directives , allows agencies to use not more than 3 percent of the funding allocated to the sbir program for new activities , including program administration ; outreach ; commercialization ; standardization and simplification of program procedures ; prevention of waste , fraud , and abuse ; and reporting . the sbir and sttr policy directives specifically note that funding under the pilot program may not replace current agency administrative funding for sbir or sttr activities . instead , the administrative pilot program is intended to supplement the agency's existing administrative efforts . in november 2015 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 extended the pilot program through september 30 , 2017 . in december 2016 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 extended the sbir and sttr programs through fiscal year 2022 but did not extend the pilot program . program managers at 8 of the 9 agencies participating in the administrative pilot program told us they supported making it permanent . given that sba officials told us that they are working to respond to our previous recommendation by taking steps to expedite the submission of the reports , such as by hiring contractors to help prepare the reports , we are not making additional recommendations at this time . changing the methodology for calculating sbir and sttr spending requirements to use total r&d budget authority rather than extramural r&d obligations would have increased agencies' spending requirements and the number of agencies required to participate in the programs for fiscal year 2015 . agency officials identified several benefits and drawbacks that changing the calculation methodology could have for their agencies' sbir and sttr programs . changing the methodology for calculating sbir and sttr spending requirements to use an agency's total r&d budget authority rather than its extramural r&d obligations would have increased spending requirements for fiscal year 2015 . specifically , we estimated that the total spending requirements for the sbir and sttr programs in fiscal year 2015 would have increased from $2.5 billion to $4.4 billion , or by 76 percent , assuming the same percentages and participation thresholds defined in current law . the increase would have occurred for two reasons: ( 1 ) an agency's total r&d budget authority is larger than its extramural r&d obligations , and therefore agencies that currently participate would have been required to spend more on the programs , and ( 2 ) additional agencies would have been required to participate . figure 3 shows the effects at each agency of changing the calculation methodology from current law , which is based on a percentage of extramural r&d obligations , to an alternative scenario that applies the same percentages to total r&d budget authority . these effects are consistent with our findings in previous reports .