gao - 12-325 . this work was conducted before labor finalized regulations regarding 33 for further details on the design of our 401 ( k ) plan sponsor survey on fees , see gao - 12-325 . as we reported in september 2012 , little is known about the employers that participate in meps , or even the number of meps by type , in part because the federal government no longer collects these data . as of 2009 , the most recent data available for our september 2012 report , meps represented only a small portion of the pension universe . specifically , db meps represented 0.7 percent of all db plans , about 6.0 percent of all db assets and 5.0 percent of all db participants . dc meps represented about the same percentage of all dc plans , assets and participants . in our september 2012 report , we found smaller employers in meps were mainly participating in association - sponsored meps . two associations told us their participating employers averaged between 20 and 60 employees . however , one mep sponsored by a peo reported that the typical participating employer in its plan was small as well . in particular , little data exist on the current number of peo or open mep plan types , their asset size , the number of participants , or the participating employers . relative to other mep types , peo and open meps are the newest , and may be the only types actively marketing their meps to participating employers . meps have been suggested by peo and open mep representatives as a viable way for small employers to reduce their administrative responsibility for their pension plans . several mep representatives said mep administrators can complete the record keeping and the annual testing , and can submit required filings such as a single form 5500 for the mep on behalf of all the participating employers . furthermore , employees can more easily move among employers in the plan . for example , in a db mep sponsored by an association , as long as a participant remains an employee of an employer within the association , participants can change employers and continue earning vesting service credit in the same plan . a small employer sponsoring a single employer plan can also contract with a service provider to perform administrative functions , but a couple of interviewees said employers not already offering plans might find it easier and faster to join a mep than to create their own single employer plan . meps have also been suggested by some as a possible means to lower the costs of plan sponsorship , since participating employers can pool assets to obtain lower pricing available to larger plans . one expert we spoke with said that certain association plans have been very effective at offering efficient , cost - effective retirement options for their members . furthermore , a couple of interviewees said meps may also reduce costs for employers since they will not need to spend money to create an initial plan document , as they would in establishing a new single - employer plan .