is your medication on formulary ? ” and providing brochures , pens , and tent cards at medical centers with information that includes a national formulary fact of the month . another vpe said that the visn sends a newsletter to veterans in its region that includes a section on how the national formulary works , points veterans to pbm's web site , and provides pharmacist contact information if veterans have any questions . likewise , one medical center official whom we interviewed posts explanations about why va has a national formulary on the bulletin boards in pharmacy waiting room areas . also , officials from three of the medical centers whom we interviewed noted that they send letters to beneficiaries when national formulary changes impact them , and officials from the fourth medical center said that they ask providers to inform veterans of these changes . at the national level , va officials are considering options for increasing beneficiary input on the national formulary and improving the transparency of the drug review process . options were discussed during a map meeting in january 2010 , and while no formal decision was made , the overall consensus was to try to work within existing lines of communication . following this meeting , officials from va's pbm told us that map and the vpe committee were in discussions to develop a process whereby veteran input at local vso meetings could be reported and addressed nationally . the officials said that they would like to use local vso meetings as a mechanism for obtaining input , because it would be easier for veterans to travel to meetings in their local area and these meetings may allow for input on not only national formulary issues , but also other pharmacy benefit issues that may be local in scope . in june 2010 , options were again discussed during a meeting of map and the vpe committee . pbm's chief consultant told us that a final decision was not made during this meeting , but that the next step is to discuss the issue with vha management . officials from most visns and medical centers we interviewed told us that there could be benefit to increasing beneficiary input on the national formulary or improving the transparency of va's drug review process , and a number gave suggestions for doing so . for example , one medical center official said that the ez - minutes newsletter contains technical language and that it would be beneficial for va's pbm to create something that was easier for beneficiaries and their representatives to understand . likewise , a vpe suggested that national formulary changes be sent to local vsos along with non - technical explanations of the reasons for the changes . another vpe said that one way to better obtain beneficiary input on the national formulary would be to survey patients through an independent organization . while va officials are considering options for increasing beneficiary input on the national formulary and improving the transparency of the drug review process , they have concerns about formally involving beneficiaries or their representatives in national formulary decisions . specifically , this matter was raised during the january map meeting around a discussion about dod's uniform formulary beneficiary advisory panel .