we disagree . the report contains analyses and descriptive information on many aspects of the ffel program , which provided approximately $23 billion of loans for postsecondary students in fiscal year 2000 . the mention of the student loan programs as high risk and the ensuing discussion are important to help establish the significance that any changes — including the vfas — might have on the program . what changes are being implemented under the vfas ? how well prepared is education to assess the effects of the vfas ? for this study , we interviewed education officials involved in the development of the vfas as well as officials at each of the 9 guaranty agencies that applied for an agreement and 10 of the guaranty agencies that chose not to apply . we also discussed the vfas with other program participants , such as representatives of lender and loan servicing groups . we reviewed the four , signed agreements for compliance with the provisions in the vfa legislation . we used education's analyses to determine whether the vfas complied with the requirement not to increase projected federal program costs . we performed our work between february and december 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for details concerning our scope and methodology , see appendix i . the federal government supports two major loan programs for postsecondary students under title iv of hea: the federal family education loan program ( ffelp ) and the william d. ford direct loan program ( fdlp ) . in 2000 , ffelp and fdlp provided approximately $23 billion and $10 billion , respectively , in loans and loan guarantees to postsecondary students and their parents . both programs provide subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans , parent loans for undergraduate students and consolidation loans . under the ffelp , private lenders , such as banks , provide loan capital . the federal government guarantees the loans but uses 36 guaranty agencies to administer many aspects of the program . with federal funding , these guaranty agencies generally provide insurance to the lenders for 98 percent of the unpaid amount of defaulted loans . the guaranty agencies also work with lenders and borrowers to prevent loan defaults and collect on the loans after default . in contrast , under the fdlp the federal government provides the loan capital to borrowers . for over a decade , gao has included student aid programs on a list of “high - risk” federal programs . these programs are designated high - risk primarily because of deficiencies in education's maintenance of the financial and management information required to administer the student aid programs and the internal controls needed to maintain the integrity of the programs . over the years education has addressed many of the high - risk issues identified by gao ; however , these long - standing conditions continue to plague the student aid programs . to achieve ffel program and cost efficiencies , and to improve the availability and delivery of loans , the vfa legislation of 1998 authorized vfas between education and the state - designated guaranty agencies .