iii ) . to analyze ex - im's methodology for calculating its direct support for small business and the reliability of the data used in the calculation , we reviewed ex - im documentation regarding the calculation , analyzed data on ex - im transactions from fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , and interviewed knowledgeable ex - im staff . we also drew a random probability sample of 300 of the 2,755 companies receiving ex - im financing in fiscal years 2004 or 2005 to determine whether companies' small business status was classified correctly . to describe ex - im's legal interpretation of its statutory small business financing mandate , we reviewed the statutory obligations under the provision and its legislative history , reviewed other relevant legal documents , and interviewed ex - im legal staff regarding their interpretation . for a more detailed explanation of our objectives , scope , and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted our work from june 2005 to january 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . established in 1934 , ex - im operates as an independent agency of the u.s. government and is the official export credit agency of the united states under the authority of the export - import bank act of 1945 , as amended . ex - im's mission is to assist u.s. companies to create and maintain american jobs by financing exports of goods and services and filling gaps in the availability of commercial financing for creditworthy export transactions . it also helps american exporters meet government - supported financing competition from other countries so that american exporters can compete for overseas business on the basis of price , performance , and service . its authorizing legislation requires ex - im not to compete with commercial lenders . to accomplish its mission , ex - im offers a variety of financing instruments , including loan guarantees and direct loans for buyer financing ; export credit insurance ; and working capital guarantees for pre - export financing . under its loan guarantee program , ex - im agrees to guarantee loans made by other lenders to help buyers in other countries obtain financing to purchase u.s. exports . ex - im also provides export credit insurance to protect u.s. exporters against nonpayment by their customers . on this basis , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our use in further analysis . we then identified the individual companies involved in ex - im transactions and analyzed data on companies' industry classifications ( standard industrial classification ) , number of employees , and annual revenues . we also reviewed ex - im's electronic records for companies receiving financing in fiscal years 2004 and 2005 to identify whether there were any instances where ex - im's small business designation for the same company differed in the insurance and loan and guarantee databases . we identified the small business administration's ( sba ) “size standard” for each company based on the sic code in ex - im's electronic records and applied the sba methodology to ex - im's electronic company records to determine how frequently ex - im's decision regarding companies' small business status was supported by the data in ex - im's databases .