ii ) . companies that elect to go private reduce the number of financing options available to them and must rely on other sources of funding . in aggregate , equity is cheaper when it is supplied by public sources , net of any costs of regulatory compliance . however , in some circumstances , private equity or bank lending may be preferable alternatives to the public market . statistics suggest bank loans are the primary source of funding for u.s. companies that rely on external financing . some companies with insufficient market liquidity had little opportunity for follow - on stock offerings and going private would not have fundamentally altered the way they raised capital . we found that almost 25 percent of the companies that deregistered from 2003 through the end of the first quarter of 2005 were not trading on any market at all ( see fig . approximately 37 percent of the companies that went private during this period were traded on the over - the - counter bulletin board ( otcbb ) ; the general liquidity of this market is significantly less than major markets traded on the nasdaq stock market , inc. ( nasdaq ) or the new york stock exchange ( nyse ) . additionally , 14 percent were traded in the pink sheets and , therefore , were most likely closely held and traded sporadically , if at all . pcaob's auditing standard no . 2 reiterates this definition of internal control over financial reporting . internal control is not a new requirement for public companies . in december 1977 , as a result of corporate falsification of records and improper accounting , congress enacted the foreign corrupt practices act ( fcpa ) . the fcpa's internal accounting control requirements were intended to prevent fraudulent financial reporting , among other things . the fcpa required companies to: ( 1 ) make and keep books , records , and accounts that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of assets and ( 2 ) develop and maintain a system of internal accounting controls sufficient to provide reasonable assurance over the recording and executing of transactions , the preparation of financial statements in accordance with standards , and maintaining accountability for assets . based on our analysis , costs associated with implementing the sarbanes - oxley act — particularly those costs associated with the internal control provisions in section 404 — were disproportionately higher ( as a percentage of revenues ) for smaller public companies . in complying with the act , smaller companies noted that they incurred higher audit fees and other costs , such as hiring more staff or paying for outside consultants , to comply with the act's provisions . further , resource and expertise limitations that characterize many smaller companies as well as their general lack of familiarity or experience with formal internal control frameworks contributed to the challenges and increased costs they faced during section 404 implementation . along with other market factors , the act may have encouraged a relatively small number of smaller public companies to go private , foregoing sources of funding that were potentially more diversified and may be less expensive for many of these companies .