( see fig . these countries are also listed in oasis as having the largest number of manufacturers importing drugs into the united states . fda does not know how many foreign establishments are subject to inspection ; including the number of establishments that are registered and whose products are currently imported into the united states and establishments that are not required to register but whose products are ultimately used in drugs that are marketed here . instead of maintaining a list of such establishments , fda relies on information from several databases that were not designed for this purpose . drls , established in 1991 , is intended to list the establishments registered that manufacture drugs for the u.s. market . however , requirements for the registration of foreign establishments were not implemented until 2002 . fda expected that requiring foreign establishments to register would provide it with a comprehensive list of such establishments . in fiscal year 2007 , approximately 3,000 foreign establishments were registered with fda that manufactured human drugs , biologics , or veterinary drugs ; fda was unable to determine from this database the number of registered establishments specifically manufacturing human drugs . drls provides fda with some information about establishments subject to inspection , but contains inaccuracies and does not provide a complete count . fda officials told us that the count of registered foreign establishments in drls does not reflect the actual number whose products are being imported into the united states for several reasons . first , foreign establishments may register with fda , whether or not they actually manufacture drugs for the u.s. market . fda officials told us that this is made more likely by the fact that fda does not charge foreign establishments a fee to register . fda officials pointed out that some foreign establishments register because , in foreign markets , registration may erroneously convey an “approval” or endorsement by fda . second , foreign establishments may not renew their registration information , although they are required by fda to do so annually . agency officials told us that if foreign establishments stop manufacturing drugs for the u.s. market or go out of business they may not report the change to fda , even though it is required . fda officials told us that the agency does not routinely verify the information provided by the establishment to ensure that it is accurate or confirm that the establishment actually manufactures drugs for the u.s. market . fda does not know how many foreign establishments are erroneously registered . third , foreign establishments that manufacture apis are not required to register if their products are not directly imported into the united states . oasis also provides fda with some information about establishments subject to inspection , but this database contains inaccurate data on the count of foreign establishments manufacturing drugs imported into the united states . according to oasis , 6,760 foreign establishments manufactured drugs that were imported into the united states in fiscal year 2007 . however , fda officials told us that errors in data entry result in inaccurate counts of establishments whose drugs are imported into the united states .