grid . when several key transmission lines in northern ohio tripped due to contact with trees , they initiated a cascading failure of 508 generating units at 265 power plants across eight states and a canadian province . davis - besse power plant . the nuclear regulatory commission confirmed that in january 2003 , the microsoft sql server worm known as slammer infected a private computer network at the idled davis - besse nuclear power plant in oak harbor , ohio , disabling a safety monitoring system for nearly 5 hours . in addition , the plant's process computer failed , and it took about 6 hours for it to become available again . while presenting significant potential benefits , the smart grid vision and its increased reliance on it systems and networks also expose the electric grid to potential and known cybersecurity vulnerabilities , which could be exploited by a wide array of cyber threats . this creates an increased risk to the smooth and reliable operation of the grid . as we and others have reported , these vulnerabilities include an increased number of entry points and paths that can be exploited by potential adversaries and other unauthorized users ; the introduction of new , unknown vulnerabilities due to an increased use of new system and network technologies ; wider access to systems and networks due to increased connectivity ; an increased amount of customer information being collected and transmitted , providing incentives for adversaries to attack these systems and potentially putting private information at risk of unauthorized disclosure and use . we and others have also reported that smart grid and related systems have known cyber vulnerabilities . for example , cybersecurity experts have demonstrated that certain smart meters can be successfully attacked , possibly resulting in disruption to the electricity grid . in addition , we have reported that control systems used in industrial settings such as electricity generation have vulnerabilities that could result in serious damages and disruption if exploited . in our january 2011 report , we identified a number of key challenges that industry and government stakeholders faced in ensuring the cybersecurity of the systems and networks that support our nation's electricity grid . among others , these challenges included the following: lack of a coordinated approach to monitor whether industry follows voluntary standards . as mentioned above , under eisa , ferc is responsible for adopting cybersecurity and other standards that it deems necessary to ensure smart grid functionality and interoperability . however , ferc had not developed an approach coordinated with other regulators to monitor , at a high level , the extent to which industry will follow the voluntary smart grid standards it adopts . there had been initial efforts by regulators to share views , through , for example , a collaborative dialogue between ferc and the national association of regulatory utility commissioners ( naruc ) , which had discussed the standards - setting process in general terms . nevertheless , according to officials from ferc and naruc , ferc and the state public utility commissions had not established a joint approach for monitoring how widely voluntary smart grid standards are followed in the electricity industry or developed strategies for addressing any gaps .