see table 2 . according to coast guard officials , the frc's decrease in monthly mission capable rates below its minimum target is primarily because of a phased warranty repair drydock period that was not initially anticipated . the average warranty repair drydock period will last approximately 15 weeks , with at least one frc not mission capable due to depot - level maintenance at all times from january 2016 to november 2019 . these drydocks were triggered by continuing structural concerns and problems with equipment that was installed during production , including continued failures with the main diesel engine . given that only a few frcs have completed the warranty drydock to date , it is difficult to determine whether the overall fleet's mission capable rate will meet its target range once the drydocks are completed . as we noted in our march 2017 report , while the frc's decrease is attributable to the unanticipated drydocks , the nsc's mission capable rates are influenced by a roughly 2-year anticipated post - delivery maintenance period called the post shakedown availability , which is scheduled for each newly delivered nsc . during this shakedown period , the nsc will be rendered not mission capable due to depot - level maintenance for a majority of its time . for example , from january 2015 until september 2016 , the nsc hamilton spent 70.9 percent of its time in depot - level maintenance , and the nsc james spent 82.6 percent of its time in depot - level maintenance from september 2015 to september 2016 . with only five nscs in operation as of september 2016 , having two cutters spend the majority of their time not mission capable due to depot - level maintenance is negatively affecting the overall fleet's mission capable rates . this will continue as the coast guard introduces new nscs into the fleet and the last cutter completes its 2-year post shakedown period — scheduled for 2022 as the ninth cutter is scheduled for delivery in 2020 . while the first three nscs achieved their mission capable rate targets on average from january 2014 to september 2016 , it is uncertain if the overall fleet mission capable rate will increase once all nscs complete their post shakedown availabilities . in addition to the negative effect that depot - level maintenance is having on both the frc and nsc's mission capable rates , our march 2017 report found that both cutter classes have been plagued with equipment failures resulting in lost operational days or a partially mission capable status . this means that the cutters are either not able to or are conducting operations in a limited capacity . the main diesel engines on both cutters , which were manufactured by the same vendor , were among the equipment systems that resulted in the most lost operational days from 2014 through 2016 and have been problematic since the cutters became operational . problems with the frc's engine resulted in roughly 355 days spent not mission capable due to maintenance .