it reform . in december 2010 , the federal chief information officer issued a 25 point implementation plan to reform federal information technology management . this 18-month plan specified five major goals: strengthening program management , streamlining governance and improving accountability , increasing engagement with industry , aligning the acquisition and budget processes with the technology cycle , and applying “light technology” and shared solutions . as part of this plan , omb outlined actions to , among other things , strengthen agencies' investment review boards and consolidate federal data centers . the plan stated that omb will work with congress to consolidate commodity it spending ( eg , e - mail , data centers , content management systems , and web infrastructure ) to , among other things , eliminate duplication , under agency chief information officers . further , the plan called for the role of agency chief information officers to focus more on it portfolio management . in april 2012 , we reported on the federal government's progress toward implementing these actions . in particular , we found that omb and key federal agencies had made progress on action items in the it reform plan , but that much work remained to be done on action items such as completing data center consolidation plans and launching a forum for agencies to share it management best practices . accordingly , we recommended , among other things , that the agencies complete all key it reform action items ; omb agreed with our recommendation . it operations and maintenance . with regard to identifying and eliminating duplication within existing it legacy systems — commonly referred to as steady state investments — omb issued the capital programming guide that calls for agencies to analyze ( via operational analysis ) whether their steady state investments are continuing to meet business and customer needs and are contributing to meeting the agency's strategic goals . more specifically , this guidance calls for agencies to perform operational analyses annually on each steady state investment and requires that each operational analysis address 17 key factors , including cost , schedule , customer satisfaction , strategic and business results , financial goals , and whether the investment overlaps with other systems . in october 2012 , we reported that of five key agencies selected for review , only two had performed operational analyses , and these two agencies did not perform analyses on all their steady state investments.agencies , none fully addressed the 17 key factors specified in omb's guidance . consequently , we recommended that the agencies conduct annual operational analyses on all their steady state investments and in doing , fully address the 17 key factors . the agencies agreed with our recommendations and have taken actions , such as developing operational analysis guidance , to address them . further , of the analyses performed by the two portfoliostat reviews . in march 2012 , omb launched the portfoliostat initiative , which requires agencies to conduct an annual agencywide it portfolio review to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how their it investments align with the agency's mission and business functions .