we provided state and usaid with a draft of this report for their review . the u.s. government acknowledged potential risks with this approach . for example , in a march 14 , 2011 , memo approving the planned use of the $65 million in democracy and governance assistance funds , usaid noted that the egyptian government would potentially object to usaid's intention to fund organizations that had not been registered to operate in the country and specifically noted the possible risks of funding iri and ndi . while the u.s. government acknowledged potential risks , state and usaid officials also noted that it was difficult to assess the extent and specific nature of these risks in the aftermath of the revolution , given the significant political changes that had just taken place . in addition , we interviewed a senior official at the egyptian ministry of international cooperation responsible for coordinating u.s. assistance , including democracy and governance assistance . for example , usaid officials stated that given the nature of the revolution , some u.s. government officials believed that the egyptian government would embrace democratic change and that it would be more inclusive in regulating ngos and other civil society organizations . additionally , state and usaid stated that ambiguities in egyptian law and its inconsistent application also complicated assessments of risk . according to u.s. government and ngo officials , the egyptian government provided conflicting information regarding the legal status of some ngos receiving u.s. funds . for example , officials from two of the prosecuted ngos stated that they had received assurances from the egyptian ministry of foreign affairs that their registration paperwork was in order and that their registration applications would be approved shortly , before the raids on their offices took place in december 2011 . in addition , the egyptian government accredited iri and ndi to serve as monitors during the parliamentary elections in november and december 2011 and january 2012 , which u.s. and ngo officials noted led many to interpret that the egyptian government was supportive of the two organizations' activities . after the raids on a number of ngos' offices in december 2011 , ngo officials reported that some groups were initially reluctant to accept u.s. government funding , to include u.s. government branding on their materials , and to participate in u.s. - funded projects . the trial exacerbated an already challenging environment for egyptian civil society organizations . appendix i provides a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a 2012 report by the usaid inspector general found that in march 2012 , 12 of the 24 ngos to which usaid had awarded grants after the 2011 revolution — with activities worth $28.5 million — were not on track to achieve their goals .