security . the selection and employment of appropriate security and privacy controls for an information system are important tasks that can have major implications for the operations and assets and for the protection of personal information that is collected and maintained in the system . security controls are the management , operational , and technical safeguards prescribed for an information system to protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of the system and its information . privacy controls limit the collection , use , and disclosure of personal information . for several it programs , security and privacy has been a challenge . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 06-598t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . until the department fully establishes and consistently implements the full range of it management disciplines embodied in best practices and federal guidance , it will be challenged in its ability to manage and deliver programs . mr . chairmen and members of the subcommittees , i appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's joint oversight hearing on department of homeland security ( dhs ) efforts to effectively manage information technology ( it ) . as you know , it is a critical tool in dhs's quest to transform 22 diverse and distinct agencies — some with longstanding management weaknesses — into a single , integrated , high - performing department . in light of the importance of this transformation and the magnitude of the associated challenges , in 2003 we designated the implementation of the department and its transformation as a high - risk undertaking . for dhs to effectively leverage it as a transformation enabler , we reported in 2004 that it needed to put firmly in place certain institutional management controls and capabilities , such as having an enterprise architecture and a process for making informed portfolio - based decisions across competing it investments . these controls and capabilities are interrelated management disciplines that collectively help an organization to deliver it systems and infrastructure on time and on budget , and to do so in a way that minimizes risk and maximizes value to the organization as a whole . my testimony today addresses the state of dhs it management on two levels: the institutional level and the individual program level . at the department level , it addresses efforts to establish corporate management controls , such as enterprise architecture , it investment management , and the empowerment of the chief information officer ( cio ) to lead the department's it activities . at the program level , it addresses the extent to which the institutional management controls are actually being implemented on key nonfinancial systems ( such as those related to border and aviation security ) , pointing out the pitfalls to avoid and best practices to employ in managing these it investments . in summary , dhs continues to work to institutionalize the range of it management controls and capabilities that our research and past work have shown are fundamental to any organization's ability to use technology effectively to transform itself and accomplish mission goals .