funds accountability . in 2009 , we found that the academy did not have assurance that it complied with applicable funds control requirements , including those in the antideficiency act ( ada ) . the academy and marad have taken sufficient actions to implement four of our seven prior recommendations related to funds accountability . specifically , officials investigated and mitigated a potential ada violation , completed a series of reviews aimed at resolving past deficiencies related to “parking” of academy funds to keep them from expiring,expense at year - end . with respect to the potential ada violation , marad's chief counsel determined in 2011 that academy officials had retained approximately $200,000 in excess funds from gmats which they had no legal authority to retain and had thereby augmented academy funds in excess of appropriations made by congress during fiscal years 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 . according to an april 11 , 2011 , memo signed by the maritime administrator , marad determined that sufficient prior - year funds existed to offset the gmats - funded academy expenditures . marad adjusted its accounts accordingly and since these sufficient prior - year funds existed , marad did not exceed its available appropriations in violation of the ada . also , the academy and marad successfully implemented two recommendations related to “parking” of appropriated academy funds by performing a series of reviews to identify excess academy funds improperly held in commercial bank accounts . as a result of these reviews , the fiscal control office nafi returned over $214,000 of improperly held excess fiscal years 2006 and 2007 funds to the academy . the academy subsequently deobligated these funds and returned them to their respective appropriation . further , the academy and marad have discontinued use of the academy's in - house fund control system and have transitioned to dot's financial accounting system and have revised the budget program accounting codes . these actions should provide more transparent financial reporting and improved oversight . additionally , in january 2010 , marad issued cfo directive 6 establishing policy and procedures for accounting and recording of academy accrual of expenses at year - end . if fully and effectively implemented , directive 6 should improve internal control over accounting and recording of academy accrual of expenses . and established written policy on the accrual of items of the three recommendations that remain open in this area relate to making final notification to congress of an ada violation resulting from midshipmen fees that were used to cover academy expenses without legal authority to do so , implementing corrective actions as a result of a marad review in which it identified weaknesses related to the academy's funds control process , and establishing targeted internal controls , such as management's review and approval procedures , over accruals . according to a march 23 , 2011 , memorandum to the maritime administrator from marad's chief counsel , the academy violated the ada by charging midshipmen fees in excess of authorized levels , improperly augmenting agency appropriations , and making expenditures in excess of and in advance of appropriations . training vessel use .