( see fig . from 1994 through 2003 , accidents on interstate hazardous liquid pipelines decreased by almost 49 percent from 245 in 1994 to 126 in 2003 . however , the industry's safety record for these pipelines has not improved for accidents with the greatest consequences — those resulting in a fatality , injury , or property damage totaling $50,000 or more — which we term serious accidents . the number of serious accidents stayed about the same over the 10-year period — about 88 every year . the overall accident rate for hazardous liquid pipelines — which considers both the amounts of products and the distances shipped — decreased from about 0.41 accidents per billion ton - miles shipped in 1994 to about 0.25 accidents per billion ton - miles shipped in 2002 . we have found that agencies that are successful in measuring performance strive to establish measures that demonstrate results , address important aspects of program performance , and provide useful information for decision - making . while ops's new measures may produce better information on the performance of its enforcement program than is currently available , ops has not adopted key practices for achieving these characteristics of successful performance measurement systems: measures should demonstrate results ( outcomes ) that are directly linked to program goals . measures of program results can be used to hold agencies accountable for the performance of their programs and can facilitate congressional oversight . the accident rate for serious interstate hazardous liquid pipeline accidents stayed the same , averaging about 0.15 accidents per billion ton - miles shipped from 1994 through 2002 . in contrast to the decreasing number of accidents overall for hazardous liquid pipelines , the annual number of accidents on interstate natural gas pipelines increased by almost 20 percent from 81 in 1994 to 97 in 2003 . ( see fig . the number of serious accidents on interstate natural gas pipelines also increased , from 64 in 1994 to 84 in 2003 , though they have fluctuated considerably over this time . information on accident rates for natural gas pipelines is not available because of the lack of data on the amount of natural gas shipped through pipelines . for both hazardous liquid and natural gas pipelines , the lack of improvement in the number of serious accidents may be due in part to the relatively small number of these accidents . ops , within the department of transportation's research and special programs administration ( rspa ) , administers the national regulatory program to ensure the safe transportation of natural gas and hazardous liquids by pipeline . the office attempts to ensure the safe operation of pipelines through regulation , national consensus standards , research , education ( eg , to prevent excavation - related damage ) , oversight of the industry through inspections , and enforcement when safety problems are found . the office uses a variety of enforcement tools , such as compliance orders and corrective action orders that require pipeline operators to correct safety violations , notices of amendment to remedy deficiencies in operators' procedures , administrative actions to address minor safety problems , and civil penalties . ops is a small federal agency .