objectivity . we found all of tfi's measures to be objective , or reasonably free from significant bias . governmentwide priorities . we also determined that tfi's 20 measures are linked to broader priorities such as cost - effectiveness , quality , and timeliness . however , the measures did not fully satisfy the following attributes . linkage . six tfi measures are not clearly linked to treasury goals . for example , teoaf measures the proportion of its forfeitures that come from high - impact cases . however , it is unclear why high - impact cases in particular are measured as opposed to all cases . our analysis could not link teoaf's measure to broader agencywide goals related to removing or reducing threats to national security . core program activities . seven tfi measures do not sufficiently cover core program activities . for example , ofac has three main responsibilities related to the administration of sanctions: ( 1 ) issuing licenses , ( 2 ) designation programs , and ( 3 ) enforcement through civil penalties . however , ofac's one performance measure only assesses cases involving civil penalties resulting from sanctions violations . balance . we found that tfi's set of performance measures is not balanced . in fiscal year 2008 , tfi reported on 20 measures , 16 of which related to fincen's programs and activities , 1 that related to ofac , 1 that related to teoaf , 2 that related to tffc , and none that related to oia . as a result , a disproportionate number of measures ( 16 ) relate to administering and enforcing the bsa and none to the analysis of financial intelligence . an emphasis on one priority at the expense of others may skew the overall performance and preclude tfi's managers from understanding the effectiveness of their programs in supporting treasury's overall mission and goals . in addition , the lack of balance exhibited by tfi's measures may give the impression that administering the bsa is prioritized over other functions , such as the analysis of financial intelligence or administration of licensing and designations programs . treasury officials acknowledge the limits of tfi's current performance measurement and have been working to enhance its measures , by replacing them with a single new tfi - wide measure . according to osppm officials , they began an initiative to overhaul tfi's performance measurement in 2007 . osppm officials stated that tfi's performance measures did not effectively reflect the impact of tfi's activities . after consultation with each tfi component , osppm decided to design a new composite measure that will provide a way to assess how tfi is performing overall as a unit . the new measure would outline the roles and functions of tfi's components and evaluate the outcomes of their activities . however , the process of reforming tfi's performance measurement has not been completed . the implementation of the new measure is still uncertain , although tfi management approved its use in may 2009 and components finalized the measures they will contribute .