ii ) . first - class mail volume ( eg , correspondence , bills , payments , and statements ) declined 4.8 percent , while standard mail ( primarily advertising ) declined 4.3 percent . volume declines accelerated during fiscal year 2008 ( see fig . usps's financial condition and outlook . options or actions available for usps to remain financially viable in the short and long term . my statement is based on our prior work and updated information on usps's financial condition and outlook . we reviewed usps's budget for fiscal year 2009 and preliminary information on results for the first quarter of the fiscal year and met with the chief financial officer and other postal officials . we conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in the long term , the large impact this unfunded obligation would have on the fund would create the risk that usps would have difficulty making future payments , particularly considering mail volume trends and the impact of payments on postal rates if mail volume declines continue . usps's proposal would also shift responsibility for paying the benefits of postal employees from current rate payers to future rate payers . usps would continue to make annual payments ranging from $5.4 billion to $5.8 billion from fiscal years 2009 through 2016 ( as shown in table 1 ) for its obligation for future retiree health benefits , as required by paea . thus , under usps's proposal , it would save $2 billion in fiscal year 2009 . reduce usps payments for retiree health benefits for 2 years . another option would be for congress to provide usps with 2-year relief for retiree health benefits premium payments , totaling about $4.3 billion , which would be consistent with providing immediate financial relief , while having much less impact on the fund than usps's proposal . specifically , congress could revise usps's statutory obligation so that it would not pay for current retiree health benefits for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . usps has provided information related to its financial situation for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 which projected that its financial condition would improve beginning in 2010 . therefore , we believe that the option to provide 2-year relief totaling $4.3 billion would be preferable to usps's proposal . under this short - term option congress could revisit usps's financial condition to determine whether further relief is needed and also review what actions usps has taken to assure its long - term financial viability . work with unions to modify work rules . one option that would not require congressional action is similar to actions taken by other financially stressed entities , whereby usps and its unions could agree on ways to achieve additional short - term savings , such as by modifying work rules to facilitate reducing work hours .