technical capacity . some tribes may not have the technical capacity to develop their energy resources , which can also limit federal energy purchases from tribal sources , according to tribal representatives and stakeholders we interviewed . for example , one tribal representative and four stakeholders we interviewed said that some tribes lack experience with energy development , which potentially limits their ability to take on large - scale projects that could meet federal energy needs . two stakeholders noted the importance of tribes having access to professionals with experience in running energy development projects to help overcome this potential limitation . federal agencies offer programs that could assist tribes with building technical capacity . for example , the department of the interior provides technical and financial assistance to tribes for the exploration , development , and management of tribal energy resources . in addition , doe offers grants and education through webinars , forums , and workshops . for example , doe in august 2018 selected 15 tribal projects to receive funding for developing their energy resources to reduce or stabilize energy costs , as well as to increase energy security and resilience on tribal lands . doe has also provided technical assistance , technology and market analysis , and capacity building for tribes , as well as webinars on utility - scale energy development , fundamentals of energy markets for tribes , and effective tribal project partnerships . however , doe's efforts have focused primarily on reducing tribal energy costs and assisting tribes in developing energy for use on reservations , rather than on selling energy to outside sources , according to doe officials . since the establishment of the tribal energy preference , gsa , dod , and doe have not entered into an energy contract with a tribe using the preference . the preference and other tribal energy resource development provisions added in the tribal energy section of epact05 provide federal agencies with mechanisms to support tribal energy development and use . as noted previously , the section provided for grants to assist tribes in developing their energy resources , authorization for federal agencies to give preference to tribal energy sources when contracting for energy , and double credit towards mandated renewable energy goals when federal agencies contract for energy produced on tribal lands . gsa , dod , and doe officials we interviewed identified five instances in the past when a tribe bid on a federal energy contract , and agencies did not use the tribal energy preference in any of these instances . two of the instances led to contracts with gsa because , in one of those instances , officials said that the tribe submitted the best bid , and in the other , gsa used the small business preference authority instead , as discussed further below . the other three instances were bids to dod and doe ; these instances did not lead to contracts because either the cost was too high or the proposal was unsolicited and not needed by the agency , according to agency officials . officials from gsa and dod noted that epact05 makes use of the preference discretionary because it says that federal agencies “may give preference” to a majority tribally owned energy source .