it goals . the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act require agencies to establish goals that address how it contributes to program productivity , efficiency , effectiveness , and service delivery to the public . we have previously reported that leading organizations define specific goals , objectives , and measures , use a diversity of measure types , and describe how it outputs and outcomes impact operational customer and agency program delivery requirements . the agencies generally have the types of goals outlined in the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act . for example , the social security administration ( ssa ) set a goal of achieving an average of at least a 2 percent per year improvement in productivity , and it expects that advances in automation will be a key to achieving this goal along with process and regulation changes . in addition , the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) latest departmental strategic plan has a goal that includes using business process reengineering and technology integration to speed up delivery of benefit payments , improve the quality of health care provided in its medical centers , and administer programs more efficiently . the va goal includes strategies such as using its enterprise architecture as a continuous improvement process , implementing e - government solutions to transform paper - based electronic collections to electronic - based mechanisms , and establishing a single , high - performance wide area data network . five agencies do not have one or more of the goals required by the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act . for example , the department of labor's single it strategic goal — to provide better and more secure service to citizens , businesses , government , and labor employees to improve mission performance — which it included in its fiscal year 2004 performance plan , does not address all required goals . further , in contrast to other agencies , labor does not have goals in its irm plan . it is important that agencies specify clear goals and objectives to set the focus and direction of it performance . it performance measures . the paperwork reduction act , the clinger - cohen act , and executive order 13103 require agencies to establish a variety of it performance measures , such as those related to how it contributes to program productivity , efficiency , and effectiveness , and to monitor the actual - versus - expected performance of those measures . as we have previously reported , an effective performance management system offers a variety of benefits , including serving as an early warning indicator of problems and the effectiveness of corrective actions , providing input to resource allocation and planning , and providing periodic feedback to employees , customers , stakeholders , and the general public about the quality , quantity , cost , and timeliness of products and services . although the agencies largely have one or more of the required performance measures , these measures are not always linked to the agencies' enterprisewide it goals .