ii . in addition to the 64 tribal tanf programs in operation in 2010 , hhs officials stated that as of april 2011 , 11 more tribes were actively pursuing starting their own program . the number of tribes served by tribal tanf programs has also increased from 174 in 2002 to at least 272 in 2010 , and more of the tribes administering their own programs are serving native families outside of their own tribe . tribes have the flexibility to determine whom their program will serve as well as their service area — the geographic area that their tanf program will cover . in 2002 , we reported that 16 out of 36 tribes ( 44 percent ) served only their own enrolled tribal members . according to our review of tribes' tanf plans , 16 out of 64 tribes ( 25 percent ) administering a program serve only members of their tribe whereas 48 tribal tanf programs ( 75 percent ) extend their services and benefits to families who are not enrolled members of their tribe . for example , according to their most recently approved tanf plan , the oneida tribe of indians of wisconsin serves both enrolled tribal members as well as other indians who are members of federally recognized tribes residing on its reservation who are eligible for tanf , whereas the hopi tribe serves only its own enrolled tribal members . we also found that according to hhs data , 11 of the 64 tribal tanf programs have expanded in order to serve more native families in nearby or surrounding areas . for example , the california tribal tanf partnership began administering tanf in 2003 and has expanded its program at least three times since then to include more tribes . as of may 2011 , this partnership was associated with 35 tribes and other organizations , and its tanf program service area spanned 14 different counties in california . nationwide , the total number of families receiving tribal tanf cash assistance has increased since 2002 , primarily because the number of programs has grown , but also because of varied caseload increases among existing programs . figure 2 below shows the changes in the nationwide average monthly number of families receiving tribal tanf cash assistance since 2002 . as shown , the total nationwide average monthly caseload increased almost every year between 2002 and 2009 ; in some years , increases were driven primarily by the addition of new programs . however , aggregate changes from year to year hide significant variation in caseload trends among programs . for example , between 2008 and 2009 , the majority of tribal tanf programs experienced increases in their average monthly caseloads , but some saw their caseloads decline . and even where increases occurred , they varied widely . a couple of smaller programs — which serve a dozen or fewer families on average per month — saw their average monthly caseloads increase by as few as four families , which represents caseload increases of about 33 and 67 percent , respectively .