high - speed passenger rail projects . we examined the factors that can lead to economically viable projects and whether the federal railroad administration's ( fra ) strategic plan to use the $8 billion of recovery act funds provided for high - speed and other intercity passenger rail projects incorporates those factors . we found that factors such as costs , ridership projections , and determination of public benefits affect which projects are likely to be economically viable . we also found that fra's strategic plan for high - speed rail outlines , in general terms , how the federal government may invest recovery act funds for high - speed rail development but that it does not establish clear goals or a clear role for the federal government in high - speed rail . we are beginning follow - up work aimed at , among other things , identifying how project sponsors and others have surmounted the challenges of instituting new rail service and how fra is positioned to develop , implement , and oversee its new high - speed rail program . we hope to have this work completed by next spring . we will continue to monitor these and other areas in which the committee might be interested . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee might have . for further information regarding this statement , please contact katherine a. siggerud at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov , or a. nicole clowers at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or clowersa@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . most states revised the initial certifications they submitted to dot . as we reported in april , many states submitted explanatory certifications — such as stating that the certification was based on the “best information available at the time” — or conditional certifications , meaning that the certification was subject to conditions or assumptions , future legislative action , future revenues , or other conditions . the legal effect of such qualifications was being examined by dot when we completed our review . on april 22 , 2009 , the secretary of transportation sent a letter to each of the nation's governors and provided additional guidance , including that conditional and explanatory certifications were not permitted , and gave states the option of amending their certifications by may 22 . each of the 16 states and district selected for our review resubmitted their certifications . according to dot officials , the department has concluded that the form of each certification is consistent with the additional guidance , with the exception of texas . texas submitted a revised certification on july 9 , 2009 . according to dot officials , as of july 28 , 2009 , the status of texas' revised certification remained unresolved . we will continue to monitor these trends in the weeks ahead . according to state officials , because an increasing number of contractors are looking for work , bids for recovery act contracts have come in under estimates .