failure or malfunction . pilots of small cargo aircraft have fewer human and other resources available to them to help avoid mistakes or recover from unexpected circumstances . typically , there is no second pilot to share in the pilot's many duties and help respond to emergencies . what have been recent trends in air cargo safety ? the lack of a second pilot coupled with the many duties of a single pilot merits a mention of the issue of pilot fatigue . although ntsb indicated fatigue as a contributing factor — not a probable cause — in just 4 of the 443 accidents in our data , 12 of 27 experts we surveyed ranked pilot fatigue as one of the three most serious challenges to safe air cargo operations . the view of the experts is not out of line with the accident record to the extent that the concern about pilot fatigue has led to vigilance in identifying and addressing fatigue issues . further compounding the lack of pilot resources , cargo aircraft operated under part 135 are not required to have on - board safety technology such as a traffic collision and avoidance system , a terrain awareness and warning system , or an autopilot , which could aid a single pilot in monitoring the environment or responding to changing weather conditions . most of these systems are required for small passenger aircraft that also operate under part 135 . additionally , small cargo aircraft may fly into airports where faa does not provide air traffic control services at all hours and the airports offer fewer services than might be required for passenger operations . for example , at the bethel , alaska , airport — the transportation hub for the remote villages in the area and the third - busiest airport in alaska — faa provides air traffic control services from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. from november to march and 2 hours later in other months , and the airport clears its runway of snow and staffs its aircraft rescue and fire - fighting equipment only during operations of passenger aircraft with more than 30 passenger seats . we analyzed ntsb reports of the 93 fatal air cargo accidents that occurred from 1997 through 2008 using faa's flight risk assessment tool and identified three or more risk factors in 63 of the accidents and four or more risk factors in 41 accidents . faa's tool is located in appendix iii and includes 38 risk factors — in the areas of pilot qualifications and experience , operating environment , and equipment — each with an assigned value ranging from 2 to 5 , with 5 indicating the highest risk . while we do not know how the presence of these risk factors differs from their occurrence during normal operations , the experts told us that the unrecognized accumulation of multiple risk factors can create a potentially dangerous situation . one 1997 fatal accident , which ntsb attributed to the pilot's disregard of the preflight weather briefing for severe weather , involved six risk factors .