usps agreed with our findings and recommendation . usps stated that it is developing a strategy to address the immediate and long - term needs of its delivery fleet , and that it plans to complete the strategy and associated timeline by the end of december 2011 . chairman carper , ranking member brown , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you have . for further information about this statement , please contact phillip herr at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or herrp@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include kathleen turner ( assistant director ) , teresa anderson , joshua bartzen , bess eisenstadt , laura erion , alexander lawrence , margaret mcdavid , joshua ormond , robert owens , matthew rosenberg , kelly rubin , karla springer , crystal wesco , and alwynne wilbur . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . these vehicles are known as dual - fueled vehicles . usps officials stated that e85-capable vehicles were chosen because they were the least costly option for meeting federal fleet acquisition requirements . in addition , officials expected that e85 eventually would be widely available throughout the united states . however , according to department of energy ( doe ) data , as of december 2009 , e85 was not available at 99 percent of u.s. fueling stations . subsequent legislation required that alternative fuel be used in all dual - fueled vehicles unless they have received a waiver from doe . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . this statement is also based , in part , on our prior and ongoing work on usps's financial condition and documents and a may 2011 interview with usps officials regarding the agency's financial performance for the first 6 months of fiscal year 2011 . our work for this statement was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in our issued products . usps's financial condition has deteriorated significantly since fiscal year 2006 , and its financial outlook is grim in both the short and long term . in july 2009 , we added usps's financial condition and outlook to our high - risk list because usps was incurring billion - dollar deficits and the amount of debt it incurred was increasing as revenues declined and costs rose .