( app . i provides a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) calls to reform the un began soon after its creation in 1945 . despite cycles of reform , un member states have had concerns about inefficient management operations . as one of the 192 member states , the united states played a significant role in promoting un reform , calling for financial and administrative changes . the united states , through the department of state and the u.s. mission to the united nations , continues to take measures to advance reform of un management processes . in 1997 and 2002 , the secretary - general proposed two separate sets of management reform initiatives in the areas of human resources , budgeting , and human rights . in july 1997 , the secretary - general proposed a broad reform program to transform the un into an efficient organization focused on achieving results as it carried out its mandates . although the secretary - general does not have direct authority over specialized agencies and many funds and programs , the reforms at the secretariat were intended to serve as a model for un - wide reforms . in may 2000 , we reported that while the secretary - general had substantially reorganized the secretariat's leadership and structure , he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting . in september 2002 , to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms , the secretary - general released a second set of reform initiatives with 36 reform actions , some expanding on previous reform initiatives introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities for the organization . in february 2004 , we reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda and 38 percent of the 66 initiatives in the 2002 agenda were in place . in 2004-2005 , a series of un and expert task force reports recommended the need for comprehensive reform of un management and the un human rights apparatus . these studies included a 2004 report of a high - level panel convened by the secretary - general to recommend ways to strengthen the un , a march 2005 secretary - general report to the general assembly , a june 2005 report by a task force mandated by the u.s. congress to recommend how to improve the effectiveness of the organization , as well as several reports of the independent inquiry committee established to investigate the oil for food program . in september 2005 , world leaders gathered at the un world summit in new york city to discuss global issues such as un reform , development , and human rights , as well as actions needed in each of these areas . the outcome document from the world summit , endorsed by all members of the un , outlines broad un reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability , and human rights . the document also called for the secretary - general to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve the management functions of the secretariat .