they were assigned . for example , they explained that border patrol agents assigned to the el paso sector may have been deployed to the tucson sector for training . given challenges related to border patrol agents deploying across sectors and since cbp does not specifically track whether agents in each sector have been trained , cbp was not able to provide information on the number of border patrol agents who had not received training . however , as shown in figure 3 , cbp was able to provide information on the number of border patrol agents who were trained in each year , by sector . we then compared these numbers with the number of border patrol agents onboard at the end of each year , for each sector . however , these percentages do not reflect the cumulative total number of border patrol agents that have not received any training , since agents that were trained in previous years may not need to receive training in subsequent years . the amount of training that cbp provided for each ofo field office also varied by office and year . for example , in 2011 , cbp trained 33 percent of ofo officers assigned to the tucson field office that year , and 1 percent of ofo officers assigned to the el paso field office , while in 2013 , cbp trained 46 percent of officers assigned to the el paso field office that year and 0 percent of officers assigned to the tucson field office , as however , a cbp official responsible for training noted shown in figure 4.that border patrol and ofo training may have been combined for smaller offices . further , as noted above , because cbp was unable to provide information on the number of ofo officers who did not receive training and officers may not need to receive training each year , these percentages do not reflect the cumulative total number of ofo officers who have not received any training . while cbp mostly provided training in the sectors that completed modernization upgrades , cbp also provided some training in other sectors where modernization projects were still under way . for example , in 2014 , cbp trained 76 percent of border patrol agents assigned to the del rio sector that year , 39 percent of agents assigned to the big bend sector , and 45 percent of agents assigned to the laredo sector — sectors that received dip upgrades during 2014 . cbp also provided some training in sectors that have not yet received modernization upgrades . for example , cbp trained about 3 percent of border patrol agents assigned to the san diego sector in 2011 . developing a mechanism to verify that all border patrol and ofo radio users receive radio training could help cbp improve its ability to monitor and address radio user training needs . ice provided training on the upgraded digital system in one location , but has not assessed radio user training needs to identify radio user skills gaps , developed a plan to ensure training needs are met , or tracked the training that it provided .