wireless . land - based , or terrestrial , wireless broadband connects a home or business to the internet using a radio link . some wireless services are provided over unlicensed radio spectrum and others over spectrum that has been licensed to particular companies . in licensed bands , some companies are offering fixed wireless broadband throughout cities . also , mobile telephone carriers — such as the large companies that provide traditional cell phone service — have begun offering broadband mobile wireless internet service over licensed spectrum — a service that allows subscribers to access the internet with their mobile phones or laptops in areas throughout cities where their provider supports the service . a variety of broadband access technologies and services also are provided on unlicensed spectrum — that is , spectrum that is not specifically under license for a particular provider's network . for example , wireless internet service providers may offer broadband access in particular areas by establishing a network of subscriber stations , each with its own antenna that relays signals throughout a neighborhood and has a common interface to the internet . subscribers place necessary reception equipment outside their homes that transmits and receives signals from the nearest antenna . also , wireless fidelity ( wi - fi ) networks — which provide broadband service in so - called hot spots , or areas within a radius of up to 300 feet — can be found in cafes , hotels , airports , and offices . such netowrks generally use a short - range technology that provides speeds up to 54 mbps . some technologies , such as worldwide interoperability for microwave access ( known as wimax ) , can operate on either licensed or unlicensed bands , and can provide broadband service up to approximately 30 miles . fcc has primary responsibility for regulating broadband . section 706 of the telecommunications act of 1996 directs fcc to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability , which includes broadband , to all americans . under this authority , fcc has to date established a minimal regulatory environment for broadband internet access services . in the past , fcc has stated that less regulation has encouraged providers to invest in broadband infrastructure . the communications act , as amended , allows fcc to classify services as telecommunications services or information services , the latter being subject to fewer regulatory restrictions . fcc , through a number of proceedings , classified broadband internet access ( regardless of the platform ) as an information service . fcc does not have explicit statutory authority to regulate the provision of information services ; however , fcc has the authority to impose regulations under what is termed its ancillary jurisdiction to regulate services that are reasonably related to its existing statutory authority . fcc also has the authority to adopt broadband regulations to ensure that broadband providers are capable of providing authorized surveillance to law enforcement agencies . as part of its responsibilities , fcc has periodically issued a report to congress on the status of advanced telecommunications capability in the united states , including the quality of broadband data .