other steps . plan sponsor representatives also mentioned other steps they took to address difficulties of the last several years . some plans now seek specific contractual terms that affect liquidity or other aspects of the investment . for example , representatives of one plan explained that they now seek investor level gates , under which cash - out limitations would be triggered once an investor has liquidated more than a specified amount of their investment . other co - investors would not be affected and could still cash out under the normal terms of the hedge fund . how have plan sponsors responded to lessons learned from recent experiences with such alternative investments ? what steps have federal agencies and other entities taken to help plan sponsors make and manage investments in such alternative assets , and what additional steps might be warranted ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant literature ; analyzed data ; interviewed relevant federal agencies and industry experts ; conducted in - depth , follow - up interviews with pension plan sponsors contacted in the course of our prior related work ; and surveyed a selected group of 20 plan consultants , academic experts , and other industry experts . specifically , we conducted in - depth , follow - up interviews with representatives of 22 public and private sector defined benefit pension plans that were interviewed for our 2008 report examining the extent to which pension plans invest in hedge funds and private equity.identified these plans in 2008 using data from the 2006 pensions & investments survey of the largest 200 pension plans and through our interviews with industry experts . plan representatives' responses from these interviews do not represent a statistically generalizeable sample of all pension plans . we interviewed officials of federal agencies , relevant national organizations , pension plan consulting firms , and other national experts . we conducted a survey of five open - ended questions with plan consultants , academic and industry experts , representatives of plan participants , and representatives of public and private plan sponsors . we obtained data on the national performance of hedge fund and private equity investments from private organizations , cambridge associates llc and hedge fund research , inc. we obtained and analyzed survey data on the extent to which pension plan sponsors continue to invest in hedge funds and private equity from two private organizations , greenwich associates and pensions & investments . we conducted our work from february 2011 to february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more information on our objectives , scope , and methodology , see appendix i . defined benefit pension plans are intended to pay retirement benefits that are generally based on an employee's years of service and other factors .