otps . otps provide mat , including methadone and buprenorphine , for people diagnosed with an opioid use disorder . methadone may generally only be administered or dispensed within an otp , as prescriptions for methadone cannot be issued when used for opioid use disorder treatment . buprenorphine may be administered or dispensed within an otp , or may also be prescribed by a qualifying practitioner who has received a waiver from samhsa . naltrexone is not a controlled substance and can be used in otps and other settings . office - based and other settings . under a drug addiction treatment act of 2000 ( data 2000 ) waiver , practitioners may prescribe buprenorphine to up to 30 patients in the first year of their waiver , 100 patients in the second year , and up to 275 patients in the third year . practitioners at the 275-patient level must meet additional qualifications and requirements . naltrexone does not have similar restrictions . hhs has implemented five key efforts from 2015 through august 2017 that focus on expanding access to mat for opioid use disorders . four of these are grant programs , including programs focused on health centers or primary care practices in rural areas . targeted capacity expansion: medication assisted treatment – prescription drug and opioid addiction ( mat - pdoa ) . this grant program is administered by samhsa and provides funding to states to increase their capacity to provide mat and recovery support services to individuals with opioid use disorders . grant recipients are expected to identify a minimum of two high - risk communities within the state and partner with local government or community - based organizations to address the mat - related treatment needs in these communities . the evaluation is particularly important , given the hundreds of millions of dollars hhs has invested in its mat - related grant programs . we are making the following two recommendations to hhs . the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation should establish performance measures with targets related to expanding access to mat for opioid use disorders . ( recommendation 1 ) the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation should establish timeframes in its evaluation approach that specify when its evaluation of efforts to expand access to mat will be implemented and completed . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review , and hhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its written comments , hhs concurred with both of our recommendations . specifically , for our first recommendation to establish performance measures with targets related to expanding access to mat for opioid use disorders , hhs stated that developing such measures is appropriate and that the department will continue to work to develop robust performance measures , including measures related to mat , as part of its overall opioid strategy , which includes the department's most recent efforts to address the opioid epidemic .