interests . gao - 07-1135t . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2007 . biological research laboratories: issues associated with the expansion of laboratories funded by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases . gao - 07-333r . what lessons can be learned from recent incidents at three high - containment labs ? to answer these questions , we interviewed officials from several federal agencies , as well as experts ; reviewed literature ; conducted site visits ; and surveyed 12 federal agencies . we conducted our work from august 2006 through september 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards ( see appendix i for our scope and methodology ) . since september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increase in the funding for research in biomedicine . this increase is intended to develop effective medical countermeasures , against emerging infectious diseases and biological agents , which can only be performed safely in bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 labs . a large part of this funding has been used to construct additional high - containment bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 labs . the bsl labs are classified by the type of agents used and the risk posed to personnel , the environment , and the community by those agents . the department of health and human services's ( hhs ) biosafety in microbiological and biomedical laboratories ( bmbl ) guidelines specify four biosafety levels , with bsl - 4 being the highest . the levels include combinations of laboratory practices and techniques , safety equipment , and facilities that are recommended for labs that conduct research on potentially dangerous agents and toxins . these labs are to be designed , constructed , and operated in a manner to ( 1 ) prevent accidental release of infectious or hazardous agents within the laboratory and ( 2 ) protect lab workers and the environment external to the lab , including the community , from exposure to the agents . work in bsl - 3 labs involves agents that may cause serious and potentially lethal infection . in some cases , there are vaccines or effective treatments available . types of agents that are typically handled in bsl - 3 labs include , for example , anthrax , west nile virus , q fever , tularemia , and avian flu . work in bsl - 4 labs involves the most dangerous agents for which there are no effective vaccines or treatments available . types of agents that are typically handled in bsl - 4 labs include , for example , ebola , hemorrhagic fevers , and smallpox . many different federal agencies have some connection with bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 labs in the united states . these agencies are involved with these labs in various capacities , including as users , owners , regulators , and funding sources . for example , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) has its own high - containment labs and regulates that portion of labs working with select agents and toxins that represent a risk to human health and safety .