persistent . generally , programs that persist over time should be included . however , agencies have the flexibility to identify short - term efforts as programs , such as activities related to the recovery act . when we asked officials at each agency if the inventory covered everything the agency does , most responded that the inventory included all agency activities . however , officials at a few agencies told us that their inventories did not always include certain activities . in most cases , activities were excluded from the inventory because they did not meet one of the characteristics of a program described in omb's guidance . for instance , the small business administration ( sba ) only included programs that were permanent in nature and excluded pilot programs from its inventory because , according to sba officials , they did not consider pilot programs to meet the “persistent” characteristic . as an example , they cited sba's boots to business program , which was in a pilot phase when the agency's 2013 inventory was published . sba officials told us they expected to add the program in the next inventory update as the pilot phase had been completed . because omb's guidance does not clearly define when a short - term activity has persisted long enough to be considered a program , agencies may be using different criteria for when to include them as programs in their inventories . as a result , agencies' inventories may not be as comprehensive as desired . clearer guidance from omb could lead to a more complete picture of federal programs in the inventory . in other instances , office of personnel management ( opm ) officials told us they did not include a voting rights oversight program in their inventory because it was not operationally meaningful , in that it did not easily align with opm's mission . social security administration ( ssa ) officials told us they , in consultation with omb staff , did not include the special benefits for certain world war ii veterans program in their inventory because it is relatively small in size , in terms of its funding ( $8 million of the agency's total net budget authority of $55.9 billion in fiscal year 2013 ) and number of beneficiaries ( approximately 1,000 , based on information in ssa's fiscal year 2015 congressional budget justification ) compared to the agency's other programs . in response to a question during our interview , department of the interior ( interior ) officials realized they did not include functional management offices , such as the offices of policy and the chief financial officer , as part of a set of “programs” in their inventory falling under the office of the secretary . agency officials at opm , ssa and interior told us they intend to account for these programs in future iterations of their program inventories . the federal government is one of the world's largest and most diverse entities , with about $3.5 trillion in outlays in fiscal year 2013 , funding an extensive array of programs and operations .