we calculated benchmarks at the contract level . using county - level enrollment and benchmark data from cms , we defined ma organizations' contracts as having a high benchmark if their enrollment - weighted average benchmark was above the enrollment - weighted average benchmark for all ma contracts in our analysis . we defined ma organizations' contracts as having a low benchmark if their enrollment - weighted average benchmark was equal to or below the enrollment - weighted average benchmark for all ma contracts in our analysis . we analyzed plans with specific eligibility requirements at the plan level , because snps and employer group plans can be included in contracts with plans available to all medicare beneficiaries . we excluded snps and employer group plans with fewer than 24,000 member months . after all exclusions , our snp analysis included 99 contracts and 121 plans , which enrolled the equivalent of approximately 1.0 million beneficiaries — 71 percent of the total snp enrollment in 2011 . after all exclusions , our employer group plan analysis included 77 contracts and 111 plans , which enrolled the equivalent of approximately 1.7 million beneficiaries — 77 percent of the total ma employer group enrollment in 2011 . the results are reported for 2011 and may not be representative of or generalizable to other years . spent on medical expenses reported in our study is not directly comparable to the ppaca medical loss ratio calculation . cms issued its final rule defining the ppaca medical loss ratio calculation in 2013 , which was after ma organizations submitted their bids for 2013 that contained ma organizations' actual 2011 expenses and profits . in addition , the percentage of total revenue we took several steps to ensure that the data used to produce this report were sufficiently reliable . specifically , we assessed the reliability of the cms data we used by interviewing relevant officials , reviewing data documentation , and examining the data for obvious errors . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our study . we conducted this performance audit from august 2013 through december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . because of differences in our methodologies , the results presented in this report are not directly comparable to our past reports on this topic . for instance , we analyzed snps separately in this report , whereas snps were not separated out in our previous reports because such data were not available . payments to ma organizations are based on the ma organization's bid and benchmark and are adjusted for differences in projected and actual enrollment , beneficiary residence , and health status . ppaca changed how the benchmark and rebate are calculated .