administrative reviews . usda develops guidance for administrative reviews in which state agencies review school districts' administration of the school meals programs . state agencies are required to conduct administrative reviews of each of their school districts at least once in a 3-year review cycle . usda guidance states that the objectives of administrative reviews include identifying noncompliance , providing technical assistance , and assessing fiscal actions . among other things , state agency staff are to review a school district's certification records and its meal counting and claiming data for the most recent month for which a claim for reimbursement was submitted . state agency staff are also to review school meals served while the staff are on - site to determine whether the meals contain the required food components . state agency staff are to record any identified noncompliance and also provide technical assistance to school district staff . the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) , as amended , requires agencies to identify , estimate , and report their improper payment amounts and to develop and implement improper payment reduction plans , among other things . usda estimates improper payments for the school meals programs through a model based on its apec study , which is conducted by contractors . the most recent apec study ( apec ii ) was released in may 2015 and covered activity during the 2012 – 2013 school year . usda conducts an apec study about every 5 years , with apec iii expected to be released in 2020 . conducting the apec study involves multiple sampling and data analysis efforts , including the following examples from apec ii . in - person surveys . contractors conducted in - person surveys of over 3,000 sampled households to collect information on each household's circumstances at the time of application , including income , household size , and receipt of other public - assistance benefits . using this information , contractors determined a sampled student's eligibility status and compared it to the school district's master benefit list and application or direct certification documentation . data matching . contractors assessed the accuracy of the identified student percentage — the figure used to determine reimbursement for schools using the community eligibility provision — for over 100 sampled schools . to do so , contactors used an iterative process to match sampled students to snap and temporary assistance for needy families records , as well as additional data sources if necessary . management evaluations . usda conducts management evaluations of state agencies' administration of the school meals programs . usda uses risk - based criteria , such as the level of turnover in state agency staff , to select the state agencies to review each year . according to usda officials , starting in fiscal year 2019 , usda will automatically select a state agency for review if it has not been reviewed in the past 3 years .