inspections . the eu bases its inspections of imports on the degree of risk presented by particular food types . according to the eu , it has shifted its focus from regular , but random , sampling to paying attention to the sources of greatest risk . risk may be high because a particular product is traded in large quantities , or because a product or the area it comes from is known to be susceptible to a particular plant or animal disease . if the risk of a given food product is not known or quantified , the eu applies what it refers to as the “precautionary principle:” if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting a problem , the commission acts to limit the risk . the eu asserts it does not necessarily need to wait for proof that there really is a risk . because of countries' differing risk profiles , the eu has different inspection methods for food products of ( 1 ) animal origin , ( 2 ) nonanimal origin , and ( 3 ) high - risk foods of nonanimal origin . first , all imports of live animals and animal products must enter the eu through its roughly 300 approved border inspection posts , which include airports , rail stations , and deepwater ports . the posts are under the authority of each member state's official veterinary services . a member state's customs service cannot release consignments unless they have passed through veterinary controls . the system thus requires the cooperation of veterinary authorities and customs officials . the border inspection posts must be notified in advance of the presentation of such consignments , which must undergo an official veterinary check at the inspection post . when a consignment arrives at a post , three types of checks are carried out: documentary: a documentary check is carried out on all consignments . identity: an identity check is carried out on all consignments to verify that the identity of the goods corresponds fully with the veterinary documents supplied . physical: a physical check is carried out on a percentage of consignments on the basis of the type of animal or animal product and the country of origin to ensure it does not pose a threat to public and animal health . according to eu officials , eu legislation also specifies a minimum number of physical checks to be carried out for each product group ( eg , meat , fish , or dairy ) by each member state . a physical inspection may also involve taking samples for laboratory tests . when all tests and checks are satisfactory , the consignment is issued a common veterinary entry document and is placed on the eu market . in cases where testing is carried out because of unfavorable results of previous tests on the animal product or when a problem is suspected , the consignment will not be cleared or allowed to leave the border inspection post until the border authorities receive the results of the new tests . if a consignment does not comply with eu requirements , it may be rejected .