op . at 31 ( march 30 , 2001 ) ( citations omitted ) . the court in lyons also held that the forest service had violated its planning regulations by failing to evaluate roadless areas within the tongass to determine whether any of these should be recommended for inclusion in the national wilderness preservation system . the court ordered the forest service to carry out such an evaluation , which is currently being performed . supporters of greater development have asserted that section 1326 ( b ) of anilca prohibits the forest service from studying national forest lands in alaska for the purpose of considering additions to the wild and scenic river and wilderness systems . although the court in lyons rejected this argument with respect to wild and scenic rivers , these stakeholders contend that the government did not adequately explain the provisions of anilca to the court , thus leading the court to an erroneous conclusion . the record of decision states that the revised forest plan does not violate section 1326 ( b ) because the plan is a general land management plan rather than a single purpose study . stakeholders also disagree over the proper management of the copper river delta . the copper river delta is a highly productive ecosystem that may contain commercial oil and gas deposits . a house version of anilca would have designated the area as a national wildlife refuge . as ultimately enacted , section 501 ( b ) retained the copper river delta under the forest service's jurisdiction , but provided that the primary purpose of the area was to further fish and wildlife conservation . some stakeholders have asserted that section 501 ( b ) of anilca prohibits the forest service from recommending any areas within the copper river delta for designation as wilderness because such a designation would prohibit the forest service from undertaking certain actions to conserve fish and wildlife . these stakeholders have also asserted that proposed wilderness designation would hinder future oil and gas development near the town of katalla . however , others who support preserving the forest's lands and resources argued that some of the land management prescriptions in the draft plan would violate section 501 ( b ) by failing to prohibit activities that conflict with the area's purpose of conserving fish and wildlife , such as mining , road construction , and off - road vehicle use , among others . the revised plan does not recommend any areas for wilderness designation within the copper river delta . the record of decision states that each of the three management prescriptions applied to the delta have fish and wildlife conservation as their primary goal . according to the rod , each prescription provides for a different mix of multiple use activities consistent with the conservation of fish and wildlife and their habitat . potential mining for minerals . in order to make decisions about areas in the chugach where mining would be permitted , the forest service analyzed a substantial body of data that it had gathered on past mining activities in the forest . however , such past activities were conducted in only a small portion of the forest , typically in areas accessible from existing forest roads .