we disagree . in characterizing and summarizing plan colombia's goals and u.s. programs , we reviewed reports prepared by state as well as our prior reports , and discussed the goals and associated programs with u.s. officials both in washington , d.c. , and the u.s. embassy in bogotá , and with numerous government of colombia officials . we addressed u.s. assistance provided for nine specific colombian military and national police programs to increase their operational capacity , as well as numerous state , justice , and usaid efforts to promote social and economic justice , including alternative development , and to promote the rule of law , including judicial reform and capacity building . we also note that state , usaid , and defense did not raise similar concerns . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense and state ; the attorney general ; the director of foreign assistance and usaid administrator ; and the director of ondcp . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4268 or fordj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . we examined u.s. assistance efforts since 2000 when funding for plan colombia was first approved . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the progress made toward plan colombia's drug reduction and enhanced security objectives ; ( 2 ) program support provided to the colombian military and national police , including specific results and related challenges ; ( 3 ) nonmilitary program support provided to colombia , including specific results and related challenges ; and ( 4 ) the status of u.s. and colombian efforts to nationalize u.s. assistance and the challenges , if any , these efforts face . to address the progress made toward plan colombia's drug reduction and enhanced security objectives , we reviewed various u.s. and colombian government reports and met with cognizant officials to discuss trends and the nature of the data . for trends in drug cultivation , production , and flow we relied primarily on u.s. agencies' information and officials . for trends in security data on government territorial control , homicides , kidnappings , and ridership on colombian roads , we relied on data reported by the colombian ministry of defense and other colombian government ministries . to evaluate trends in colombian drug cultivation and trafficking since calendar year 2000 , we reviewed various studies , such as the national drug threat assessment produced each year by the national drug intelligence center .