crop disaster assistance payments . similar to our crop insurance analysis , our analysis of fsa crop disaster assistance payments data indicates that conversions of grassland with no cropping history add disproportionately to government costs for disaster assistance payments in south dakota . table 4 shows the crop disaster assistance payments received by producers in the 16 south dakota counties with the highest conversion rates in comparison with the payments received by producers in other south dakota counties . from 1998 to 2004 , crop disaster assistance payments in the 16 highest conversion counties totaled more than $195 million ( 40 percent of the state total ) , compared with approximately $292 million for the other 50 south dakota counties , including about $16 million in 7 historically cropped counties in southeast south dakota . according to usda officials , a possible reason for the relatively high crop insurance and disaster assistance payments in south dakota counties with the highest conversion rates is that these counties are in areas that are more prone to drought and crop losses than other major crop - producing counties . drought has been the largest cause of crop insurance indemnity payments nationwide from 1989 to 2004 , accounting for about 40 percent of the primary causes of total indemnity payments . our 2005 report on crop insurance explains why areas that are prone to frequent or severe crop losses may have relatively high crop insurance costs . the crop insurance program has high premium subsidies to encourage participation . premium subsidies are calculated as a percentage of the total premium and can be as high as 67 percent . the subsidies shield producers from the full cost of growing crops in these areas . because premiums are higher in areas that are prone to frequent or severe crop losses than in the major crop - producing counties , premium subsidies have the effect of causing crop insurance costs to be higher in these areas . federal farm program payments are an important factor in producers' decisions to convert native grassland to cropland , but rising crop prices and advances in crop production technology are also important factors in these conversions . ducks unlimited study . a recent ducks unlimited study provided additional information regarding the extent of native grassland conversions to cropland in the western part of the prairie pothole region in north dakota and south dakota . the researchers analyzed conversions from 1984 through 2003 , examining satellite imagery from this period and performing field checks to identify native grassland . the study found that from 1984 through 2003 , an estimated 144,000 acres were converted from native grassland to cropland . the highest conversions were in central south dakota . the study concluded that the annual conversion rates — which ranged from 0.32 percent to 0.95 percent across the study areas — were relatively low but that the acreage converted was significant from a biological and economic perspective . although states other than montana , north dakota , and south dakota may have experienced conversions in recent years , we did not find any other systematic efforts to collect state or local conversions data . however , we were able to obtain some quantitative information that provides some indication of recent conversions in nebraska .