even so , it cannot be presumed that they will continue to do so . 113-446 , accompanying h.r . 4435 , the howard p. “buck” mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , noted the requirements stated in section 913 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( public law no . 111 – 383 ) requiring the department of defense ( dod ) to purchase m - code capable user equipment during the fiscal years after fiscal year 2017 and included a provision for us to report on dod's progress in deploying m - code capability . this projection proved to be overly optimistic . in light of the challenges experienced to that point , at the april 2012 ager , usd at&l postponed the scheduled milestone b decision for ocx and directed the program to return for a formal defense acquisition board ( dab ) review within 120 days and to report on progress . in the midst of mounting ocx problems , the air force disrupted the ongoing software development effort . as it became apparent that ocx block 1 would not be ready in time to support the then - projected launch time frames of the first gps iii satellite ( august 2015 and may 2014 respectively ) , usd at&l directed the air force in january 2011 to separate out development of the satellite launch and initial testing portion of the block 1 software . dubbed block 0 , this subset of software is to contain the capabilities needed to launch and test the initial gps iii satellites . the air force modified the ocx contract in january 2012 to implement this change , which included bringing forward ia capabilities originally scheduled for later iterations . block 0 is a temporary measure because the air force anticipated that some gps iii satellites would need to be launched before the entirety of block 1 was to be developed . block 0 does not allow the gps iii satellites to be incorporated into the overall gps constellation and used by the military or civil community — which requires block 1 implementation . further , this decision to accelerate the gps iii launch and test capability was based on air force assessments of gps iii progress that appeared overly optimistic , as gao found at the time . nevertheless , according to raytheon officials , the creation of block 0 and acceleration of some software capabilities caused it to have to revamp the ocx software development plan 2 years into development — not in accordance with best practices in software development , which call for stabilizing requirements and design prior to coding . our prior work in this area shows that too many changes to requirements can result in additional , sometimes unmanageable risk . meanwhile , raytheon continued to struggle with developing ocx , specifically with implementing ia requirements . the contractor was overly optimistic in its initial estimates of the work associated with incorporating open source and reused software , and , according to the air force , did not appear to follow ia screening or software assurance processes as required , for example , incorporating open source software without ensuring that it was ia - compliant .