gao - 08-469rni . washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2008 ( for official use only ) . defense critical infrastructure: dod's risk analysis of its critical infrastructure omits highly sensitive assets . gao - 08-373r . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2008 . a more thorough description of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . homeland security presidential directive 7 , issued in december 2003 , designates the secretary of homeland security as the principal federal official responsible for leading , integrating , and coordinating the overall national effort to protect the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources . homeland security presidential directive 7 also requires all federal departments and agencies to identify , prioritize , and coordinate the protection of critical infrastructure and key resources from terrorist attacks . asd ( hd&asa ) , within the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , serves as the principal civilian advisor and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff serves as the principal military advisor to the secretary of defense on critical infrastructure protection . the transportation defense sector is made up of a worldwide network of dod and non - dod surface , sea , and air assets that the u.s. military relies on to move personnel and equipment . currently , the transportation defense sector consists of 300 critical air bases , seaports , and commercial airports worldwide and owned by dod , other u.s. governmental organizations , private companies , and foreign governments . according to transcom officials , the transportation defense sector is highly resilient because of significant redundancy among the various modes of transportation , particularly as it relates to surface transportation . for example , the size and capabilities of the u.s. rail and highway networks afford ability to reroute shipments via alternate roads and rail lines in the event of disruptions , a key reason why surface transportation assets were not identified as critical . in addition to dcip , dod has established other complementary programs that help assure critical assets , including the antiterrorism program and the defense continuity program . figure 1 shows the areas of responsibility for each geographic combatant command . further , we assessed relevant planning documents , including continuity of operations and emergency management plans for assets we selected for review and for the associated public works assets that support them . we reviewed transportation infrastructure vulnerability assessments that focus on critical infrastructure , when available , for those dod and foreign installations we visited . also , we analyzed relevant office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , military service , and combatant command guidance and funding data . within dod , we interviewed officials from osd , the joint staff , defense agencies , the military services , combatant commands , subcomponent commands , sector lead agents , and installation - level organizations in the united states and abroad . our cases for review included two of the four tier 1 critical transportation assets . the specific assets we reviewed , their locations , and the missions that they support are omitted from this appendix , since that information is classified . figure 6 shows the methodology we used to select the critical transportation assets for review .