however , sec did not take further action . the primary sro for broker - dealers is finra . state securities offices work in conjunction with sec and finra to regulate securities firms . salespersons working for broker - dealers are subject to state registration requirements , including examinations . about half of broker - dealers were examined in 2009 by sec and sros . under broker - dealer regulation , financial planners are held to a suitability standard of care when making a recommendation to a client to buy or sell a security , meaning that they must recommend those securities that they reasonably believe are suitable for the customer . financial planners that sell insurance products , such as life insurance or annuities , must be licensed by the states to sell these products and are subject to state insurance regulation . in contrast to securities entities ( other than national banks ) that are subject to dual federal and state oversight , the states are generally responsible for regulating the business of insurance . a more extensive discussion of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2010 to january 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . financial planning typically involves a variety of services , including preparing financial plans for clients based on their financial circumstances and objectives and making recommendations for specific actions clients may take . in many cases , financial planners also help implement these recommendations by , for example , providing insurance products , securities , or other investments . individuals who provide financial planning services may call themselves a variety of different titles , such as financial planner , financial consultant , financial adviser , trust advisor , or wealth manager . in addition , many financial planners have privately conferred professional designations or certifications , such as certified financial planner® , chartered financial consultant® , or personal financial specialist . the number of financial planners in the united states rose from approximately 94,000 in 2000 to 208,400 in 2008 , according to the bureau of labor statistics . the bureau projects the number will rise to 271,200 by 2018 because of the need for advisers to assist the millions of workers expected to retire in the next 10 years . according to the bureau , 29 percent of financial planners are self - employed and the remaining 71 percent are employees of firms , some of them large entities with offices nationwide that provide a variety of financial services . the median annual wage for financial planners was $68,200 in may 2009 .