contracts under the mod rehab program are between the owner and pha . eligible tenants generally pay 30 percent of their monthly adjusted income toward rents . phas pay the difference between the tenant payment and the approved rent directly to the owner . mod rehab projects with expiring housing assistance payment contracts are eligible for renewal , but renewal options are limited in that the assistance is generally only renewed in the form of a 1-year contract , which makes it difficult for property owners to secure financing for capital improvements . under rad , owners may elect to apply for a long - term , project - based voucher contract for their property rather than have phas provide eligible residents tenant - protection vouchers when a property's rental assistance contract with hud ( or with a pha in the case of the mod rehab program ) expires or the contract is terminated due to prepayment of the mortgage ( in the case of rent supp and rap ) . the rad program consists of two components . the first component focuses on the voluntary conversion of public housing properties , while the second component of rad — and the focus of our review — addresses the following programs that provide subsidized rents to residents . the project - based contracts under these programs — generally between hud and the owners of private rental housing — were entered into in the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , typically for terms of 15 , 20 , or 40 years . the voucher program pays subsidies to property owners to help very low - and extremely low - income households rent units on the private market . the voucher program currently serves over 2 million households . phas administer the program on hud's behalf , including special - purpose vouchers , such as tenant - protection , and project - based vouchers . eligible owners apply to hud to request approval for the conversions and must take specific steps and meet certain criteria , such as notifying residents of the conversions , obtaining consent from each resident who has already received a tenant - protection voucher in order to convert their unit , and passing housing - quality - standards inspections for the units proposed for conversion . once approved , the conversions allow the owners to convert their current assistance to long - term , project - based voucher contracts . after the conversion , if residents decide to move , they would lose their assistance because it is tied to the unit . however , project - based vouchers provide a mobility option for residents . the mobility option for residents allows them to apply for a tenant - based voucher from their local pha and be placed at the top of the pha's wait list for tenant - based vouchers after having resided in the converted unit for 1 year . the ability of residents to relocate , however , is subject to the availability of vouchers from the pha . further , residents we spoke to at three properties told us that they were planning on staying at the property , so mobility was not a concern for them .