( see fig . 4 for more information on forced - balance adjustments. ) the use of forced - balance accounting adjustments affects the reliability of an organization's financial information and may indicate weaknesses within its systems and processes . over the years , dod's practice of recording forced - balance adjustments has been questioned by gao and by dod's auditors . for example , in an audit of the army general fund's reconciliation process for the fbwt account , dod's office of inspector general ( oig ) stated that the army and personnel in dfas's indianapolis office “make forced - balance adjustments , which are unsupported manual and system - generated adjustments.” gao and an independent accounting firm both reported similar practices at the navy and marine corps . these audits have repeatedly identified limitations within the source - level accounting systems that dod components use and the multitude of legacy systems ( computer systems that are outdated or that can no longer receive support and maintenance but are still essential for an organization ) as the main contributing factors for the use of forced - balance adjustments . based on this testing , we estimate that at least 88 percent of fourth quarter fiscal year 2018 unsupported adjustments for which a root cause analysis was performed did not have a documented action plan . for the remaining 25 packages with documented action plans , we found that only two included steps documenting how the action plan was to be implemented . the remaining 23 packages with documented action plans lacked implementation details , and dfas officials stated that they were waiting for resolution from the relevant dod components . dfas officials stated that they prepare and document action plans for issues that affect multiple accounting adjustments but not for issues that affect only one adjustment ( unique root cause ) . unique root causes do not necessitate action plans and are resolved the following month through dfas working with the affected dod components . according to dfas officials , many of the action plans are discussed in biweekly and monthly meetings , but these action plans are not documented . finally , we found that dod and dfas do not have policies and procedures requiring management to monitor the results of action plans that individual dfas sites prepared or to measure whether implemented action plans are effective in addressing the causes for accounting adjustments . dod's financial management regulation ( fmr ) states that a forced - balance adjustment does not represent an adequate reconciliation . instead , dod components are required to maintain detailed reconciliation documentation to provide an adequate audit trail . additionally , the metrics did not include any information on action plans to address system - generated accounting adjustments , which account for the majority of the adjustments . this type of detailed information is critical to dod management and dod external stakeholders for evaluating the department's progress in correcting the issues . gao has previously reported that a lack of comprehensive information on corrective action plans limits dod's and congress's ability to evaluate dod's progress toward fully , timely , and efficiently correcting its long - standing financial management deficiencies .