nsf commented about several of our findings . nsf stated that our program evaluations finding may be misleading largely because the type of information gao requested and accepted from agencies was limited to program level evaluations and did not include evaluations of individual underlying projects . nsf suggested that we include information on the range of approaches used to assure program effectiveness . our finding is based on agency officials' responses to a survey question that did not limit or stipulate the types of evaluations that could have been included . nonetheless , we modified the report to acknowledge that nsf uses various approaches to evaluate its programs . nsf criticized the methodology we used to support our finding on the factors that influence decisions about pursuing stem fields and suggested that we make it clearer in the body of the report that the findings are based on interviews with educators and administrators from 8 colleges and universities , and responses from 31 students . also , nsf suggested that we improve the report by including corroborating information from reports and studies . our finding was not limited to interviews at the 8 colleges and universities and responses from 31 current students but was also based on interviews with numerous representatives and policy experts from various organizations as well as findings from research and reports — which are cited in the body of the report . using this approach , we were able to corroborate the testimonial evidence with data from reports and research as well as to determine whether information in the reports and research remained accurate by seeking the views of those currently teaching or studying in stem fields . as nsf noted , this approach yielded reasonable observations . additional information about our methodology is listed in appendix i , and we added a bibliography that identifies the reports and research used during the course of this review . nsf also commented that the report mentions the nstc efforts for interagency collaboration , but does not mention other collaboration efforts such as the federal interagency committee on education and the federal interagency coordinating council . nsf also pointed out that interagency collaboration occurs at the program level . we did not modify the report in response to this comment . in conducting our work , we determined that the nstc effort was the primary mechanism for interagency collaboration focused on stem programs . the coordinating groups cited by nsf are focused on different issues . the federal interagency committee on education was established to coordinate the federal programs , policies , and practices affecting education broadly , and the federal interagency coordinating council was established to minimize duplication of programs and activities relating to children with disabilities . in addition , nsf provided information to clarify examples related to their programs that we cited in the report , stated that some data categories were not clear , and commented on the graduate level enrollment data we used in the report . nsf pointed out that while its program called opportunities for enhancing diversity in the geosciences is designed to increase participation by minorities , it does not limit eligibility to minorities .