( see fig . a dod executive agent is the head of a dod component . directive 5101.1 requires odcmo to maintain such a list . the list included information about the number of dod executive agents , the dod component and office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) principal staff assistant to which they were assigned , contact information for officials at the dod executive agent and the osd principal staff assistant offices , and the date of assignment . officials from the dod executive agent for weapons of mass destruction elimination operations and delivery vehicle elimination operations in libya stated in their response to our questionnaire that the dod executive agent's 2004 designation is no longer needed , as considerable time has passed and the nature of u.s. government engagement and policies toward libya have changed significantly . while not generalizable , the sample we selected was designed to represent a variety of dod executive agents where ( 1 ) dod executive agents indicated they were assessed or indicated they were not , ( 2 ) different dod components were designated as dod executive agents , and ( 3 ) different dod organizations were designated as osd principal staff assistants . we also interviewed odcmo officials to understand its role as it relates to conducting the assessments . we compared dod's approach to assess dod executive agent designations to the stated requirements in dod directive 5101.1 . we also compared dod's approach to the standards for internal control in the federal government , including requirements for documenting internal control activities . we conducted this performance audit from july 2016 to september 2017 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod codified its dod executive agent program in 2002 and issued a directive , dod directive 5101.1 , that defines a dod executive agent and establishes the roles and responsibilities governing the dod executive agent assignments and arrangements . dod officials told us that the department issued a directive for its dod executive agent program in part because the term dod executive agent had been used to describe a variety of management arrangements , and dod directive 5101.1 was intended to clarify the term . for example , in 1998 , dod identified approximately 401 executive agents within the military departments . however , after the directive was issued in 2002 , odcmo officials stated they worked with identified executive agents to determine which were to remain dod executive agents under the directive . as a result , the number of activities and programs with the title of dod executive agent was significantly reduced . for example , the joint interagency task force west was referred to as u.s. pacific command's executive agent to support law enforcement for counterdrug efforts in the asia - pacific region .