job security . it personnel fear for their jobs after an incident and seek to conceal the breach from senior management . lack of law enforcement action . according to private sector officials , law enforcement entities have failed to investigate cases reported to them , which is a disincentive for them reporting crimes in the future . to improve the reporting of cybercrime , the numerous public / private partnerships ( eg , the national cyber forensics and training alliance , infragard , and the electronic crimes task forces ) , as well as the awareness and outreach efforts of law enforcement discussed earlier , are methods for building better relationships and understanding between the public and private sectors . these efforts may increase trust between the public and private sector and encourage better reporting of cybercrimes when they occur . efforts by law enforcement to investigate and prosecute cybercrime require individuals with specialized skills and tools . according to federal , state , and local law enforcement and private sector officials , it is a challenge to recruit such individuals from a limited pool of available talent , retain them in the face of competing offers , and train them to stay up to date with changing technology and increasingly sophisticated criminal techniques . federal and state law enforcement organizations face challenges in having the appropriate number of skilled investigators , forensic examiners , and prosecutors . he also stated that the rotation of the electronic crimes special agent program agents does not have a detrimental impact on the agency's cyber investigative capabilities because secret service field offices send additional agents through the program prior to a trained agent's departure , and because the electronic crimes task forces allow the agency to draw on state and local law officials trained in cyber investigations and computer forensics . while we agree that expanding the electronic crimes special agent program and leveraging the relationships and capabilities of the electronic crimes task forces is important to adequately addressing cybercrime , the current rotational policy may adversely affect the secret service's use of staff with cyber expertise ; therefore , it is important for the secret service to continually reassess the rotational policies that impact its ability to address the cyber threat . dod , doj , dhs , state and local government , and other officials also provided technical corrections that have been incorporated in this report as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the attorney general , the secretaries of defense and homeland security , the chairman of the federal trade commission , and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact david powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 , or pownerd@gao.gov ; or keith rhodes at ( 202 ) 512-6412 , or rhodesk@gao.gov .