ii ) . in 1991 , a phase 2 trial of paclitaxel demonstrated its effectiveness in treating breast cancer . in 1992 , bms filed and received approval for trademark protection for the name taxol . also in 1992 , bms filed an nda for taxol with fda . on december 29 , 1992 , fda approved taxol for the treatment of ovarian cancer , an indication for which it had been shown to be effective in earlier studies . in january 1993 , taxol was introduced into the marketplace by bms for the treatment of ovarian cancer . fda's approval of bms's nda to market taxol for the treatment of ovarian cancer triggered a provision in federal law granting bms 5 years of marketing exclusivity for taxol as a new chemical entity under the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 . the statute provides marketing protection for unpatentable pharmaceuticals , stating that during this 5-year period “no application…may be submitted” to fda that “refers” to the approved drug , a provision that generally prohibits the introduction of a generic drug during the exclusivity period . ( 3 ) what factors influenced how nih exercised its authority in taxol - related technology transfer activities ? in july 1997 , a number of generic drug manufacturers filed applications with fda to market a generic version of paclitaxel , and notified bms of their intent . to address these questions , we reviewed published and unpublished documents describing nih and bms's partnership and their efforts to research and develop taxol . using the u.s. patent and trademark office's database , we reviewed the patent history of taxol . we reviewed the primary taxol - related crada between nih and bms , which was signed in 1991 . we also reviewed an additional taxol - related crada and the license agreement between nih and bms . we interviewed the principal investigators associated with those cradas to understand the research involved . to assess nih's investments and financial outcomes resulting from taxol - related research , we obtained and reviewed data from nih's national cancer institute ( nci ) , office of financial management ( ofm ) , and bms's annual reports . we also reviewed medicare drug purchase data from the medicare part - b extract summary system and pricing data from the federal supply schedule ( fss ) . we interviewed officials from bms and from nih's ofm , office of technology transfer ( ott ) , and nci about spending estimates and the use of royalty payments . to assess the factors that influence how nih exercises its legal authority , we reviewed the relevant statutes and regulations pertaining to the technology transfer process and interviewed pertinent officials involved in the process at nih and bms . we also interviewed officials from one of nih's key partners in paclitaxel - related research , florida state university ( fsu ) , where much of the early research on a semisynthetic method of producing paclitaxel was performed . the scope of our report was restricted to nih's investment in paclitaxel , and we did not evaluate the effectiveness of commercializing taxol in comparison to other drugs .