risk assessments were lacking . our march 2015 report found that for case study projects we reviewed in four countries , neither usaid nor its implementing partners conducted comprehensive risk assessments that address financial vulnerabilities that may affect cash - based food assistance projects , such as counterfeiting , diversion , and losses . usaid officials told us that they conduct a risk assessment for all usaid's programs within a country rather than separate risk assessments for cash - based food assistance projects . according to usaid , its country - based risk assessments focus primarily on the risks that u.s. government funds may be used for terrorist activities and on the security threat levels that could affect aid workers and beneficiaries ; these risk assessments do not address financial vulnerabilities that may affect cash - based food assistance projects , such as counterfeiting , diversion , and losses . a usaid official provided us with internal efsp guidance to staff on the grant proposal and award process stating that an award would not be delayed if a risk - based assessment has not been conducted . according to usaid officials , its partners have established records of effective performance in implementing cash and voucher projects and they understand the context of operating in these high - risk environments . as a result , usaid expects that its partners will conduct comprehensive risk assessments , including financial risk assessments , and develop appropriate risk mitigation measures for their cash - based food assistance projects . however , none of the partners implementing efsp - funded projects in our four case study countries had conducted a comprehensive risk assessment based on their guidance or widely accepted standards during the period covered by our march 2015 review . we found that usaid did not require its implementing partners to develop and submit comprehensive risk assessments with mitigation plans as part of the initial grant proposals and award process or as periodic updates , including when grants are modified.efsp grant proposals and agreements do not contain risk assessments and mitigation plans . in addition , the implementing partners we reviewed had not consistently prioritized the identification or the development of financial risks that address vulnerabilities such as counterfeiting , diversion , and losses . usaid officials stated that most we concluded that without comprehensive risk assessments of its projects , usaid staff would be hampered in developing financial oversight plans to help ensure that partners are implementing the appropriate controls , including financial controls over cash and vouchers to mitigate fraud and misuse of efsp funds . in our march 2015 report , we recommended that usaid require implementing partners of cash - based food assistance projects to conduct comprehensive risk assessments and submit the results to usaid along with mitigation plans that address financial vulnerabilities such as counterfeiting , diversion , and losses . usaid concurred with our recommendation . in june 2015 , usaid noted that the fiscal year 2015 aps includes a requirement for applicants to provide an assessment of risk of fraud or diversion and controls in place to prevent any diversion or counterfeiting . we have yet to verify this information to determine whether it addresses the issues we identified . control activities had weaknesses .