dtra does not have its own laboratories . rather , the agency uses existing institutions , such as the service laboratories ( departments of the army , navy , and air force ) , and national laboratories as well as academic institutions . for example , in response to the military requirement for a specialized weapon to bomb caves and tunnels in afghanistan , dtra organized a team that employed products and expertise from the navy , air force , energy , and industry , which allowed dtra to develop , test , and deploy a weapon that could be used to attack cave and tunnel targets . dtra has also worked to develop specialized incendiary devices that would destroy wmd material held in a storage facility . to support dtra's efforts to address the wmd threat , the agency's advanced systems concepts office ( asco ) works to address ways to identify , anticipate , and address technology gaps to improve agency capabilities . for example , asco personnel with scientific expertise work to analyze the potential threat to military forces of pathogens such as bubonic plague , e. coli , and ebola . dtra also has overseen a project to test the ability of military facilities to protect against and recover from the consequences of chemical and biological attacks . from 2001 to 2003 , dtra and other military personnel undertook a series of exercises , technology demonstrations , and assessments at the u.s. air force base at osan , korea , to determine different ways to defend military forces and facilities against chemical and biological attacks . as the dod agency responsible for addressing all aspects of wmd threats , dtra possesses specialized capabilities and services that can assist civilian entities , including energy and dhs . dtra has a formal relationship with energy's national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) that coordinates and supports legislatively mandated joint dod - energy responsibilities for the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile . dtra also works with nnsa to secure nuclear materials in russia . dtra works with dhs offices on programs related to wmd issues , such as the international counterproliferation program and crisis response exercises . dtra's interface with dhs is through dod's newly established office of the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense . dtra's relationship with dhs may be subject to change as the broader dod - dhs relationship evolves . in addition to its relations with nnsa and dhs , dtra also works with and supports other federal agencies , state and local governments , and governments with which the united states has bilateral agreements . dtra works closely with energy's nnsa in matters pertaining to the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile . this relationship has its roots in the 1946 atomic energy act , which establishes joint dod and nnsa responsibility for the u.s. nuclear weapons program , including ensuring the safety , security , and control of the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile . these activities are conducted through the nuclear weapons council ( nwc ) , the senior - level body dedicated to these activities . dtra plays an active role in all activities of the nwc , from participating as an observer on the nwc to membership on its subordinate bodies .