predecessor contract . the contract in place prior to the award of a bridge contract . follow - on contract . a longer - term contract that follows a bridge contract for the same or similar services . this contract can be competitively awarded or awarded on a sole - source basis . it noted that while there is a legitimate role for bridge contracts in helping to avoid lapses in service that can cause mission harm , agencies bear a responsibility , as a part of effective risk management , to ensure this authority is being used only to the extent necessary and in accordance with far requirements that are designed to promote competition , including limitations on extensions and execution of justifications and approvals when competition is not used . ofpp stated that it intends to work with the members of the far council and u.s. chief acquisition officer's council to review relevant far coverage and discuss the value of developing a regulatory definition for a bridge contract or making other refinements to address non - competitive work with incumbent contractors beyond the period of contract performance . we appreciate that ofpp will be taking steps to explore the option of adding a definition into the far , and we continue to believe that a uniform , government - wide definition for bridge contracts is imperative to providing agencies with the information necessary to monitor these contracts and to ensure they are being used as intended . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb , the secretaries of defense and health and human services , the attorney general , and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 mackinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . our report examines ( 1 ) the insights of selected agencies into their use of bridge contracts ; ( 2 ) key characteristics of selected bridge contracts ; and ( 3 ) the reasons why bridge contracts are being used . since bridge contracts are not defined by the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , we , in consultation with our general counsel , developed a definition for bridge contracts based on our prior reviews and knowledge of bridge contracts and the institute for defense analyses report on competition for service contracts — which defined bridge contracts . for the purposes of this report , we established the following definitions: bridge contract . an extension to an existing contract beyond the period of performance ( including option years ) , or a new , short - term contract awarded on a sole - source basis to an incumbent contractor to avoid a lapse in service caused by a delay in awarding a follow - on contract . predecessor contract . the contract in place prior to the award of a bridge contract . follow - on contract .