ii. ) country studies and health and education officials in the fsm and the rmi also highlight other challenges — for example , the increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes or hypertension ; youth health issues ; and poor teaching skills . according to the fsm department of health , 80 percent of 35 to 64 year - olds are overweight , and the number of cases involving diabetes , hypertension , heart disease , and cancer increased in the late nineties . likewise , the rmi ministry of health reports that diabetes figured as the leading cause of adult morbidity in 2000 and 2001 . although the rmi has made progress in reducing overseas referrals since 2001 , the rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases poses challenges for delivery of health services in both nations . the care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad , lowered funding for public health programs that serve impoverished populations , and burdens on household and national budgets . future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing fsm and rmi youths . fsm and rmi health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides , sexually transmitted diseases , and teen pregnancy . with regard to teacher qualifications , the fsm department of education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards ( a bachelor's degree with courses in child development ) . in the rmi , a 2004 ministry of education assessment reported that more than 50 percent of teachers had failed basic english literacy tests . in the past 2 years , the fsm and the rmi economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance , suggesting limited prospects for achieving development goals of budgetary self - reliance and long - term economic advancement . private sector employment has largely stagnated in both countries , whereas public sector expenditures continue to account for almost two - thirds of gdp . despite the amended compacts' structure of declining grant assistance , the fsm and the rmi public sectors have grown while tax revenues remain relatively small . unless each nation can secure other donor assistance , maintenance of living standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances . the fsm and the rmi private sectors face significant constraints to growth , however , and fsm and rmi emigrants' current lack of marketable skills is a hurdle to increased remittance revenue . although the amended compacts' fiscal procedures agreements require jemco and jemfac to monitor fsm and rmi progress toward budgetary self - reliance and long - term economic advancement , neither organization has discussed these issues at its annual meeting or defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement . as in the original compact period , fsm and rmi economic conditions in 2004 and 2005 were characterized by dependence on foreign assistance . in the fsm , 2004 and 2005 gdp fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003 . for the rmi , the imf estimates that gdp expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure ( see fig .