b - 1b conventional upgrades . gao / nsiad - 96-52r . the report was delivered to congress in february 2002 . among other things , the report provided a summary of the ( 1 ) air force's reasons for reducing the b - 1b fleet , ( 2 ) follow - on missions for the affected units , and ( 3 ) details of the b - 1b modernization program . the air force began relocating and retiring b - 1bs in july 2002 . air force officers in the office of the deputy chief of staff for plans and programs said they considered a number of basing options before recommending that the remaining aircraft be consolidated at two active duty bases . however , they did not document the options considered at the time the decision was made and could not provide a comprehensive list of options considered . in early 2002 , at our request , they prepared a paper that outlined some of the options they believed were considered . according to the paper , the air force considered options that would have consolidated the aircraft at two active bases and one guard base , one guard base and one active base , or two active duty bases . the option selected continues to house b - 1bs at two active duty bases — 26 at ellsworth air force base and 32 at dyess air force base.according to air force officials , they selected this option because they believed it was the most cost - effective option available . we discuss our scope and methodology in more detail in appendix i . in a march 1999 white paper detailing modernization plans for the bomber fleet , the air force advised congress that it needed 93 b - 1bs , including 70 combat - coded aircraft by the end of fiscal year 2004 , to meet dod's strategy of being prepared to win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars . in june 2001 , the air force proposed reducing the fleet from 93 to 60 aircraft and reducing the number of combat - coded aircraft to 36 . table 1 compares the force structure before and after osd's june 2001 decision to reduce and consolidate the b - 1b fleet . partly in response to concerns expressed by members of congress about osd's june 2001 decision to eliminate the b - 1b mission at mountain home , mcconnell , and robins air force bases , the air force identified and announced new missions for these locations in september 2001 . planning for the new missions is well underway , and the units are expected to transition to their new missions in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2002 . mountain home's current f - 15e squadron will be increased from 18 to 24 aircraft , and its 7 kc - 135 tankers will be relocated to the air national guard unit at mcconnell air force base . the air national guard unit at mcconnell will be redesignated as the 184th air refueling wing and will have 10 kc - 135r tankers . the guard unit at robins air force base will transition to the 116th air control wing and have 19 joint surveillance target attack radar system aircraft .