this concludes my prepared statement . i appreciate , as always , your continued support and careful consideration of our budget . i look forward to discussing our fy 2015 request with you . limiting the federal government's fiscal exposure by better managing climate change risks ( new ) management of federal oil and gas resources modernizing the u.s. financial regulatory system and federal role in housing finance restructuring the u.s . postal service to achieve sustainable financial viability funding the nation's surface transportation system strategic human capital management managing federal real property transforming dod program management dod approach to business transformation dod business systems modernization dod support infrastructure management dod financial management dod supply chain management dod weapon systems acquisition ensuring public safety and security mitigating gaps in weather satellite data ( new ) appendix iii: gao's strategic plan framework this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . $2.3 billion from consolidating u.s . forces stationed in europe: dod removed two brigade combat teams and support units from europe , allowing it to further consolidate and close facilities , based in part on our work showing significant costs related to maintaining permanent army forces in europe and our recommendations that dod identify alternatives that might lead to savings . $1.3 billion through improved tax compliance: our recommendations on the use of information reporting to reduce the tax gap contributed to legislation requiring banks and others to report income that merchants receive through credit cards , third - party networks , and other means to help irs verify information reported on merchants' income tax returns . the estimated increased revenue through improved tax compliance is expected over the provision's first 3 fiscal years . gao has generated recommendations that save resources , increase government revenue , improve the accountability , operations , and services of government agencies , increase the effectiveness of federal spending as well as provide other benefits . since fy 2003 , gao's work has resulted in substantial financial and other benefits for the american people , including: over ½ trillion dollars in financial benefits ; about 14,500 program and operational benefits that helped to change laws , improve public services , and promote sound management throughout government ; and about 12,000 reports , testimony , and other gao products that included over 22,000 recommendations . in fy 2013 , gao also contributed to 1,314 program and operational benefits that helped to change laws , improve public services , and promote sound management throughout government . thirty six percent of these benefits are related to business process and management , 31 percent are related to public safety and security , 17 percent are related to program efficiency and effectiveness , 8 percent are related to acquisition and contract management , 5 percent are related to public insurance and benefits , and 3 percent are related to tax law administration .