our work is not generalizable to all fps regions . to determine the status of fps's efforts to develop an fsa tool , we reviewed , among other things , relevant project documents for mist and federal physical security standards , such as dhs's national infrastructure protection plan's ( nipp ) risk management framework . we also interviewed fps officials , representatives from argonne national laboratory who are responsible for developing mist , and four risk management experts . we selected our four risk assessment experts from a list of individuals who participated in the comptroller general's 2007 risk management forum . we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 through august 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fps concurred with this recommendation and plans to take action . in september 2011 , fps signed an inter - agency agreement with argonne national laboratory for about $875,000 to develop mist by june 30 , according to fps's mist documentation , mist is an interim 2012.vulnerability assessment tool that fps plans to use until it can develop a permanent solution to replace ramp . according to fps officials , among other things , mist will enable the agency to begin aligning its fsa process with nipp's risk management framework and isc standards . in addition , according to fps's mist documentation , mist will address key shortcomings identified with the ramp development effort , including lack of inspector involvement , limited testing , and an inadequate training program . according to mist project documents and fps officials , among other things , mist will also: allow fps's inspectors to review and document a facility's security posture , current level of protection , and recommend countermeasures ; provide fps's inspectors with a standardized way for gathering and recording facility data ; and allow fps to compare a facility's existing countermeasures against the isc countermeasure standards based on isc's predefined threats to federal facilities ( eg , blast - resistant windows for a level iv facility ) to create the facility's vulnerability report ) . in addition , according to fps officials , after completing the mist vulnerability assessment , inspectors will use additional threat information gathered outside of mist by fps's threat management division and any local crime statistics to justify any deviation from the isc - defined threat levels in generating a threat assessment report . fps plans to issue the facility's threat and vulnerability reports along with any countermeasure recommendations to the federal tenant agencies . fps officials stated that mist provides several potential improvements over its prior assessment tools: fsrm , ramp , and the fsa calculator and template . according to the nipp , a risk assessment should assess threats , vulnerabilities , consequences , and recommend countermeasures , specifically: a threat assessment is the identification and evaluation of adverse events that can harm or damage an asset . a vulnerability assessment identifies weaknesses in physical structures , personal protection systems , processes , or other areas that may be exploited .