this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions the members of the committee may have . reduce the tax gap 2 . address governmentwide acquisition and contracting issues 3 . transform the business operations of the department of defense , including addressing all related “high - risk” areas 4 . ensure the effective integration and transformation of the department of homeland 5 . enhance information sharing , accelerate transformation , and improve oversight related to the nation's intelligence agencies 6 . enhance border security and enforcement of existing immigration laws 7 . ensure the safety and security of all modes of transportation and the adequacy of 8 . strengthen efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons and their delivery systems ( missiles ) 9 . ensure a successful transformation of the nuclear weapons complex 10 . enhance computer security and deter identity theft 11 . ensure a cost - effective and reliable 2010 census 12 . transform the postal service's business model 13 . ensure fair value collection of oil royalties produced from federal lands 14 . ensure the effectiveness and coordination of u.s. international 15. review the effectiveness of strategies to ensure workplace safety policies and programs that are in need of fundamental reform and reengineering 1. review u.s. and coalition efforts to stabilize and rebuild iraq and afghanistan 2 . ensure a strategic and integrated approach to prepare for , respond to , recover , and 3 . reform the tax code , including reviewing the performance of tax preferences 4 . reform medicare and medicaid to improve their integrity and sustainability 5 . ensure the adequacy of national energy supplies and related infrastructure 6 . reform immigration policy to ensure equity and economic competitiveness 7 . assess overall military readiness , transformation efforts , and existing plans to assure the sustainability of the all - volunteer force 8 . assure the quality and competitiveness of the u.s. education system 9 . strengthen retirement security through reforming social security , increasing pension saving and promoting financial literacy 10 . examine the costs , benefits , and risks of key environmental issues 11 . reform federal housing programs and related financing and regulatory 12 . ensure the integrity and equity of existing farm programs 13 . addressing challenges in broad - based transformations strategic human capital management managing federal real property protecting the federal government's information systems and the nation's critical implementing and transforming the department of homeland security establishing appropriate and effective information - sharing mechanisms to improve dod approach to business transformation dod personnel security clearance program faa air traffic control modernization financing the nation's transportation system ( new ) ensuring the effective protection of technologies critical to u.s. national security interests ( new ) transforming federal oversight of food safety ( new ) . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the following are two recent examples .