( see ch . 5 for more information on the economic impact of tariff reductions for agricultural products. ) to date , the agriculture group has prepared a 45-page draft text that presents a range of proposals on market access for agricultural goods , export subsidies , other practices that distort trade in agriculture , and sps measures . the group is working toward agreement on this draft text and must also prepare schedules for the reduction of agricultural tariffs , nontariff barriers , export subsidies , and other trade - distorting practices . before they can begin negotiations on the schedules , they must decide how to conduct these negotiations . the agriculture group faces four significant issues . ftaa countries have not agreed on whether the agreement will address domestic supports . they also have not determined whether sensitive agricultural products will receive exceptions in the tariff negotiations . while ftaa countries have agreed to eliminate export subsidies within the hemisphere , they have not determined how to address third - party export subsidies . finally , while all ftaa countries seek the full implementation of the wto sps agreement , they have not agreed on how to treat it within the text of the ftaa . one controversial issue within the agriculture group is the issue of whether to include domestic support programs in the negotiations on other trade - distorting measures . some countries have proposed that the ftaa go beyond the current wto agreement on agricultural domestic supports by reducing and eliminating some supports that are currently permitted . these countries feel that that much of their trade protection comes in the form of tariffs , and , if they eliminate tariffs , their products would be disadvantaged in the face of subsidized products . brazilian officials have been particularly vocal on the issue of domestic supports , declaring that the negotiations could not proceed if the united states refuses to address domestic support programs . the united states , however , has publicly stated that commitments to domestic support reduction can only be achieved in multilateral negotiations , such as those in the wto . u.s. negotiators argue that because u.s. competitors , such as the eu , employ such supports , reducing them in the ftaa instead of the wto would amount to unilateral disarmament . at least one other country has a similar position on this issue . this impasse has led several ftaa experts to conclude an ftaa agreement on agriculture will depend on progress made in addressing domestic support in the wto . once the agriculture group begins tariff and nontariff negotiations , negotiators must determine how to handle each country's sensitive sectors . there has been no discussion on specific agricultural products beyond the san josé declaration , which states that all products will be subject to negotiation . two ftaa experts reported that they expect certain products will receive special treatment in the negotiations , such as longer phase - out periods or outright exceptions to tariff elimination . others have stated that they oppose exceptions to tariff elimination for agricultural products . the issue of product exceptions will be controversial because many of the products that are sensitive to one country are strong exports for another .