we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . in its written comments , which are reprinted in appendix i , dod concurred with our recommendation . funding for smi started in fiscal year 2013 . figure 4 depicts a timeline of key sbirs program events and efforts to study options for the next system , including technology development investments . beyond assessing the two options — of replacing the current analog focal plane with a more modern digital focal plane , either with or without changes to the electronic interfaces — the air force was not in a position to incorporate changes and still maintain the efficiencies planned by buying geo satellites 5 and 6 together . the current approach to technology insertion for sbirs is not consistent with the best practice of establishing a plan prior to the start of a program that identifies specific technologies to be developed and inserted to achieve a desired end state . the efforts that are under way are limited by lack of direction and time constraints in informing an acquisition decision and technology insertion plan for the follow - on to the current sbirs program . while the air force is working to develop a technology road map for the next system , the effort is still hampered by the lack of a clear vision for the path forward , requiring the air force to plan for multiple potential systems . further , it is too soon to tell whether the road map will be sufficiently developed in time to address future technology insertion needs . technology insertion decisions for sbirs do not systematically follow an established plan . instead , efforts are more near - term oriented to solve known problems or to take advantage of isolated technologies . a technology insertion plan ideally envisions desired capabilities for a system and then directs investments to develop those capabilities . in its systems engineering guide , the mitre corporation — a not - for - profit research and development company — highlights the importance of technology planning to provide guidance for evolving and maturing technologies to address future mission needs . as mentioned above , we have also found that leading commercial companies conduct strategic planning before technology development and plan for technology insertion before a program begins . such practices enable managers to identify needs and technologies , prioritize resources , and validate that a technology can be integrated . currently , technology insertion for sbirs is largely driven by the need to replace obsolescent parts , that is , parts that are no longer available and need to be rebuilt or redesigned and qualified for the space environment . for example , when a contractor was having difficulty delivering an encoder and decoder system — which assists with pointing control of the sensor — on time , the program office sought another source for the system . in place of a technology insertion plan , air force officials have cited smi as a means for demonstrating developed technologies that could be inserted into future systems .