calculation . for each fiscal year , total user fees are to be allocated in 1 . class allocation . the amount of total user fees for a fiscal year ( eg , $635 million for fiscal year 2017 ) is allocated among the different tobacco product classes subject to user fees ; this allocation is based on each class's share of the gross domestic volume of tobacco products introduced into the u.s. market . individual allocation . the amount of user fees allocated to each manufacturer or importer is proportional to its market share within a given class of tobacco products . for example , a manufacturer with 50 percent of the cigarette market would be required to pay 50 percent of user fees allocated for the cigarette product class . the act specifies that no manufacturer or importer of tobacco products shall be required to pay a user fee in excess of the percentage share of such manufacturer or importer . see figure 1 for a summary of the tobacco user fee allocation process under the tobacco control act . notifications to each manufacturer or importer of the amount of its quarterly tobacco user fee assessments are to be sent at least 30 days before the end of the quarter for which the assessment is made . collection . tobacco user fee payments are due the last day of each quarter . if a manufacturer or importer does not pay its user fee assessments by the last day of the relevant quarter , the act states that tobacco product shall be deemed adulterated . since the enactment of the tobacco control act , fda has issued several final rules ( regulations ) regarding its process to calculate , bill , and collect tobacco user fees , including the following: in 2014 , fda issued a final rule requiring tobacco manufacturers and importers to submit to fda the information needed to calculate individual tobacco user fees , starting with fiscal year 2015 . this rule applied to the four classes of tobacco products fda initially regulated: cigarettes , snuff , chewing tobacco , and roll - your own tobacco . fiscal year 2015 was the first year for which fda obtained the data directly from manufacturers and importers to calculate individual tobacco user fee assessments . in 2016 , fda issued a final rule extending fda's regulatory authority to all tobacco products , including pipe tobacco and cigars ( but excluding accessories of newly deemed products ) . using its deeming authority , fda issued another final rule requiring that pipe tobacco and cigar manufacturers and importers submit to fda the information required to calculate user fees for these tobacco product classes . fda began collecting tobacco user fees from the pipe tobacco and cigar classes in fiscal year 2017 . see appendix i for a timeline of events related to fda tobacco product user fees . fda's process for calculating , billing , and collecting user fees involves five steps . first , fda collects the data needed to calculate the quarterly user fee allocations for each tobacco product class and , within each class , for individual manufacturers and importers .