as a result , a backlog grew . according to wcrc data , over the past several years , an increasing number of submitted wcmsa proposals were determined by the wcrc to be ineligible for review , meaning that more of the wcrc's time has been spent responding to ineligible proposals . this information may then be used during the negotiations . this information is provided in writing through a conditional payment letter . additionally , while cms has created an msp manual , there is no direct link to the manual under the coordination of benefits or medicare secondary payer recovery headings on the medicare home page . also , because cms regularly updates its msp policies and process by issuing memos or “alerts,” it is difficult to determine what the current policy is or what may have changed in the process . cms has issued guidance regarding wcmsas , but finding current , official wcmsa guidance can be challenging , and cms has issued little other msa guidance . msp mandatory reporting has not been fully implemented . ghps were required to begin reporting in january 2009 . while nghps were scheduled to begin mandatory reporting in july 2009 , cms delayed this deadline several times , in part because of concerns raised by the insurance industry . certain nghps , including workers' compensation and no - fault insurers , were required to begin reporting in january 2011 . for resolutions that include a wcmsa , no payments are made by medicare for medical expenses related to the workers' compensation injury or illness until the set - aside is exhausted . the administrator of the wcmsa , typically the beneficiary or the beneficiary's representative , must submit an annual accounting of the set - aside funds to the msprc . mandatory reporting: the nghp reports the resolution to the cobc . regardless of whether notification of the msp situation occurred earlier in the process , after a resolution is reached in which the medicare beneficiary or someone on the beneficiary's behalf receives a settlement , judgment , award , or other payment from the nghp , the nghp is required to report information about the msp situation and its resolution to the cobc under mandatory reporting . the data nghps are required to submit include information to identify the beneficiary ; diagnosis codes for the injury , accident , or illness ; information concerning the policy or insurer ; information about the injured party's representative or attorney ; and settlement or payment information . recovery: the msprc seeks to recover medicare's conditional payments that have been made . the msprc calculates the total amount owed to medicare and issues a demand for payment — referred to as a demand letter . if the msprc was aware of the msp situation prior to receiving the notice of settlement , it averaged about 48 days to issue a demand letter . delays in issuing demand letters could result in delays in distributing funds from msp situation resolutions to beneficiaries . cms officials stated that the agency has a performance standard stating that the issuance of a demand letter within 20 days is timely if the case was established prior to settlement and the initial conditional payment letter was issued .