( see fig . helicopter air ambulances make up about 74 percent of the air ambulance fleet and , unlike fixed - wing aircraft , do not always operate under the direction of air traffic controllers . they also often operate in challenging conditions , flying , for example , at night during inclement weather and using makeshift landing zones at remote sites . my testimony today focuses on the safety of helicopter air ambulance operations . air ambulance operations can take many different forms but are generally one of two business models — hospital - based or stand - alone . in a hospital - based model , a hospital typically provides the medical services and staff and contracts with an aviation services provider for pilots , mechanics , and aircraft . initiated in january 2009 , this program provides guidance for inspectors of air ambulance operators , requiring them to ensure , among other things , that these operators have a process in place to facilitate safe operations , such as a risk assessment program . revised minimum standards for weather and safe cruise altitudes: to enhance safety , faa revised its minimal requirements for weather and safe cruise altitudes for helicopter air ambulances in november 2008 . specifically , faa revised its specifications to require that if a patient is on board for a flight or flight segment and at least one of the flight segments is therefore subject to part 135 rules , then all of the flight segments must be conducted within the revised weather minimums and above a minimum safe cruise altitude determined in preflight planning . the aviation services provider also holds the faa operating certificate . the hospital pays the operator for services supplied . in a stand - alone ( independent or community - based ) model , an independent operator sets up a base in a community and serves various facilities and localities . typically , the operator holds the faa operating certificate and either employs both the medical and flight crews or contracts with an aviation services provider for them . this stand - alone model carries more financial risk for the operator because revenues depend solely on payments for transporting patients . some operators provide both hospital - based and stand - alone services and may have bases located over wide geographic areas . regardless of the business model employed , most air ambulances — except government and military aircraft — must operate under rules specified in part 135 of title 14 of the code of federal regulations when patients are on board and may operate under rules specified in part 91 when patients are not present . the growth in the stand - alone provider business model has led to increased competition in some locales . according to the officials we interviewed and others who have studied the industry , the increase in the stand - alone provider business model is linked to the development , mandated in 1997 , of a medicare fee schedule for ambulance transports , which has increased the potential for profit making . this fee schedule was implemented gradually starting in 2002 , and since january 2006 , 100 percent of payments for air ambulance services have been made under the fee schedule .