reserves . cash reserves are funds held for known future requirements . this element provides for cash on hand to cover specific requirements that are not expected to disburse until subsequent fiscal years . our analysis of dwwcf cash data showed that the dwwcf monthly cash balances fluctuated significantly from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 and were outside the upper and lower cash requirements for 87 of the 120 months — about 73 percent of the time for this period . reasons why the monthly cash balances were outside the cash requirements included , among other things , ( 1 ) dla charging its customers more or less than it cost to purchase , refine , transport and store fuel and ( 2 ) dod transferring funds into or out of the dwwcf to pay for combat fuel losses or other higher priorities . during this 10-year period , dod took actions to adjust the dwwcf cash balance , such as transferring funds to other appropriation accounts , but the actions did not always bring the balances within the requirements in a timely manner . as a result , the monthly cash balances were above or below the cash requirements for more than 12 consecutive months on three separate occasions from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 . figure 1 shows the dwwcf monthly cash balances compared to the upper and lower cash requirements from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 . further , for the 10-year period , the dwwcf's reported monthly cash balances were above the cash requirement 62 times , between the upper and lower cash requirements 33 times , and below the cash requirement 25 times . table 1 shows the number of months the dwwcf monthly cash balances were above , between , or below the upper and lower cash requirements for each of the 10 years reviewed . the monthly cash balances were above or below the cash requirements more than 12 consecutive months on three separate occasions from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 . specifically , the monthly cash balances were ( 1 ) below the lower cash requirement for 13 consecutive months beginning in october 2007 , ( 2 ) above the upper cash requirement for 29 consecutive months beginning in march 2010 , and ( 3 ) above the upper cash requirement for 15 consecutive months beginning in april 2015 . the draft dod financial management regulation currently being implemented by the dwwcf provides information on the management tools dod cash managers can use to bring cash balances within the upper and lower cash requirements . the draft regulation states that these tools include , but are not limited to , changing the frequency of collections ; controlling the timing of contract renewals and large obligations or disbursements ; negotiating the timing of customer orders and subsequent work ; and requesting policy waivers , when necessary . in addition , the draft dod financial management regulation also provides guidance on transfers of cash between dod working capital fund activities or between dod working capital fund activities and appropriation - funded activities . dod has used transfers to increase or decrease cash balances in the past , under authorities provided in annual appropriations acts .