lack of resources . some african countries lack sufficient revenues to improve the safety of their aviation systems . a world bank official told us that only a few countries in sub - saharan africa have an aviation market with sufficient passenger traffic to generate sustained funding for aviation safety improvements . furthermore , aviation officials from all four of the african countries we visited told us that obtaining adequate funding to properly maintain their aviation system was a major challenge . for example , according to tanzanian civil aviation officials , they have not been able to make needed aviation safety improvements because their authority does not generate sufficient revenue from air traffic . moreover , revenue generated through such mechanisms as landing fees are not always dedicated to the aviation system in some african countries ; rather , the governments use this revenue for other priorities . finally , because of the low priority placed on improving aviation safety in some african countries , african aviation officials told us that it can be difficult to secure additional government funding for safety improvements . inadequate infrastructure . partly for lack of resources , the aviation infrastructure in many african countries is insufficient , outdated , or in otherwise poor condition , which can lead to safety hazards . for example , as discussed previously , airspace in some regions of africa is not controlled by air navigation systems . the lack of such technology increases the potential for midair collisions , affecting both civilian and military aviation . for example , dod officials told us that the lack of air navigation systems affects military aviation operations , such as carrying out missions and conducting training exercises , on the continent . to reduce the risk of collisions , officials from one african airline said they fly to certain regions only during daytime hours . african airports also sometimes lack basic infrastructure , such as radar systems , adequate runway surfaces , and other navigation facilities , or the infrastructure they have is obsolete . for example , according to iata , at many african airports , airfield lighting is not compliant with international aviation safety standards . noncompliant airfield lighting contributed to a crash in nigeria in december 2005 that killed 108 passengers . the runway lights were off , in part because the airport lacked the funds and resources to maintain a stable power supply from operating generators . according to tanzanian airport officials , maintaining and improving airport infrastructure is the biggest challenge they face in attempting to improve their country's aviation safety . lack of human capital expertise . according to several u.s. and african officials , the lack of qualified aviation personnel , such as pilots , air traffic controllers , maintenance technicians , and flight inspectors , has been a major challenge for african countries . these officials stated that many african civil aviation authorities and air carriers find it difficult to attract and retain qualified personnel , primarily because of the low wages they pay . this problem becomes especially acute for some african civil aviation authorities trying to retain qualified inspectors , because their salaries are tied to the governmental pay structure , which is not competitive with the private sector .