eleven agreed to participate . appendix i contains the details of our scope and methodology . we conducted our review from february through december 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . under the federal meat inspection act , the poultry products inspection act , and the egg products inspection act , usda , through fsis , is responsible for ensuring the safety of meat , poultry , and certain egg products . under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act and the public health service act , fda is responsible for all other foods , including fruits and vegetables ; dairy products ; seafood ; and certain canned , frozen , and packaged foods . the food - processing sector is generally described as the middle segment of the farm - to - table continuum — it extends from the time livestock and crops leave the farm for slaughter and processing into food until it reaches retail establishments . fda and fsis work to ensure the safety of food products processed in the united states through a regulatory system of preventive controls that identifies hazards early in the production process to minimize the risk of contamination . known as the hazard analysis and critical control point ( haccp ) system , it makes food - processing facilities responsible for developing a plan that identifies harmful microbiological , chemical , and physical hazards that are reasonably likely to occur and establishes critical control points to prevent or reduce contamination . through their inspection programs , fda and fsis verify that food processors are implementing their haccp plans . fda inspects over 57,000 food facilities every 5 years on average , and usda inspects over 6,000 meat and poultry slaughter and processing facilities daily . while nearly half of the fsis respondents said they were somewhat or very confident of the efforts made by the food processors they inspect , slightly over one - fourth of the fda respondents were satisfied or very satisfied with the efforts made by the food processors they inspect . thirty - seven food regulatory officials interviewed by state auditors in 11 states provided opinions on their overall level of satisfaction with federal , state , and industry efforts to protect food from intentional contamination . table 1 shows that nearly half of the state regulatory officials interviewed expressed satisfaction with the efforts made by federal , state , and industry to safeguard food products — though these results cannot be generalized to all state regulatory officials . finally , most of the state officials interviewed by state auditors believed it was either “important” or “very important” for states to monitor whether companies have adopted security measures to prevent acts of deliberate contamination ; 3 of the 11 states are already requiring their inspectors to do so . the vulnerability of the food supply to potential acts of deliberate contamination is a national concern . the president addressed this concern in the october 8 , 2001 , executive order establishing the office of homeland security and adding the agriculture and food industries to the list of critical infrastructure systems needing protection from terrorist attack .