atf concurred with the recommendations . as of march 2017 , atf has implemented one recommendation and reported progress towards implementing the other two recommendations by improving practices and modifying data systems to better align with atf policy . doj should study options for reducing overlap and fragmentation on missing persons databases . in june 2016 , we reported that doj could facilitate more efficient sharing of information on missing persons and unidentified remains . the fbi's national crime information center database includes criminal justice agency information and is restricted to authorized users . doj's nij oversees the national missing and unidentified persons system , a database open to the public for access to published case information . we found that data contained in these systems were overlapping and fragmented , creating the risk of duplication . because there is no mechanism to share information between the systems , users relying on only one system may miss information that could be instrumental in solving these types of cases . although federal law precludes full integration , there may still be opportunities to share information between the systems , which could reduce overlap and fragmentation of data on missing and unidentified persons . to allow for more efficient use of missing and unidentified persons information , we recommended that the fbi and nij evaluate options to share information between the two systems . doj disagreed with our recommendation , citing that it lacks legal authority . in march 2017 , doj reiterated its position that any such sharing was prohibited by the law . specifically , doj stated that the fbi's system can only share information with authorized users , dissemination is limited to those individuals performing law enforcement , and that additional efforts to examine other options would waste taxpayer funds . we continue to believe that our recommendation is valid and that doj should further study options for sharing information within the confines of its legal framework . for example , our work identified a variety of solutions to address the fragmentation and overlap between the two systems such as developing a notification alert for the fbi's system when related case data was also present in the other system . doj and the fbi have not addressed privacy and accuracy concerns related to the fbi's use of face recognition technology . whenever agencies develop or change technologies that collect personal information , federal law requires them to publish certain privacy impact statements . in may 2016 , we reported that the fbi did not publish updated privacy impact assessments ( pia ) and a system of records notice ( sorn ) for a face recognition service that allows law enforcement agencies to search a database of over 30 million photos to support criminal investigations . users of this service include the fbi and selected state and local law enforcement agencies , which can submit search requests to help identify an unknown person using , for example , a photo from a surveillance camera . doj issued an initial pia in 2008 , before the fbi and state and local law enforcement agencies began using this service on a pilot basis .