fees . moreover , in many cases the fixed effects estimates will still produce consistent estimates even when the random effects model is valid . auditing standard no . 5 , which is expected to address some of the cost issues , became effective for audits in fiscal years ending on or after november 15 , 2007 . other accounting and financial reporting standards and requirements have been implemented in recent years . between january 2003 and august 2007 , the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) , which issues the accounting standards that sec recognizes as gaap for public companies , issued 11 statements ( nos . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact orice m. williams at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov , jeanette m. franzel at ( 202 ) 512-9471 or franzelj@gao.gov , or thomas j. mccool at ( 202 ) 512-2642 or mccoolt@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . see appendix vi for a list of other staff who contributed to the report . this work was conducted under the comptroller general's authority . our objectives were to study ( 1 ) the level of concentration among the market for public company audits and the impact of this concentration , ( 2 ) the potential for increased capacity among midsize and smaller accounting firms to ease market concentration , and ( 3 ) proposals that have been offered by others for easing concentration in the market for public company audits and the barriers facing midsize and smaller firms in expanding their market share for public company audits . we conducted this performance audit in new york city and washington , d.c. , from october 2006 to january 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to determine the level of concentration among the market for public company audits and its effect we collected data and calculated our own descriptive statistics for analysis . using audit market data from various sources , we analyzed auditor changes and changes in audit fees , computed concentration ratios and hirschman - herfindahl indexes , and conducted trend analyses . we also developed and employed an econometric model to analyze the relationship between concentration and fees . appendix v contains more details about this model . to augment these data , we interviewed academics , private consultants , trade associations , accounting firms , public companies , and securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and public company accounting oversight board ( pcaob ) officials . we also reviewed relevant academic literature . most of the research studies citied in this report have been published in academic journals . these studies were also reviewed by our economists , who determined that they did not raise serious methodological concerns and were reliable for our limited purpose .