under fas no . 125 , “accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets and extinguishments of liabilities,” which became effective after december 31 , 1996 , when a transferor surrenders control over transferred assets , it should be accounted for as a sale . the transferor should recognize that any retained interest in the transferred assets should be reported in its statement of financial position based on the fair value . the best evidence of fair value is a quoted market price in an active market , but if there is no market price , the value must be estimated . in estimating the fair value of retained interests , valuation techniques include estimating the present value of expected future cash flows using a discount rate commensurate with the risks involved . the standard states that those techniques shall incorporate assumptions that market participants would use in their estimates of values , future revenues , and future expenses , including assumptions about interest rates , default , prepayment , and volatility . in 1999 , fasb explained that when estimating the fair value for retained interests used as a credit enhancement , it should be discounted from the date when it is estimated to become available to the transferor . superior bank did not properly value the residual interest assets it reported on its financial statements . since those assets represented payments that were to be received in the future only after credit losses were reimbursed , they needed to be discounted at an appropriate risk - adjusted rate , in order to recognize that a promise to pay in the future is worth less than a current payment . superior did not use discounting when valuing its residual interest related to overcollateralization . however , as a credit enhancement , the overcollateralized asset is restricted in use under the trust and not available to superior until losses have been paid under the terms of the credit enhancement . the result was that superior bank reported assets , earnings , and capital that were far in excess of their true values . in addition , there were other issues with respect to superior's compliance with fas no . when superior finally applied the appropriate valuation techniques and related accounting to the residual interests in early 2001 , at the urging of ots , superior was forced to take a write - off against its capital and became “significantly undercapitalized. federal regulators now have serious concerns about the quality of ernst & young's audit of superior bank's financial statements for the fiscal year ending june 30 , 2000 . this audit could have highlighted the problems that led to superior bank's failure but did not . regulators' major concerns related to the audit include ( 1 ) the inflated valuation of residual interest in the financial statements and ( 2 ) the absence of discussion on superior's ability to continue in business in the auditor's report . the accounting profession plays a vital role in the governance structure for the banking industry .