limits to development costs . ncsha recommends that each allocating agency develop a per - unit cost limit standard based on total development costs . fourteen of the 58 qaps we reviewed stated that total development costs , development costs per unit , or development costs per square foot were assessed against limits the agencies established for these cost categories . of the nine agencies we visited , four noted that their limits for development costs were benchmarks determined by costs of similar projects , historical pricing , and other factors . for instance , the massachusetts qap contains recommended per unit costs using cost information from the agency's portfolio . the illinois qap contains per square foot and per unit cost limits , set on the basis of historical data and adjusted for inflation annually . for example , the michigan qap notes that developer fees can be no higher than the lesser of 15 percent of total development costs or $2.5 million for buildings with 50 or more units ; higher limits ( 20 percent ) may be used for buildings with 49 units or fewer to create incentives for developers . other agencies calculate the fee limit differently , using a percentage of total development cost minus costs such as acquisition , reserves , or syndication . three of the agencies we visited had no developer fee limits in their qaps , but two had limits in supplemental documentation that is publicly available . limits to fees for builders . agencies also may elect to place limits on builder's fees . a builder's fee is a payment made to the builder and is included in eligible basis from which the credit award is ultimately calculated . similar to the limits on the developer fees , limits on builder's fees can help maintain costs . builder's profit , builder's overhead , or general requirements are common components of builder's fees . ncsha recommends that builder's profit not exceed 6 percent of construction costs , builder's overhead not exceed 2 percent of construction costs , and general requirements not exceed 6 percent of construction costs . ncsha notes that the limits should not be exceeded except for developments with characteristics that may justify higher fees ( such as small size or location in difficult development areas ) . based on our qap analysis , we found that 34 of 58 noted limits on builder's fees , but the value and calculations varied . some agencies elected to aggregate the fee components into one fee limit and others set limits for each component of the fees . we also found that few qaps ( 4 of 58 ) cited specific circumstances under which developments could exceed cost or credit award limits , such as the developer demonstrating need . however , we found that eight of the nine allocating agencies we visited had policies where applicants could exceed limits that were specified in their qaps or internal documents . section 42 requires allocating agencies to review cost information and determine the credit amount at three different points of time: application , allocation , and placed - in - service and agencies we visited had different practices for meeting treasury requirements at each stage .