further actions are needed to address the risk to the information and systems . until ( 1 ) the organizations act to mitigate identified weaknesses and ( 2 ) fincen and irs fully implement their information security programs , there is an increased risk that sensitive bsa information will not be adequately protected against unauthorized disclosure or modification and that systems could be disrupted . to better ensure the security of the overall bsa environment , we are recommending that the secretary of the treasury direct the director of fincen to fully implement its information security program by taking the following five actions: update information security policies and procedures to address key missing information such as patch prioritization and inspection of outbound network traffic , as well as to include detailed implementation guidance for issues such as securely configuring the virtual private network . ensure that system security plans document all required controls and describe how all required controls are implemented . conduct vulnerability scans on databases , applications , and network infrastructure on a quarterly schedule . implement vulnerability scanning of custom source code or manual source code reviews . the weaknesses we identified in each of these controls demonstrate the need for such guidance . one primary principle of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic confidentiality and integrity for data by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . fincen requires that sensitive information must be encrypted when it is transmitted or stored . in addition , irs requires the use of insecure protocols to be restricted on its systems in order to protect passwords and other sensitive data . weaknesses in encryption controls over the information and systems supporting fincen's mission at fincen and irs could place sensitive data at risk , as the following examples indicate: although fincen employed encryption mechanisms to protect data on its network and workstations , not all sensitive data were encrypted . fincen employed software to encrypt data on removable flash drives . however , user ids and passwords for a key system were transmitted unencrypted across the fincen network , making them vulnerable to being compromised and used to gain unauthorized access . additionally , although fincen encrypted the hard drives on its laptop computers , the encryption software did not protect data after the computers had been booted to a running state . irs did not always secure the transmission of information on its network . for example , user ids and passwords for the mainframe were transmitted unencrypted over the network , making them vulnerable to being compromised . in addition , it did not use certificates to ensure that the encrypted communications path between its network and the bsa database could be trusted . as a result , weaknesses in encryption increased the risk of exposing data at fincen and irs to unnecessary disclosure or misuse by unauthorized individuals . boundary protections demarcate logical or physical boundaries between unknown users and protected information and systems . best practices dictate that organizations allocate publicly accessible information system components to separate subnetworks with separate physical network interfaces and that key components within private networks are also adequately segregated as subnetworks .