gao - 15-764r . washington , d.c.: september 23 , 2015 . education and workforce data: challenges in matching student and worker information raise concerns about longitudinal data systems . gao - 15-27 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2014 . this is consistent with the fair information practice principles . the forms explain the types of allowable uses of pii , among other things . for example , an information disclosure form for the vr program in new hampshire informs participants that personal information is confidential and will not be released without their written permission , except when information must be released as required by federal authorities or in other circumstances specified on the form . the disclosure form states that information can be shared , with consent , with other related state programs with which the participant is involved and with entities involved in audit , evaluation , or research directly connected with administration of the program . in prior work , we identified actions in the areas of security management and access controls , among others , as important for keeping data secure ; these are also consistent with the fair information practice principle of protecting data through safeguards against risks . officials in the three states we visited reported using various practices in these areas . for example , in terms of security management , state officials reported various activities related to the design and operation of their data systems , including: state data security protocols ( together with federal guidance ) that establish practices for handling both electronic and paper pii ; data security training that staff must attend periodically , as well as staff being required to sign a confidentiality ( also called nondisclosure ) agreement ; and data sharing agreements with another state agency that must have proper pii protection procedures included , with programs owning the pii reviewing current or proposed data sharing agreements , and entities requesting data sharing required to provide evidence of acceptable data security procedures . related to physical and data system access controls , state officials said that among other practices , they: use secured entry for buildings containing pii ; keep data on a secure network and access to the network has levels of set privileges based on a staff member's role ; with staff computers password protected and locked after a certain time period of inactivity ; and require staff to use encryption software to safeguard data whenever sending sensitive information via email or when transferring data . in addition , the core programs in texas have a periodic “penetration test” to try to identify possible vulnerabilities that outsiders could use to access the data . the central state entity for information resources conducts these tests individually for each state agency ; staff from that entity attempt to hack into the data system as if they were outsiders . the texas core programs also perform self - assessments of data security . new hampshire's central entity for information resources also conducts scans on data servers for vulnerabilities . we provided copies of this draft report to the department of education and the department of labor for review and comment . both departments provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate .