iv . appendix ii: detailed breakdown of workers' training providers and costs by site ( mo. ) lear ( pa. ) ( wash. ) ( miss. ) ( mass. ) general mills ( mo. ) ( wash. ) ( miss. ) the following tables provide further detailed analysis of workers' use of hctc and their reasons for not participating in the benefit . table 10 provides information on the number of workers who visited a one - stop center and were aware of the hctc benefit and whether they participated in hctc . table 11 provides information on the reasons given by workers for not participating in hctc . note that in table 11 respondents could choose more than one of these reasons for not participating . to determine what factors were related to whether workers went to a one - stop center , received training , or received hctc benefits , we used multivariate logistic regression models to estimate the effects of several factors . the advantage of the multivariate approach is that the effect of any given factor is estimated after its relationship with other factors is taken into account . the factors we considered were sex , age , education , tenure , time since the layoff , pre - layoff wage , and site , or the plant where the worker had been employed . the logistic regression approach requires that we use odds and estimate differences in the odds by taking their ratios . table 12 below provides an example of how odds and odds ratios are calculated . the top panel of table 12 shows that 88 percent of female workers visited a one - stop center , compared to 80 percent of male workers . alternatively , we can calculate the odds on women and men visiting a one - stop center , which were 291 / 38 = 7.7 and 608 / 150 = 4.0 , respectively . these odds imply that 7.7 women visited a one - stop center for every woman that did not , and that 4.0 men visited a one - stop center for every man that did not . moreover , the ratio of the two odds , 4.0 / 7.7 = 0.52 can be interpreted as meaning that the odds on visiting a center were only half as large for men as for women . while this might seem inconsistent with the difference between 88 percent and 80 percent , consider that 12 percent of the women but 20 percent of the men ( nearly twice the percentage ) did not visit a one - stop center . when the factor being considered has more than two categories , we choose any one category arbitrarily as the referent category , and calculate the ratios of the odds for all other categories relative to that one . for example , in the bottom panel of table 12 we see the odds on visiting a one - stop center in each of the five sites , and odds ratios which indicate how much different the odds were for every site relative to general mills .