length of simulcast . mabb and industry participants implemented the dtv transition in the berlin area with a short simulcast period . the dtv transition agreement negotiated between mabb and the broadcasters specified a three - phase simulcast process: on november 1 , 2002 , the simulcast period commenced as digital signals for some of the stations of both public and commercial broadcasters began to be transmitted . berlin officials dedicated two additional channels for the simulcast , with each of these channels carrying four multicast digital stations . thus , eight of berlin's eleven analog stations were initially simulcast . on february 28 , 2003 , five previously analog channels were converted to digital channels , with each channel carrying multiple stations . thus , the digital signals of more stations were turned on , including stations that were not previously available terrestrially in berlin . the analog transmission of all national private broadcasters stopped , and public broadcasters transitioned their analog signals to lower - power analog frequencies . on august 8 , 2003 , all analog transmission stopped . the government and industry officials with whom we spoke with cited several reasons for the short simulcast period . first , germany does not have enough spectrum dedicated to television service to implement a long simulcast period while also providing additional stations ; the spectrum used for analog transmission is the same spectrum that will be used for digital transmission . second , an extended simulcast period is costly for broadcasters , who , as mentioned earlier , must pay for terrestrial transmission . third , a quick and certain shutoff date provides an incentive for households to purchase the necessary set - top boxes . german federal officials and other media authorities are generally encouraged by the success of the short simulcast period in berlin . in the state of north - rhine westphalia , the media authority intends to implement a 6-month simulcast period for public broadcasters , with no simulcast period for private broadcasters , in the state's two islands . private broadcaster support . mabb made the decision to provide financial and nonfinancial support to private broadcasters . public broadcasters were able to finance their transition costs through the radio and television license fee they receive . private broadcasters , on the other hand , do not receive license fees , but were viewed as important participants in the dtv transition . therefore , mabb decided to provide support to private stations , which consisted of three elements . first , for 5 years , mabb will pay the broadcasters' incremental costs associated with digital transmission ( i.e. , mabb will pay the difference between the broadcasters' former analog transmission costs and their digital transmission costs ) . in return , the private broadcasters agreed to provide digital terrestrial television for at least 5 years . second , as incumbent broadcasters , the private broadcasters received authority to provide multiplexed service . according to mabb , a total of 6,000 set - top boxes were provided to needy households with a total cost of 500,000 euro ( $615,100 ) . extensive consumer education . mabb and industry participants conducted an extensive consumer education effort .