( result of 6a . / results of 6b. ) * 1,000 the resulting cost - effectiveness calculation returns a ratio of millions saved per $1 billion borrowed . additional calculations that are not relevant to the model's cost - effectiveness calculation though not detailed above , the model includes five calculations that do not produce output relevant to the cost - effectiveness calculation . in addition , the model performs an additional step in the after - tax “present value discount factor” calculation that is not necessary . the model creates an after - tax “present value discount factor” expressed as a monthly rate , shown above as step 4 in the calculations for the marketable treasury “present value.” step 5 , as shown above in the calculations for the marketable treasury “present value,” reverses this calculation through the 30-year life cycle of the marketable treasury alternative . the following are gao's comments on the bureau of the public debt's ( bpd ) letter dated june 4 , 2003 . as we note in this report's agency comments and our evaluation section , the approach that bpd outlines here would be an appropriate alternative to the cost - effectiveness model based on a present value analysis described in the report . the description in this report is based on documentation for the cost - effectiveness model that bpd provided in an october 16 , 2002 , meeting ; on a july 2002 report that bpd prepared for the house committees on appropriations and on financial services ; and on march 2002 testimony by the commissioner of the public debt before the house appropriations subcommittee on treasury , postal service , and general government . as we note in the report , the 20-year extension is not consistent with a statement previously made by the department of the treasury regarding the presumption of payment 10 years beyond the maturity date . we agree that all administrative costs are included in the model . as the report notes , however , the model calculation does not accurately incorporate these costs in computing the present value of the marketable treasury security and the savings bond . based on bpd's explanation that redemptions within 6 months of a savings bond's issuance are sometimes granted in hardship cases , we have deleted discussion of their inclusion in the model from the report . as we note in the report , the model's compound interest formula for the series i bonds does not recognize the bond's accrued value at the beginning of each semiannual period . when calculated out over 30 years , the difference between the formula in the regulation and the model's calculation is minor but still exists . in addition to those named above , heather t. dignan , mitchell b. rachlis , and barbara m. roesmann made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .