flcbusiness . flc is developing a new web - based search tool called flcbusiness that is scheduled to become publically available in fall 2014 , according to flc officials , and is intended to allow potential customers to search for technology development programs , available funding , and to learn about the capabilities of federal lab facilities . the tool is designed to allow potential customers to perform key word searches for labs , or funding or technology development programs , and to refine searches to a specific agency , geographic location , or technology area . the tool also is to provide links to additional information on licenses , cradas , and other technology transfer methods . as of august 2014 , flc reported spending approximately $150,000 to develop the tool . in addition , flc has utilized various communication tools , such as social media , outreach by regional flc members to local technology transfer organizations , its annual meeting , and an online newsletter and news forum , to communicate with potential customers and promote its clearinghouse initiatives and technology transfer success stories . for example , in 2013 , flc began providing an opportunity for industry representatives from large corporations to present their companies' technology needs to participating federal lab officials as part of its annual meeting , according to an industry representative we interviewed . during the 2014 flc annual meeting , we observed that industry representatives described technology needs ranging from advanced materials to robotics . flc used the opportunity to do a presentation to publicize its clearinghouse initiatives and , after the presentation , industry representatives and agency members had an opportunity to interact and exchange contact information . flc's process to design and implement its primary clearinghouse initiatives involves flc committees and regional coordinators annually proposing new ideas for consideration by flc's executive board . according to flc officials , the executive board considers proposals in relation to available resources and conducts outreach to agency and lab members . for example , in 2012 when developing its available technologies tool , flc reached out to its agency and lab members when considering possible options for designing a clearinghouse of available technology transfer opportunities . after receiving input from agency and lab members , including concerns about the burden , ability , or willingness to compile data on available technology transfer opportunities for flc , flc officials said they designed the available technologies tool to minimize the burden on agencies to collect and share their data . specifically , rather than ask agencies to gather relevant data on federally owned inventions , which were not already centralized and did not exist in a standard format , flc developed a web - based search tool that would direct potential customers to existing information on federal labs' websites . flc officials determined this tool ( 1 ) would not require flc resources to manipulate agency data and ( 2 ) would not require agency members to update information separately from what they already planned to include on their websites .