fcc agreed with this recommendation . fcc and usac have implemented controls to improve subscriber eligibility verification , such as implementing the nlad database in 2014 , which helps carriers identify and resolve duplicate claims for lifeline - supported services . however , as discussed in our may 2017 report , our analysis of data from 2014 , as well as our undercover attempts to obtain lifeline service , revealed significant weaknesses in subscriber eligibility verification . lifeline providers are generally responsible for verifying the eligibility of potential subscribers , but we found that their ability to do so is hindered by a lack of access to , or awareness of , state eligibility databases that can be used to confirm eligibility prior to enrollment . for example , not all states have databases that lifeline providers can use to confirm eligibility and some providers with whom we spoke were unaware of databases that were potentially available to them . these challenges might be overcome if fcc establishes a national verifier , as it plans to do nationwide by the end of 2019 , to remove responsibility for verifying eligibility from the providers . additionally , since usac was not maintaining and providing information to providers about these databases , we recommended they maintain and disseminate an updated list of state eligibility databases available to lifeline providers that includes the qualifying programs those databases access to confirm eligibility , to help ensure lifeline providers are aware of state eligibility databases and usac audits of lifeline providers can verify that available state databases are being utilized to verify subscriber eligibility . fcc agreed with the recommendation . for our may 2017 report , to identify lifeline subscribers who were potentially ineligible to participate in the program , we tested the eligibility of subscribers who claimed participation in medicaid , snap , and supplemental security income ( ssi ) using nlad data as of november 2014 . we focused our analysis on these three programs because fcc reported in 2012 that these were the three qualifying programs through which most subscribers qualify for lifeline . we compared approximately 3.4 million subscribers who , according to information entered in nlad , were eligible for lifeline due to enrollment in one of these three programs to eligibility data for these programs . on the basis of our analysis of nlad and public - assistance data , we could not confirm that a substantial portion of selected lifeline beneficiaries were enrolled in the medicaid , snap , and ssi programs , even though , according to the data , they qualified for lifeline by stating on their applications that they participated in one of these programs . in total , we were unable to confirm whether 1,234,929 subscribers out of the 3,474,672 who we reviewed , or about 36 percent , participated in the qualifying benefit programs they stated on their lifeline enrollment applications or were recorded as such by lifeline providers . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact seto j. bagdoyan at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or bagdoyans@gao.gov . the results of the data analysis are illustrative rather than generalizable . we also performed undercover work to test the vulnerability for improper payments of funds disbursed to both subscribers and lifeline providers .