analysis . eight initiatives are intended to transform data into information and knowledge to answer questions and enhance decision making on issues such as performance , program management , cause - and - effect relationships , and costs . knowledge management . three ongoing initiatives are intended to capture , evaluate , and share employee knowledge , experiences , ideas , and skills . alignment . what challenges , if any , are present in trying to use the primary measures to link resources expended and results achieved ? to conduct our analysis of the soundness of the primary performance measures , we relied primarily on a set of criteria that we had previously developed . are selected secondary performance measures for four of the coast guard's non - homeland security programs sound ? we used our judgment to assess whether these measures met our criteria . we also reviewed the fiscal years 2005 and 2006 dhs performance and accountability report , the fiscal years 2006 and 2007 dhs budget requests , and the coast guard's fiscal years 2006 and 2007 budget - in - brief . these criteria were developed based on the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) and office of management and budget ( omb ) guidelines for agency performance measures . to conduct our reliability analysis , we relied primarily on comparisons of coast guard data collection methods and internal control processes with gpra and the reports consolidation act of 2000 requirements , as well as commonly accepted standards and practices . we reviewed and analyzed information collected and assembled at coast guard headquarters as well as at four coast guard field locations . our reliability analysis assessed only the specific data fields used to collect and report data for the six non - homeland security primary performance measures , and not the relevant databases as a whole . to the extent possible , we also reviewed secondary measures for four of the six non - homeland security programs . to identify and assess the challenges in trying to use the primary measures to link resources expended and results achieved we interviewed coast guard officials at agency headquarters to discuss how measures are used in resource and budget allocation decisions and reviewed previous gao reports on performance measures , performance reporting , and the link between the coast guard's resources used and results achieved . we conducted our work from july 2005 to august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more details about the scope and methodology of our work are presented in appendix i . the coast guard has responsibilities divided into 11 programs that fall under two broad missions — homeland security and non - homeland security — which are recognized in the homeland security act . to accomplish its wide range of responsibilities , the coast guard is organized into two major commands that are responsible for overall mission execution — one in the pacific area and the other in the atlantic area . these commands are divided into nine districts , which in turn are organized into 35 sectors that unify command and control of field units and resources , such as multimission stations and patrol boats .