referrals for investigation . according to the six plan sponsors we interviewed , the referrals can be made to cms's national benefit integrity medicare drug integrity contractor ( nbi medic ) , which is responsible for identifying and investigating potential part d fraud , waste , and abuse , or to the plan sponsor's own internal investigative unit , if they have one . after investigating a particular case , they may refer the case to the hhs - oig or a law enforcement agency , according to cms , nbi medic , and one plan sponsor . based on cms's use of the oms and the actions taken by plan sponsors , cms reported a 61 percent decrease from calendar years 2011 through 2016 in the number of beneficiaries meeting the oms criteria of high risk — from 29,404 to 11,594 beneficiaries — which agency officials consider an indication of success toward its goal of decreasing opioid use disorder . in addition , we found that cms relies on separate patient safety measures developed and maintained by the pharmacy quality alliance to assess how well part d plan sponsors are monitoring beneficiaries and taking appropriate actions . in 2016 , cms started tracking plan sponsors' performance on three patient safety measures that are directly related to opioids . the three measures are similar to the oms criteria in that they identify beneficiaries with high dosages of opioids ( 120 mg med ) , beneficiaries that use opioids from multiple providers and pharmacies , and beneficiaries that do both . however , one difference between these approaches is that the patient safety measures separately identify beneficiaries who fulfill each criterion individually . our october 2017 report also found that while cms tracks the total number of beneficiaries who meet all three oms criteria as part of its opioid overutilization oversight across the part d program , it does not have comparable information on most beneficiaries who receive high doses of opioids — regardless of the number of providers and pharmacies used — and who therefore may be at risk for harm , according to cdc guidelines . these guidelines note that long - term use of high doses of opioids — those above a med of 90 mg per day — are associated with significant risk of harm and should be avoided if possible . based on the cdc guidelines , outreach to part d plan sponsors , and cms analyses of part d data , cms has revised its current oms criteria to include more at - risk beneficiaries beginning in 2018 . the new oms criteria define a high user as having an average daily med greater than 90 mg for any duration , and who receives opioids from four or more providers and four or more pharmacies , or from six or more providers regardless of the number of pharmacies , for the prior 6 months . based on 2015 data , cms found that 33,223 beneficiaries would have met these revised criteria .