implementation . no matter what plans are made to reorganize the government , fulfilling the promise of these plans will depend on their effective implementation . the creation of a new organization may vary in terms of size and complexity . however , building an effective organization requires consistent and sustained leadership from top management to ensure the needed transformation of disparate agencies , programs , functions , and activities into an integrated organization . to achieve success , the end result should not simply be a collection of component units , but the transformation to an integrated , high - performance organization . the implementation of a new organization is an extremely complex task that can take years to accomplish . it is instructive to note that the 1947 legislation creating the department of defense was further changed four times by the congress in order to improve the effectiveness of the department . despite these changes , dod continues to face a range of major management challenges , with six agency - specific challenges on our 2003 list and three governmentwide challenges . start - up problems under any reorganization are inevitable but can be mitigated by comprehensive planning and strong leadership . in fact , the dhs legislation instructed both houses of congress to review their committee structures in light of the reorganization of homeland security responsibilities within the executive branch . in summary , the key issue at hand is how to make changes and reforms and what the respective roles of the congress and the executive branch should be in the process . clear goals . the key to any reorganization plan is the creation of specific , identifiable goals . reorganization demands a coordinated approach , within and across agency lines , supported by solid consensus for change . one cannot underestimate the interconnectedness of government structure and activities . make changes here , and you will certainly affect something over there . our work has certainly illuminated the interconnectedness of federal programs , functions , and activities . dhs again provides lessons . though many homeland security responsibilities , functions , and activities have been brought under the umbrella of dhs , many remain outside . dhs will have to form effective partnerships throughout the federal government — on intelligence functions , health issues , science activities . in addition , partnerships will be required outside the federal government — state and local governments , private sector organizations , and the international community , if dhs is to successfully accomplish its mission . regardless of the immediate objectives , any reorganization should have in mind certain overarching goals: a government that serves the public efficiently and economically , that is run in a sound , businesslike fashion with full accountability , and that is flexible enough to respond to change . integrated approach . the importance of seeing the overall picture cannot be overestimated . we have previously reported that the government performance and results act ( results act ) could provide a tool to reexamine roles and structure at the governmentwide level . the results act requires the president to include in his annual budget submission a federal government performance plan .