, descriptively ) . however , rather than using the methodology established in the nipp for assessing risk , tsa officials stated that the agency uses an intelligence - driven approach to make strategic investment decisions across the transportation system . as on june 2009 , tsa reported that the update of the ts - ssp is ongoing , with the goal of completing the effort in 2009 . until tsa works with dhs to validate its risk management approach , tsa lacks assurance that its approach provides the agency and dhs with the information needed to guide investment decisions to ensure resources are allocated to the highest risks . moreover , as we reported in march 2009 , although intelligence is necessary to inform threat assessments , it does not provide all of the information needed to assess risk , in particular information related to vulnerability and consequence assessments . in addition , the intelligence - driven approach that tsa uses may be limited because , in contrast with practices adopted by the intelligence community , tsa officials do not plan to assign uncertainty or confidence levels to the intelligence information it uses to identify threats and guide long - range planning and strategic investment . both congress and the administration have recognized the uncertainty inherent in intelligence analysis and have required analytic products within the intelligence community to properly caveat and express uncertainties or confidence in analytic judgments . furthermore , while intelligence can and does help the u.s. security community on an operational or tactical level , uncertainty in intelligence analysis limits its utility for long - range planning and strategic investment . without expressing confidence levels in its analytic judgments , it will be difficult for tsa to correctly prioritize its tactics and long - term investments based on uncertain intelligence . in march 2009 , we recommended that the assistant secretary of tsa work with the director of national intelligence to determine the best approach for assigning uncertainty or confidence levels to analytic intelligence products and apply this approach to intelligence products . tsa officials agreed that they do not have a risk assessment and expressed the desire to conduct one ; however , they reported that a lack of resources and other factors made completing a risk assessment challenging . for example , tsa officials stated that comprehensive vulnerability and consequence assessments are cost - prohibitive and time - intensive to conduct . where applicable , we link relevant sections of executive order 13416 to highlight the importance of these measures to strengthen the passenger rail and mass transit security national strategy . this characteristic addresses why the strategy was produced , the scope of its coverage , and the process by which it was developed . for example , a strategy might discuss the specific impetus that led to its creation , such as statutory requirements , executive mandates , or other events — such as terrorist attacks . in addition to describing what the strategy is meant to do and the major functions , mission areas , or activities it covers , a national strategy would ideally also outline its methodology .