( app . ii contains the full text of opm's comments. ) premiums for ffs plans are experience rated . over time , their premiums approximately equal average service expenditures , administrative costs , and profits . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or john dicken at ( 202 ) 512-7043 if you have any additional questions . n. rotimi adebonojo and joseph petko were major contributors to this report . to compare premium trends for the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) and other large purchasers over the last decade , we obtained data from the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the california public employees' retirement system ( calpers ) , and surveys of private employer - sponsored health benefits conducted by the kaiser family foundation and the health research and educational trust ( kaiser / hret ) . to identify factors driving fehbp's recent premium growth , we analyzed several opm data sources , including summary reports it received from the three largest nationwide plans on enrollees' health care service utilization and related plan payments for 1998 through 2000 . these three plans are all fee - for - service ( ffs ) plans and accounted for 90 percent of fehbp enrollment in ffs plans and almost two - thirds of the total fehbp enrollment . we analyzed expenditure and utilization data for services , including hospital inpatient care , hospital outpatient care , physician visits , prescription drugs , laboratory services , surgery , and mental health and substance abuse for 1998 through 2000 for the three largest plans . these summary data are submitted to opm by each ffs experience - rated plan , reporting utilization and expenditures incurred by the plan in a calendar year and paid in that calendar year and through the first 9 months of the next calendar year . because each plan reports its data to opm slightly differently , we aggregated expenditures and utilization for multiple categories of services , including hospital inpatient , hospital outpatient , prescription drugs , and physician visits — and all other services . we adjusted each plan's expenditures by enrollment as reported by the plans to opm to calculate per - enrollee expenditure and utilization , and calculated a payment per unit for each category of service . we weighted the expenditure and utilization for the three plans by their respective enrollments for each year from 1998 to 2000 . we calculated the increase in per - enrollee claims expenditure attributable to increased plan payments from 1998 through 2000 using the change in plan payments over the 3 years and assuming utilization remained steady at the 1998 level . some local markets had higher hmo participation . for example , the washington , d.c. , area and southern california had at least four hmos in which federal workers and retirees could enroll in 2002 . a few plans accounted for the largest share of fehbp enrollment . the largest plan — the bcbs service benefit plan — had about half of the 2002 enrollment .