other projects . te / ge initiated these examinations under older compliance projects , using a variety of selection methods . the compliance strategies portfolio consists of compliance issues that originated from a compliance issue submission portal for te / ge staff . the strategies are approved by the governance board , which results in adding the compliance strategy to the work plan . effective internal control provides reasonable , not absolute , assurance that an organization will meet its objectives . the second internal control involved communicating inside and outside of te / ge . internally , te / ge staff could provide feedback through an online compliance issue submission portal in fiscal year 2018 . submissions may become compliance strategies or model queries . as for external communication , te / ge collaborated on data - related issues in an irs - wide group and with statistical specialists in the raas division . for example , raas identified potential data sources for compliance issues and drew samples for certain compliance strategies to test rates of noncompliance . in addition , to show how it communicates essential information with staff and outside parties , te / ge provided examples on disseminating guidance and examination accomplishments , including examination starts and closures . te / ge did not fully implement and document internal control over the processes and data used to select returns for examination . these processes cover five key steps for using data to decide which returns to select for examination ( see figure 4 ) . effective internal controls would enable te / ge to show how feedback and lessons learned in step 5 can help it better determine how to create and use quality information ( step 3 ) and what decisions to make ( step 4 ) when pursuing the established objectives ( step 1 ) . however , te / ge has not defined measurable objectives or undertaken regular evaluations to assess progress toward objectives . although te / ge was able to describe its approach for accessing relevant and reliable data , processing those data into quality information and using the data to make decisions , it was not able to fully document how its control processes worked , as discussed below . since its 2017 reorganization , te / ge has not established measurable objectives to select exempt organization returns for examination ( see figure 5 ) . specifically , te / ge has not produced formal objectives that are aligned with its mission and the irs strategic plan , are expressed in quantitative terms , and are related to examination selection and program outcomes . te / ge documents , including program letters and business performance reviews , refer to outcomes that could constitute objectives — such as improving the models and advancing data analytics to drive decisions about identifying and addressing existing and emerging areas of noncompliance — but they do not identify them as such . te / ge officials acknowledged the need to establish measurable objectives . they said their efforts are evolving and they need to improve analytical abilities to help assess the capacity for meeting objectives . for example , one official said they are working to establish objectives at the onset of a compliance strategy .