reconciliation . reconciliation is the process of comparing nmmss nuclear material inventory data with other records . reconciliation occurs at two levels: at the facility level and at the country level . at the facility level , nmmss officials compare facilities' reported physical inventory records — including their obligation balances — with the data in nmmss and either confirm that these records are in agreement or alert facilities to make adjustments , if necessary . a doe order and nrc regulations require u.s. facilities to reconcile their nuclear material inventories — including their foreign obligation balances — at least once annually . doe contractors must report their inventories to nmmss by september 30 of each year and reconcile any discrepancies with nmmss . nrc licensees must report their inventories to nmmss at least annually , depending on the type of material held , and reconcile any discrepancies with nmmss . at the country level , nmmss officials annually compare the inventory data with the records of foreign partners , including obligation balances . according to doe officials , this inventory reconciliation process is conducted in accordance with the terms of certain administrative arrangements . like reconciliation at the facility level , the officials told us that this process confirms whether nmmss records are in agreement with other records and alerts officials to follow up , if necessary . export records comparison . a function in nmmss compares foreign partners' export records with nmmss data . foreign partners provide advance notification , as well as a confirmation of shipment , to the u.s. government when shipping nuclear material to the united states . nmmss then compares these communications , as well as foreign partners' export records obtained through iaea , with data in nmmss . until january 2012 , the communications were stored in documents , but since then , they have been recorded electronically in nmmss . we tested elements of these procedures and analyzed certain nmmss data and found the data to be generally accurate with little evidence of inaccuracies or other problems with nmmss data on obligation exchanges . for instance , we tested several elements of the records of compatibility and edit checks for all 817 obligation exchanges to verify that the shipper and receiver submitted identical information to nmmss for each obligation exchange . we found that nearly all information submitted by the shipper and receiver — such as material type , element weight , and obligation country code — was identical for each of the obligation exchanges conducted from october 1 , 2003 through november 30 , 2015 . however , we found two issues in nmmss obligation exchange data . we discussed these issues with doe and nrc officials , who indicated that they planned to take steps to address one of the identified issues and explained that that other issue had already been addressed . first , we found that according to nmmss data , 2 of the 817 obligation exchanges conducted by nrc licensees involved uranium with assay levels of slightly more than 5 percent , which is contrary to nrc guidance that obligation exchanges are restricted to uranium enriched to 5 percent or less .