developing the ea . the organization focuses on developing architecture products according to the selected framework , methodology , tool , and established management plans . roles and responsibilities assigned in the previous stage are in place , and resources are being applied to develop actual ea products . the scope of the architecture has been defined to encompass the entire enterprise , whether organization - based or function - based . completing the ea . the organization has completed its ea products , meaning that the products have been approved by the ea steering committee or an investment review board , and by the cio . further , an independent agent has assessed the quality ( i.e. , completeness and accuracy ) of the ea products . additionally , evolution of the approved products is governed by a written ea maintenance policy approved by the head of the organization . leveraging the ea to manage change . the organization has secured senior leadership approval of the ea products and has a written institutional policy stating that it investments must comply with the architecture , unless granted an explicit compliance waiver . further , decision makers are using the architecture to identify and address ongoing and proposed it investments that are conflicting , overlapping , not strategically linked , or redundant . also , the organization tracks and measures ea benefits or return on investment , and adjustments are continuously made to both the ea management process and the ea products . the fbi has yet to develop an ea , and it does not have the requisite means in place to effectively develop , maintain , and implement one . however , no completion date has been established . business , performance , data , application , and technology address or will address security . no plans exist . progress against ea plans is measured and reported . no plans exist . written / approved policy exists for ea maintenance . according to fbi officials , there is no written and approved policy for ea maintenance . ea products and management processes undergo independent verification and validation . the fbi has not developed ea products , and management processes do not undergo independent verification and validation . ea products describe the enterprise's business and the data , applications , and technology that support it . the fbi has not developed these products . further , we recommend that the director ensure that steps taken to use the ea to manage modernization efforts include ( 1 ) establishing a written and approved policy for it investment compliance with ea , ( 2 ) establishing processes to formally manage ea changes , ( 3 ) ensuring that ea is an integral component of it investment management processes , ( 4 ) ensuring that ea products are periodically updated , ( 5 ) ensuring that it investments comply with the ea , ( 6 ) obtaining director approval of the current ea version , ( 7 ) measuring and reporting ea return on investment , and ( 8 ) measuring and reporting on ea compliance .