( see fig . as shown in figure 2 , of the 3,788 se submissions received by fda as of january 7 , 2013 , 3,165 ( 84 percent ) were provisional se submissions almost all of the and 623 ( 16 percent ) were regular se submissions.provisional se submissions were received in the second quarter of fiscal year 2011 — 3,115 of the provisional se submissions were received within the 3 weeks prior to the statutory deadline of march 22 , 2011 . fda did not receive any pmta submissions . the number of regular se submissions received in a quarter ranged from 19 ( in the third quarter of fiscal year 2011 ) to 192 ( in the third quarter of fiscal year 2012 ) . ctp is organized into seven offices . ( see table 1. ) within ctp , os is the office primarily responsible for conducting reviews of new tobacco product submissions ; however , os staff duties are not limited to reviewing new tobacco product submissions . under the tobacco control act , a manufacturer may make a submission to fda for ctp's determination of whether the manufacturer may introduce a new tobacco product to the market in the united states . ctp reviews submissions made by manufacturers through one of three pathways: substantial equivalence ( se ) pathway: manufacturers make a submission under the se pathway if either ( 1 ) a new tobacco product has the same characteristics as a predicate tobacco product — that is , a product commercially marketed in the united states on february 15 , 2007 , or a product previously found by ctp to be substantially equivalent ; or ( 2 ) the new tobacco product has different characteristics from a predicate tobacco product , but does not raise different questions of public health . there are two types of submissions made under the se pathway — provisional and regular — that are defined by the date that the product came on the market and when the manufacturer made the submission . for provisional se submissions , a manufacturer may market the new product that is the subject of the submission while ctp conducts its review of the submission , but for regular se submissions , a manufacturer may not market the new product until ctp completes its review and determines that the product meets the se requirements . ( see table 2. ) contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . as of january 7 , 2013 , the office of science ( os ) — the only center for tobacco products ( ctp ) office involved in all steps of reviewing new tobacco product submissions — had 124 staff members on board , and the majority of the staff ( 102 or 82 percent ) reported spending some portion of their time reviewing new tobacco product submissions . os has other responsibilities in addition to reviewing new tobacco product submissions , including research to meet regulatory science needs and to evaluate the population and public health impact of tobacco products .