pilot location breakeven points . va officials stated that the second achievement that indicates success is the confirmation of the time necessary for a pilot location to reach its breakeven point — which va has defined as the point when a pilot location achieves cost savings in the non - va medical care program for dialysis services for its sponsoring vamc and repays its start - up funding to va central office . through the dialysis pilot , sponsoring vamcs for the pilot locations were each provided about $2.5 million in start - up funding to establish a va - operated , free - standing dialysis clinic and were to finish repaying this start - up funding to va central office in fiscal year 2014 . according to va central office officials , all four pilot locations have repaid their start - up funding as of the beginning of fiscal year 2014 and two pilot locations — raleigh and fayetteville — have demonstrated that their cost per treatment is lower than comparable per treatment costs of non - va dialysis providers in their areas . achieving this breakeven point indicates that the pilot locations are no longer incurring additional costs for va and are fulfilling va's goal of providing dialysis treatments to veterans at a lower cost than similar care provided through non - va dialysis providers . while va officials indicated they could conclude the dialysis pilot once the pilot locations had created a replicable model and realized their breakeven points , va has not formally communicated these achievements in writing as criteria for concluding the pilot . va did not analyze patient satisfaction for the newer pilot locations — philadelphia , pennsylvania , and cleveland , ohio — because these pilot locations were either not open or not operating at full capacity during the periods of va's analysis . table 3 provides results for va's review of the raleigh , north carolina , dialysis pilot location's patient satisfaction . table 4 provides results for va's review of the fayetteville , north carolina , dialysis pilot location's patient satisfaction . this appendix provides results from the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) review of veterans' access to care at its two more established dialysis pilot locations — raleigh and fayetteville , north carolina . in calendar year 2012 , va did not analyze veterans' access to care for the newer pilot locations — philadelphia , pennsylvania , and cleveland , ohio — because these pilot locations were either not open or not operating at full capacity during the periods of va's analysis . table 5 provides results for va's review of veterans' access to care at the raleigh and fayetteville pilot locations for calendar year 2012 . table 6 provides results for va's review of veterans' access to care at all four pilot locations for calendar year 2013 . this appendix provides results from the evaluation contractor's review of clinical quality for three of the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) dialysis pilot locations in raleigh and fayetteville , north carolina , and philadelphia , pennsylvania . we conducted this performance audit from january 2014 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .