gao - 04-228 . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2004 . washington , d.c.: january 23 , 1996 . medicaid: states use illusory approaches to shift program costs to federal government . gao / hehs - 94-133 . washington , d.c.: august 1 , 1994 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . michigan financing arrangements . gao / hehs - 95-146r . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 1995 . we believe the problem goes beyond igts . an observation we made in our first report on this issue in 1994 is as valid today as it was then: in our view , the medicaid program should not allow states to benefit from arrangements where federal funds purported to benefit providers are given to providers with one hand , only to be taken back with the other . state financing schemes , variants of which have been applied for a decade or longer , circumvent the federal and state funding balance set under law . they have also resulted in the diversion of federal funds intended to pay for covered services for medicaid - eligible individuals to whatever purpose a state chooses . although congress and cms have often acted to address medicaid financing schemes once they become apparent , new variations continue to emerge . experience shows that some states are likely to continue looking for creative means to supplant state financing , making a compelling case for the congress and cms to sustain vigilance over federal medicaid payments . understandably , states that have relied on federal funding as a staple for their own share of medicaid spending are feeling the budgetary pressure from the actual or potential loss of these funds . the continuing challenge remains to find the proper balance between states' flexibility to administer their medicaid programs and the shared federal - state fiduciary responsibility to manage program finances efficiently and economically in a way that ensures the program's fiscal integrity . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call kathryn g. allen at ( 202 ) 512-7118 . katherine iritani , tim bushfield , ellen w. chu , helen desaulniers , behn miller kelly , and terry saiki also made key contributions to this testimony . medicaid: improved federal oversight of state financing schemes is needed . major management challenges and program risks: department of health and human services . gao - 03-101 . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . medicaid: hcfa reversed its position and approved additional state financing schemes . gao - 02-147 . washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2001 . medicaid: state financing schemes again drive up federal payments . gao / t - hehs - 00-193 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2000 . state medicaid financing practices .