reliance on medicare revenue . medicare payments account for a substantial share of revenue for rural ambulance providers that bill medicare . longer distances traveled . a common characteristic of rural ambulance providers is a large service area , which generally requires longer trips . longer trips increase direct costs from increased mileage costs and staff travel time . they also raise indirect costs because ambulance providers must have sufficient backup services when vehicles and staff are unavailable for extended periods . current medicare payment policy generally allows freestanding providers to receive a payment for mileage . nevertheless , mileage - related reimbursement issues , such as the amount paid for mileage , represent a greater concern to rural providers because of the longer distances traveled . lack of alternative transportation services . rural areas may lack alternative transport services , such as taxis , van services , and public transportation , which are more readily available in urban and suburban areas . this situation is complicated by the fact that some localities require ambulance providers to transport in response to an emergency call , even if the severity of the problem has not been established . because of this situation , some providers transport a medicare beneficiary whose need for transport does not meet medicare coverage criteria and must therefore seek payment from the beneficiary or another source . among rural providers , 44 percent of their annual revenue in 1998 , on average , was from medicare , compared to 37 percent for urban providers , according to project hope center for health services , a nonprofit health policy research organization . additionally , for some rural providers , other revenue sources — such as subsidies from local tax revenues , donations , or other fundraising efforts — have not kept pace with increasing costs of delivering the services . decreasing availability of volunteer staff . rural ambulance providers traditionally have relied more heavily on volunteer staff than providers in urban or suburban areas . some communities having difficulty recruiting and retaining volunteers may have had to hire paid staff , which increases the costs of providing services . medicare's proposed fee schedule , published in september 2000 , reduces the variation in maximum payment amounts to similar providers for the same type of services . the considerable variation that exists in the current payment system does not necessarily reflect expected differences in provider costs . for example , in 1999 , the maximum payments for two types of emergency transport — one requiring no specialized services and the other requiring specialized services — were the same in montana at $231 for freestanding providers . in north dakota , the maximum payment was about $350 and also did not differ measurably for the two types of transport services . in contrast , south dakota's maximum payment for the less intensive transport was $137 , which was $30 lower than the payment for the transport requiring specialized services . per - mile payments also varied widely . for example , in rural south dakota , the payment was just over $2 per mile , compared to $6 per mile in rural wyoming .