( see fig . some insular areas do not have certain types of health care providers , and even when providers operate in these areas , their numbers per capita are lower , on average , than in the states . for example , most of the insular areas do not have medicare - certified outpatient rehabilitation facilities , community mental health centers , or ambulatory surgical centers . in addition , none of the pacific insular areas has a medicare - certified , free - standing skilled nursing facility or a medicare - certified hospice facility . provider shortages in insular areas are often particularly acute for certain specialists . for example , although guam has a cardiac catheterization lab , it is not used because there is no cardiac surgeon . also , although its rate of diabetes death is high , american samoa has no resident nephrologists . in addition , the report is available at no charge on gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or allenk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii . to compare characteristics of the five largest insular areas — american samoa , the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) , guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands — we used demographic data from the census bureau and disease mortality data from the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . except for puerto rico , interim and supplemental censuses to the decennial census are not performed for the insular areas . therefore , 2000 census data for all insular areas and states were used for consistency . reliable data for the incidence of disease are not collected for all insular areas . cdc's 2002 natality and mortality report provided health indicator data except where the number of cases was too few to provide reliable estimates . to identify key federal sources of health care funding to the insular areas we reviewed the census bureau's consolidated federal funds report and conducted interviews with representatives from insular areas , six agencies of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of the interior's office of insular affairs ( doi - oia ) , and the white house office of intergovernmental affairs . we defined health care funding as federal funds provided to support directly delivered health care , health data collection , disease prevention , and other health - related activities . on the basis of the discussions , we focused our work on the following key sources of funding: medicare , medicaid , and schip , in addition to grants from three hhs agencies — cdc , the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) — and doi . we collected federal health expenditure data for the states and the insular areas .