dhs concurred with the recommendation . in our september 2014 report , we found that dhs and gsa cost and schedule estimates for the headquarters consolidation project at st. elizabeths did not conform or only minimally or partially conformed with leading estimating practices , and were therefore unreliable . furthermore , we found that in some areas , the cost and schedule estimates did not fully conform with gsa guidance relevant to developing estimates . we found that dhs and gsa cost estimates for the headquarters consolidation project at st. elizabeths did not reflect leading practices , which rendered the estimates unreliable . for example , we found that the 2013 cost estimate — the most recent available — did not include ( 1 ) a life - cycle cost analysis of the project , including the cost of repair , operations , and maintenance ; ( 2 ) was not regularly updated to reflect significant changes to the program including actual costs ; and ( 3 ) did not include an independent estimate to assist in tracking the budget . in addition , a sensitivity analysis had not been performed to assess the reasonableness of the cost estimate . we have previously reported that a reliable cost estimate is critical to the success of any program . specifically , we have found that such an estimate provides the basis for informed investment decision making , realistic budget formulation and program resourcing , meaningful progress measurement , proactive course correction when warranted , and accountability for results . accordingly , we concluded that dhs and gsa would benefit from maintaining current and well - documented estimates of project costs at st. elizabeths — even if project funding is not fully secured — and these estimates should encompass the full life cycle of the program and be independently assessed . in addition , we found that the 2008 and 2013 schedule estimates did not include all activities for both the government and its contractors necessary to accomplish the project's objectives and did not include schedule baseline documents to help measure performance as reflected in leading practices and gsa guidance . for the 2008 schedule estimate , we also found that resources ( such as labor , materials , and equipment ) were not accounted for and a risk assessment had not been conducted to predict a level of confidence in the project's completion date . in addition , we found the 2013 schedule estimate was unreliable because , among other things , it was incomplete in that it did not provide details needed to understand the sequence of events , including work to be performed in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . gao / aimd - 99-32 and omb capital programming guide . our september 2014 report , we recommended that dhs and gsa conduct ( 1 ) a comprehensive needs assessment and gap analysis of current and needed capabilities that takes into consideration changing conditions , and ( 2 ) an alternatives analysis that identifies the costs and benefits of leasing and construction alternatives for the remainder of the project and prioritizes options to account for funding instability . more detailed information on the scope and methodology can be found in our published report .