sanctuary . to protect our total force from natural and man - made hazards or threats , allowing us to operate anywhere with the lowest risk possible . rapid aerospace response . to respond as quickly as necessary to support peacetime operations or crises and move this response to another location very rapidly if needed . effective aerospace persistence . to sustain the flow of equipment and supplies as well as the application of force for as long as required . once the long - term challenges were identified , the air force followed the planning process specified in the act . for example , it established six work groups tasked with identifying possible approaches to address these challenges . the groups had about 9 weeks to complete their work . as required , a technical coordinator , assisted by a management coordinator , headed each group . each group also complied with the requirement to hold a workshop within the science and technology community to obtain suggestions on possible approaches and promising areas of research . the workshop participants satisfied the requirement to identify current work that addresses the challenge , deficiencies in current work , and promising areas of research . finally , the groups were also expected to select projects that were not linear extensions of current science and technology work . this particular provision was not easy for some groups to define . some pondered the relative nature of the term . for example , a user would perceive “nonlinearity” differently than a scientist . another group characterized it as a quantum leap in capability . another definition associated nonlinear projects with multiple - capability dimensions . for example , if doubling the payload capacity of a weapon is a linear extension , then doubling the payload , speed , and range of the weapon would also be a nonlinear extension . regardless of the definition selected , each group addressed the issue in its planning process . each group summarized the results of its workshop in a briefing that contained enabling capabilities , research areas , technology roadmaps , and associated funding requirements . in many cases , the level of funding projections was double or triple the level of the planned budget . for example , the level of funding projections for basic research in physics , materials , mathematics , and computer science was more than triple the planned investment levels . the air force complied with the overall provisions of the national defense authorization act regarding short - term objectives . ( see table 2 for the checklist of provisions. ) as required , the air force established a task force consisting of representatives from the air force chief of staff and combatant commands to identify short - term objectives . the task force obtained about 58 ideas from the requirements , user , and acquisition communities as specified in the act . because of the mandated short - term focus , most of the input involved enhancing or accelerating ongoing research efforts — not initiating entirely new areas of research . these ideas included maintaining aging aircraft , combat identification , and time - critical targeting . while these are not new concepts , they still present significant technological challenges .