mar . u.s. department of justice , office of justice programs , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention . gang - free schools and communities initiative: fy 2000 ojjdp discretionary program announcement . july 2000 . u.s. department of justice , office of justice programs , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention . ( 2 ) to what extent do project sites adhere to the prescribed comprehensive strategy framework ? ( 3 ) what are the major implementation challenges program grantees face in implementing the comprehensive strategy ? ( 4 ) to what extent does the training and technical assistance provided to project sites help them acquire the knowledge , skill , and tools necessary to develop the comprehensive strategy ? ( 5 ) what role should ojjdp play in the future implementation of the comprehensive strategy ? the comprehensive strategy is ojjdp's approach for addressing juvenile violence and delinquency at the community , state , and national levels through a systematic plan . it advocates the use of local planning teams to assess the factors and influences that put youths at risk of delinquency , determine available resources , and establish prevention programs to either reduce risk factors or provide protective factors that buffer juveniles from the impact of risk factors . this evaluation uses a multilevel design to assess how project sites implement the comprehensive strategy . the evaluation began with telephone interviews with site coordinators from all 48 project sites ; 25 of the 48 project sites were randomly selected for a stakeholder survey . one year later , 10 of the 25 project sites are being given a second stakeholder survey . subsequently , five sites are to be selected for visits , and intensive case studies are being done in three cities . the purpose of this evaluation is to examine ( 1 ) community coalitions' developmental processes from the early planning and adoption stages through implementation and later stages and ( 2 ) the impact of coalitions' prevention efforts concerning risk and resiliency factors and , to the extent feasible , alcohol , tobacco , and other drug use . the drug - free communities support program provides grants to community coalitions to strengthen their efforts to prevent and reduce young people's illegal use of drugs , alcohol , and tobacco . the evaluation is studying two cohorts of program grantees — those that received grants in 1998 or 1999 ( cohort 1 ) and those that received grants in 2000 ( cohort 2 ) . the national evaluation sample is comprised of a total of 213 grantees . the sample is divided by years of operation: 1-5 years , 6-9 years , and more than 9 years . semiannually , cohort 1 grantees are required to submit progress reports to ojjdp and the evaluator that include a special section ( part ii ) , which provides information about the compositions of the coalitions and outcome data collection . cohort 2 grantees do not have a part ii reporting requirement and submit progress reports semiannually only to ojjdp .