sufficient funding . officials for all seven selected investments cited active engagement with program stakeholders — individuals or groups ( including , in some cases , end users ) with an interest in the success of the acquisition — as a critical factor to the success of those investments . agency officials stated that stakeholders , among other things , reviewed contractor proposals during the procurement process , regularly attended program management office sponsored meetings , were working members of integrated project teams , and were notified of problems and concerns as soon as possible . further , officials from two investments noted that actively engaging with stakeholders created transparency and trust , and increased the support from the stakeholders . additionally , officials for six of the seven selected investments indicated that the knowledge and skills of the program staff were critical to the success of the program . this included knowledge of acquisitions and procurement processes , monitoring of contracts , large - scale organizational transformation , agile software development concepts , and areas of program management such as earned value management and technical monitoring . finally , officials for five of the seven selected investments identified having the end users test and validate the system components prior to formal end user acceptance testing for deployment as critical to the success of their program . similar to this factor , leading guidance recommends testing selected products and product components throughout the program life cycle . testing of functionality by end users prior to acceptance demonstrates , earlier rather than later in the program life cycle , that the functionality will fulfill its intended use . if problems are found during this testing , programs are typically positioned to make changes that would be less costly and disruptive than ones made later in the life cycle . in conclusion , va has invested considerable time in multiple efforts toward improving and replacing its it system to better serve the family caregiver program . however , even with these efforts , the department has not yet implemented a system and the program is not prepared for expansion . going forward , it is important that va take steps to improve its efforts to implement a replacement it system for the family caregiver program . in this regard , the department could benefit from applying critical success factors we previously reported as leading to successful federal it acquisitions . these factors can serve as a model of best practices that the department can apply to enhance the likelihood that its effort to replace the it system for the family caregiver program will be successful . chairs lee and brownley , ranking members banks and dunn , and members of the subcommittees , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . if you or your staffs have any questions about this testimony , please contact carol c. harris , director , information technology management issues , at ( 202 ) 512-4456 or harriscc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony statement .