health . from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 , states allocated about $16.8 billion of their master settlement agreement payments to a variety of health care programs , including medicaid ; health insurance ; cancer prevention , screening , and treatment ; heart and lung disease ; and drug addiction . over this period , the amounts states allocated to health care ranged from about $1.9 billion in fiscal year 2005 to nearly $4.8 billion in fiscal years 2000-2001 combined . in fiscal year 2005 , the most recent year for which we collected actual data , 36 of the 46 states allocated some of their master settlement agreement payments to health care . of the 36 states , 5 states allocated two - thirds or more of their payments to health care ; 19 states allocated one - third to two - thirds ; and 12 states allocated less than one - third . ten states did not allocate any of their payments to health care activities . in fiscal year 2005 , pennsylvania , illinois , michigan , and maryland allocated larger amounts to health care than the other states . pennsylvania allocated over $326 million of its payments to health care programs for adult health insurance , uncompensated care , medical assistance for workers with disabilities , and community medical assistance . illinois allocated nearly $204 million of its payments to health care , citing medicaid drugs as a key program that would receive funds . michigan allocated over $185 million of its payments to areas such as elder pharmaceutical assistance and medicaid support programs . maryland allocated nearly $100 million of its payments to areas such as medicaid ; cancer prevention , screening , and treatment ; heart and lung disease ; and drug addiction . budget shortfalls . from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 , states allocated about $12.8 billion of their master settlement agreement payments to budget shortfalls . over this period , the amounts the states allocated to budget shortfalls ranged from a high of about $5.1 billion , or 44 percent of the total payments in fiscal year 2004 , to $261 million , or 4 percent in fiscal year 2005 . thirty states did not allocate any of their payments to education - related activities . michigan , new hampshire , nevada , and colorado allocated the largest amounts to education in fiscal year 2005 . michigan allocated over $99 million of its payments to education for merit award scholarships and tuition incentive grants for higher education students ; the michigan educational assessment program testing for k - 12 students , nursing scholarships , the michigan education savings plan , and general higher education support . new hampshire allocated $40 million of its payments to areas such as an education trust fund , which distributes grants to school districts in the state . nevada allocated about $33 million of its payments to education programs , citing a scholarship program for nevada students attending nevada's higher education institutions as a key recipient . colorado allocated over $16 million of its payments to education , including its read to achieve program . debt service on securitized funds .