( see fig . va provided this mental health care to veterans in both specialty mental health care and other settings , such as primary care clinics staffed with mental health providers . ( see app . ii for information on the number of veterans receiving mental health care in specialty mental health care and other settings. ) although the number of veterans receiving mental health care from va increased for both oef / oif veterans and veterans of other eras of service , as shown in figure 1 , oef / oif veterans accounted for an increasing proportion of the veterans receiving care . specifically , the proportion of oef / oif veterans receiving mental health care from va out of the total number of veterans receiving mental health care increased from 4 percent in fiscal year 2006 to 12 percent in fiscal year 2010 . nonetheless , veterans from earlier eras , such as vietnam , accounted for approximately 90 percent of the 2.1 million veterans receiving care at va over the 5-year period from fiscal years 2006 through 2010 , although the proportion decreased from 96 percent in fiscal year 2006 to 88 percent in fiscal year 2010 . va officials indicated that the increasing proportion of oef / oif veterans receiving mental health care is not unexpected because of the nature of oef / oif veterans' military service — veterans of this era typically had intense and frequent deployments . in addition , according to va officials , va has made changes in its mental health screening protocols that may have resulted in more mental health conditions being diagnosed among veterans entering the va system . for example , va requires veterans treated in primary care settings to be screened for mental health conditions such as ptsd , depression , substance abuse disorders , as well as a history of military sexual trauma . additionally , the 2.1 million veterans receiving mental health care from va accounted for almost a third of the 7.2 million total unique veterans receiving any type of health care from va over the 5-year period from fiscal years 2006 through 2010 . specifically , 38 percent of all oef / oif veterans and 28 percent of all other veterans receiving any health care during this time period received mental health care . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to identify the key barriers that may hinder veterans from accessing mental health care from va , we searched research databases , such as medline and psycinfo , that included peer - reviewed journals to capture relevant literature published on or between january 1 , 2006 , and march 3 , 2011 . we also reviewed relevant literature that was cited in articles from our original search or recommended to us during the course of our research .