v ) . the commissioner of internal revenue said that the report “is an accurate and balanced reflection of our efforts in administering the new law” and that the “documentation provided by your report , and a series of reports by tigta , are a strong foundation for an assessment of lessons learned.” the commissioner said that he asked the commissioner of irs's wage and investment division to conduct a brief review to identify lessons learned and that “his synopsis will supplement the documentation already available and serve as a historic reference for future guidance.” such a review and documentation would be responsive to our recommendation . the commissioner of fms expressed the belief that the advance tax refund program was a model initiative that demonstrated that federal agencies are capable of implementing major programs on short notice efficiently and cost - effectively . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member of the house committee on ways and means . various questions concerning offsets for back taxes and child support , innocent spouse , etc . according to tas staff at one campus , some taxpayers told them that they had called tas with these types of questions because they had difficulty reaching irs's regular telephone assistors . according to tas national office staff , as of may 2002 , tas had opened a total of 3,246 cases nationwide related to the advance tax refunds and the subsequent rate reduction credit , about 500 of which had been opened since the start of calendar year 2002 . of the total cases opened , about 2,170 ( 67 percent ) involved congressional contacts , which automatically result in the opening of a tas case . other cases that were opened involved either an injured spouse or a potential hardship situation . in reviewing tas cases at one of the irs campuses , we found that taxpayers who had either no taxable income in 2000 or not enough taxable income to make them eligible for the full amount of the advance tax refund authorized by law were questioning why they had received no advance refund or less than the full amount . we are also sending copies to the secretary of the treasury ; the commissioner of internal revenue ; the commissioner of fms ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . this report was prepared under the direction of david j. attianese , assistant director . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact mr. attianese or me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 . key contributors to this report were robert c. mckay and ronald w. jones . once the advance tax refunds were issued between july and december 2001 , there were some problems identified involving duplicate , altered , and counterfeit checks . however , in light of the overall number of advance refund checks issued — about 86 million — these problems were relatively minor .