to date , that has not been the case . for future questions about this statement , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512- 4841 or francisp@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this statement include william r. graveline , assistant director ; marcus c. ferguson ; william c. allbritton ; noah b. bleicher ; helena brink ; and tana m. davis . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . the army had veto power over these selections . the army also directed that the lsi contract with integrators at lower levels in the program , and the army was involved with these selections . these integrators held competitions to select suppliers for those systems . this strategy kept the first tier of subcontractors from bringing their own supplier chains , and the approach promoted competition and pushed army visibility down lower into the supplier chain . it was also a means for the army to ensure commonality of key subsystems across fcs platforms . enhanced visibility into the selection and design decisions of subcontractors appears to have benefited the fcs program and warrants consideration in future efforts . the army envisioned an unprecedented information network as the backbone of fcs . inventing such a network while concurrently designing vehicles and other systems dependent on it was too grand an approach . however , the recognition that an integrated combat network should be deliberately designed versus derived or cobbled together from other systems was discerning . since fcs began , the army has achieved an understanding of what the information network needs to be , what may be technically feasible , how to build it , and how to demonstrate it . it has also consciously endeavored to develop the fcs network and software over time in a series of pre - planned blocks . although work on such a network needs to be properly situated within the acquisition process and guided by requirements that are technically realistic , the deliberate development of an integrated network seems a sound approach . the army initiated spin - out development in 2004 , when it embarked on an effort to bring selected fcs capabilities , such as the unattended ground sensors and the non - line - of - sight launch system , to current forces while core fcs development continued . accordingly , the army should continue utilizing the task force to better understand and improve its systems , spin out and otherwise . in our work , we found the greatest obstacle to the army's realizing its vision for fcs to be that the program was not executable within reasonable bounds of technical , engineering , time , or financial resources . that would have left only 40 percent of its financial and schedule resources left to complete what is typically the most challenging and expensive development work ahead . the timing of planned commitments to production funding put decision makers in the difficult position of making production commitments without knowing if fcs would work as intended .