retransmission consent . retransmission consent refers to permission given by television stations who do not choose must carry to allow a cable or satellite operator to retransmit their signals . stations invoke either retransmission consent or must carry . retransmission consent was enacted in 1992 ; at the time , congress determined that cable operators obtained great benefit from the broadcast signals that they were able to carry without broadcaster consent , which resulted in an effective subsidy to cable operators . retransmission rights are negotiated directly between a local television station and cable and satellite operators . by opting for retransmission consent , stations give up the guarantee that cable and satellite operators will carry their signal under must carry in exchange for the right to negotiate compensation for their retransmission . cable and satellite operators are unable to retransmit the signal of a local television station that has chosen retransmission consent without its permission . the copyright act establishes the royalties that a cable operator must pay to carry television stations' signals . a cable operator pays a minimum royalty fee regardless of the number of local or distant television station signals it carries , and the royalties for local signals are less than those for distant signals . compensation for television content flows through industry participants in a number of ways that are relevant to the exclusivity rules , as seen in figure 3 . households that subscribe to television service with an mvpd pay subscription fees ; fcc reported that the average monthly fee for expanded - basic service was $64.41 on january 1 , 2013 . those mvpds , including cable and satellite operators , pay retransmission consent fees to local television stations that opt for retransmission consent ; as discussed above , the fees are determined in negotiations between stations and mvpds . advertisers purchase time from local television stations , broadcast networks , and mvpds . local television stations provide compensation to their affiliated national broadcast networks and to the providers of syndicated content in exchange for the rights to be the exclusive provider of that content in their market . local television stations also use their advertising and retransmission consent revenues to develop their own content , including local news . in 2014 , fcc issued a fnprm to consider eliminating or modifying the exclusivity rules , in part to determine if the rules are still needed given changes to the video marketplace since the rules were first promulgated . fcc asked for comments on , among other things , the potential effects of eliminating the rules . in response to the fnprm , fcc received 72 records during the open comment period , including letters from individuals , and comments and reply comments from industry stakeholders . fcc officials said that the media bureau is working on a recommendation for the fcc chairman's consideration on whether to repeal or modify the exclusivity rules ; there is no firm timeframe for when the bureau may make a recommendation .