civil air patrol . according to air force and patrol officials , very few written requests for items outside of the 97 allowed federal supply classes were submitted and approved by the air force during the 5-year study period . our analysis of department records showed that during this period , the patrol received 1,720 orders for 94,000 supplies ( valued at $8.1 million ) that were not in the eligible federal supply classes . civil air patrol and air force policies differ on what must be done to obtain an item not in the eligible federal supply classes . cadet training . the purpose of the cadet program is to provide youth between the ages of 12 and 18 an opportunity to develop their leadership skills through their interest in aviation . cadets progress through a 15-step program , including aerospace education , leadership training , and physical fitness . the patrol is organized into 8 geographic regions consisting of 52 wings — 1 wing for each state , puerto rico , and the district of columbia . wings are then subdivided into groups , squadrons , and sometimes flights , depending on their size . collectively , there are about 61,000 patrol members and 1,700 individual patrol units . in fiscal year 2000 , there were 4,600 reutilization organizations . the civil air patrol ranked 106th , as measured by the value of excess property obtained . the 12th congressional regional equipment center was established in 1992 as an infrastructure demonstration project in cambria county , in western pennsylvania . participation in the project by the department of defense is mandated.the project's purpose is to assist municipalities and nonprofit organizations in pennsylvania complete specific public projects that would otherwise be too costly to undertake . the center acquires department excess heavy equipment , such as dump trucks , backhoes , front - end loaders , snowplows , forklifts , and rollers , and restores them to acceptable working condition . it then leases the equipment for land reclamation , site preparation , road repair , soil conservation , garbage and snow removal , and other community improvements . the center leases equipment on a daily , weekly , monthly , or yearly basis and continues to maintain the equipment during the leasing period . recently , the center began to provide operators with the equipment for an additional fee and added a lease - with - an - option - to - buy provision . to be eligible to lease equipment , an organization must be governmental or nonprofit and pay a $300 annual membership fee . since its inception , the center's membership has increased each year , and in calendar year 2000 it totaled 283 members . the center's headquarters is in blairsville , pennsylvania . a 12-member board of directors oversees the center ; a paid managing director and staff handle day - to - day business activities . the center's principal sources of revenue were equipment lease fees and auction proceeds . in fiscal year 2000 , there were 4,600 reutilization organizations . the center ranked 15th , as measured by the value of excess property obtained .