, safeguards ) . metallurgy , or activities that could contribute to the design and development of a nuclear explosive device . the duration of certain commitments ranges from 8 years for certain centrifuge restrictions to 25 years for monitoring of uranium ore concentrate . the jcpoa does not contain any provisions relating specifically to iran's bushehr nuclear power plant , so according to iaea , the agency will not carry out verification or monitoring activities in relation to the jcpoa at bushehr beyond its standard safeguards under iran's csa and additional protocol . iran also agreed to fully implement the “roadmap for clarification of past and present outstanding issues.” the roadmap sets out a process for iaea to address issues relating to the possible military dimensions of iran's nuclear program . iaea issued a report on the results of its pmd investigation in december 2015 , and the board of governors subsequently adopted a resolution closing its consideration of the “past and present outstanding issues.” the resolution noted the board's decision to transition iaea's work in iran from under previous board of governors and united nations security council resolutions to jcpoa implementation and verification , in light of united nations security council resolution 2231 . state department officials noted that the board , in its resolution , stated that it will be watching closely to verify that iran fully implements its commitments under the jcpoa and will remain focused going forward on the full implementation of the jcpoa to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of iran's nuclear program . according to officials in iaea's office of legal affairs , the agency draws on its safeguards authorities to verify and monitor iran's implementation of its nuclear - related commitments . for example , using its safeguards authorities , including the csa , iaea will verify and monitor iran's implementation of most of its nuclear - related commitments largely through a range of traditional safeguards approaches and techniques that it has used in the past , such as inspecting nuclear facilities and conducting nuclear material accountancy to verify quantities of nuclear material declared to the agency and any changes in the quantities over time . under the jcpoa , iran agreed to provisionally apply , and seek ratification of the additional protocol , which gives the agency's inspectors access to an expanded range of locations , including those where the agency seeks assurance regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear materials and activities . according to iaea officials , iran previously applied the additional protocol beginning in december 2003 but ceased to do so in february 2006 , and has been provisionally applying it since implementation day ( january 16 , 2016 ) . iaea regards this as if the additional protocol were in force . under the jcpoa , iaea is also conducting certain additional verification and monitoring activities agreed to by iran , such as containment and surveillance measures for monitoring iran's uranium mines and mills , according to iaea officials . containment and surveillance measures include the use of video cameras to detect any movement of nuclear material and any tampering with agency equipment as well as seals that indicate whether the state has tampered with installed iaea safeguards systems .