public law no . 110-28 , the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 , directs us to review how fema develops its estimates of the funds needed to respond to any given disaster , as described in house report no . accordingly , we addressed the following questions: ( 1 ) what is fema's process for developing and refining its cost estimates for any given disaster ? ( 2 ) from 2000 through 2006 , how close have cost estimates been to the actual costs for noncatastrophic natural disasters ? ( 3 ) given the findings from the first two questions and our relevant past work , what steps has fema taken to learn from past experience and improve its management of disaster - related resources and what other opportunities exist ? to address the first question , we examined fema policies , regulations , and other documents that govern its estimation processes . we interviewed senior staff from fema's office of the chief financial officer , as well as headquarters and regional personnel responsible for fema's disaster assistance programs ( public assistance , individual assistance , and the hazard mitigation grant program ) . although we looked at how the estimates from other federal , state , and local government and private nonprofit organizations feed into fema's process , we did not review the estimating processes of these entities . also , we did not review whether fema implemented its cost estimation processes as described . to address the second question , we compared fema's cost estimates at various points in time ( initial ; 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 months ; and a year ) to actual costs to determine when estimates reasonably predicted actual costs . fema officials defined “reasonable” as within 10 percent of actual costs . although the total number of disaster declarations from 2000 through 2006 was 363 , we focused on noncatastrophic , natural disasters . two of the 363 disaster declarations were not natural — they were related to the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 — and another 14 were considered catastrophic . of the remaining 347 disaster declarations , 83 ( 24 percent ) had actual or close to actual costs — known as reconciled or closed , respectively — that could be compared to earlier estimates . none of these 83 disaster declarations occurred in 2005 or 2006 . although the analysis of these 83 disaster declarations is informative , it is not generalizable to all declarations as it does not represent the general population of disasters . finally , to assess the reliability of fema's estimate data , we reviewed the data fema officials provided and discussed data quality control procedures with them . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for purposes of this report . to address the third question of how fema has improved its management of disaster - related resources and identify other opportunities for improvement , we reviewed available policies , procedures , and training materials for staff involved in developing disaster cost estimates or the management of disaster - related resources .