satellite . currently , three providers of satellite service can offer nearly ubiquitous broadband service in the united states . these providers use geosynchronous satellites that orbit in a fixed position above the equator and transmit and receive data directly to and from subscribers . signals from satellites providing broadband service can be accessed as long as the user's reception dish has a clear view of the southern sky . therefore , while the footprint of the providers' transmission covers most of the country , a person living in an apartment with windows only facing north , or a person living in house in a heavily wooded area might not be able to receive internet access via satellite . earlier internet services via satellite could only receive internet traffic downstream — that is , from the satellite to the subscriber — and upstream internet traffic was transmitted through a standard telephone line connection . currently , however , satellite companies provide both upstream and downstream connections via satellite , eliminating the need for a telephone line connection and speeding the overall rate of service . transmission of data via satellite typically adds one - half to three - fourths of a second , causing a slight lag in transmission and rendering this service less well - suited for certain applications over the internet . while satellite broadband service may be available throughout the country , the price for this service is generally higher than most other broadband modes ; both the equipment necessary for service and recurring monthly fees are generally higher for satellite broadband service , compared with most other broadband transmission modes . wireless . land - based , or terrestrial , wireless networks can offer a broadband connection to the internet from a wide variety of locations and in a variety of ways . some services are provided over unlicensed spectrum and others over spectrum that has been licensed to particular companies . in licensed bands , some companies are offering fixed wireless broadband throughout cities . dsl . local telephone companies provide digital subscriber line ( dsl ) service , another form of broadband service , over their telephone networks on capacity unused by traditional voice service . local telephone companies began to deploy dsl service in the late 1990s — some believe , in part , as a response to the rollout of cable modem service . to provide dsl service , telephone companies must install equipment in their facilities and remove devices on phone lines that may cause interference . while most residential customers receive asymmetric dsl ( adsl ) service with download speeds of 1.5 to 3 mbps , adsl technology can achieve speeds of up to 8 mbps over short distances . newer dsl technologies can support services with much higher download speeds . also , mobile telephone carriers — such as the large companies that provide traditional cell phone service — have begun offering broadband mobile wireless internet service over licensed spectrum — a service that allows subscribers to access the internet with their mobile phones or laptops as they travel across cities where their provider supports the service . such services are becoming widely deployed and are increasingly able to offer high - speed services .