the results of our interviews are not generalizable . in addition , we analyzed available data on remittances sent through banks as well as cash declarations at u.s. ports of exit . for both reports , we administered a web - based survey to a nationally representative sample of 406 banks in the united states , including 115 southwest border banks . additional details on our scope and methodology are available in our published reports . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the bsa established reporting , recordkeeping , and other aml requirements for financial institutions . regulation under and enforcement of bsa involves several federal agencies . fincen is responsible for administering the bsa and has authority for enforcing compliance with its requirements and implementing regulations , including through civil money penalties . fincen issues regulations under bsa and delegated bsa / aml examination authority for banks to the federal banking regulators . the federal banking regulators have issued their own bsa regulations that require banks to establish and maintain a bsa / aml compliance program . the federal banking regulators may take enforcement actions for violations of bsa / aml requirements . they may also assess civil money penalties against financial institutions and individuals independently , or concurrently with fincen . both federal and state agencies oversee money transmitters . fincen has delegated examination authority for bsa compliance for money transmitters to the internal revenue service ( irs ) . some have attributed these challenges to derisking . according to treasury , in all states except one , money transmitters are required to obtain licenses from states in which they are incorporated or conducting business . all banks and money transmitters are required to establish an aml compliance program that includes policies , procedures , and processes which , at a minimum , must provide for ( 1 ) a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance , ( 2 ) a designated individual or individuals responsible for managing bsa compliance ( bsa compliance officer ) , ( 3 ) training for appropriate personnel , and ( 4 ) independent testing for bsa / aml compliance . additionally , as of may 11 , 2018 , banks and certain other financial institutions are required to implement appropriate risk - based procedures for conducting ongoing customer due diligence . banks must also have policies and procedures for opening accounts and verifying the identity of each customer and monitoring transactions and reporting suspicious activity .