as a result , we were unable to provide an opinion on such statements . we are encouraged by dod's efforts toward addressing its long - standing financial management weaknesses and its efforts to achieve auditability . your involvement is critical to assuring continued progress . our testimony today discusses the following major issues relating to the consolidated financial statements for fiscal years 2010 and 2009: ( 1 ) the results of our audit , including continued major impediments to an opinion on the accrual - based consolidated financial statements and certain significant uncertainties that resulted in us being unable to render an opinion on the 2010 statement of social insurance ; ( 2 ) the effects of the recent economic recession and the federal government's actions to stabilize financial markets and promote economic recovery on the federal government's financial condition ; and ( 3 ) challenges posed by the federal government's long - term fiscal outlook . we performed sufficient audit work to provide our report on the consolidated financial statements , internal control , and compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations . we considered the limitations on the scope of our work in forming our conclusions . our audit was conducted in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . both the consolidated financial statements and our related audit report are included in the fiscal year 2010 financial report of the united states government ( financial report ) . our audit report would not be possible without the commitment and professionalism of inspectors general throughout the federal government who are responsible for annually auditing the financial statements of individual federal agencies . the financial report was issued by the department of the treasury ( treasury ) on december 21 , 2010 . this report is available through gao's internet site , at http: / / www.gao.gov / financial / fy2010financialreport.html and treasury's internet site , at http: / / www.fms.treas.gov / fr / index.html . since the enactment of key financial management reforms in the 1990s , the federal government has made significant progress in improving financial management activities and practices . for fiscal year 2010 , 20 of 24 chief financial officers ( cfo ) act agencies were able to attain unqualified audit opinions on their accrual - based financial statements within an accelerated reporting timeframe , up from 6 cfo act agencies for fiscal year 1996 . also , accounting and financial reporting standards have continued to evolve to provide greater transparency and accountability over the federal government's operations , financial condition , and fiscal outlook . further , the preparation and audit of financial statements has identified numerous deficiencies , leading to actions to strengthen controls and systems . it is important for the individual federal departments and agencies to remain committed to maintain the progress that has been achieved in obtaining positive audit results and to build upon that progress to make needed improvements .