six caos did provide some suggestions . for example , energy's response to our questionnaire stated that the cao position needs improved resource support and full engagement with the agency's senior leadership team . at epa , the cao responded that it would be helpful if there were a better understanding of the contracting process by agency management . the gsa cao , who left the position during our review , believed that returning the cao position to a direct report to the gsa administrator would improve the position's effectiveness at her agency . to complement information gathered through the questionnaire and agency documentation , we conducted follow - up interviews to discuss the cao's roles and responsibilities with caos and acquisition officials at seven agencies: commerce , department of homeland security ( dhs ) , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , interior , energy , gsa , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . we used a nongeneralizable sample of agencies based upon the following criteria: review of the questionnaire responses , the amount of procurement spending as a portion of the agency's fiscal year 2010 budget , and whether the agency's inspector general had identified acquisition - related issues as a major management challenge . we also met with officials from omb's office of federal procurement policy to discuss the roles and responsibilities of agency caos . we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . despite these responses and other issues raised in our report , almost all the caos believed that they had the appropriate authority to fulfill their acquisition management responsibilities . more than 8 years after the enactment of the sara legislation , there is wide variation in how agencies have implemented the cao position . increasing appropriate use of performance - based contracting and performance specifications making acquisition decisions consistent with all applicable laws and establishing clear lines of authority , accountability , and responsibility for acquisition decision - making within the executive agency managing the direction of acquisition policy for the executive agency , including implementation of the unique acquisition policies , regulations , and standards of the executive agency developing and maintaining an acquisition career management program in the executive agency to ensure that there is an adequate professional workforce as part of the strategic planning and performance evaluation process , assessing the requirements established for agency personnel regarding knowledge and skill in acquisition resources management and the adequacy of such requirements for facilitating the achievement of the performance goals established for acquisition management ; developing strategies and specific plans for hiring , training and professional development to rectify any deficiency in meeting such requirements ; and reporting to the head of the executive agency on the progress made in improving acquisition management capability .