dod concurred with our recommendation . subsequent to issuance of its 2014 strategy , dod implemented an additional 10 of the 22 original plans . for example , the u.s. marine corps' blount island command has implemented long - range passive rfid for visibility and accountability of items , resulting in improvements including an increased range for “reading” an item — from up to 30 feet to up to 240 feet — and reduced inventory cycle times from 12 days to 10 hours . additionally , the joint staff has implemented its plan to develop in - transit visibility capabilities within the global combat support system - joint ( gcss - j ) , a web - based logistics program that was developed to provide logisticians with visibility and decision support tools to effectively plan and execute joint logistics support for current and future operations . according to dod , gcss - j has dramatically improved functionality over the last several program releases to access and visualize logistics information . also , after the release of the most recent software version , users graded gcss - j as having exceeded their expectations with a 96 percent customer satisfaction rating . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . this appendix provides an overview of dod's implementation plans intended to improve asset visibility and progress in implementing those plans . these implementation plans are described in detail in both dod's 2014 and 2015 strategies for improving dod asset visibility . the implementation plans in table 2 below were included in dod's 2014 strategy for improving dod asset visibility and have been implemented , according to dod . the implementation plans in table 3 below were included in dod's 2014 strategy for improving dod asset visibility but were halted for the reasons stated . as of july 2015 , the implementation plans in table 4 below were in the process of being implemented and were included in both dod's 2014 and its 2015 strategies for improving dod asset visibility . the implementation plans in table 5 below were included for the first time in dod's 2015 strategy for improving dod asset visibility . to assess the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) satisfied its mandate to provide congress a comprehensive strategy for improving asset tracking and in - transit visibility that includes each of the 11 statutory elements , we reviewed dod's october 2014 report to congress on the strategy to improve asset tracking and in - transit visibility , which incorporated its january 2014 strategy for improving dod asset visibility and accompanying implementation plans . we refer to the 2014 strategy document , implementation plans , and 2014 report collectively as the 2014 strategy . we performed a content analysis in which two analysts independently reviewed dod's 2014 strategy and compared the information in these documents with the 11 statutory elements and assessed the extent to which dod had addressed each required element . any initial disagreements in the coding were discussed and reconciled by the analysts .