i for more information. ) va spent about $11.22 billion on outpatient fee basis care and about $9.07 billion on inpatient fee basis care from fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2012 . in addition , officials from the six vamcs reported several methods they use to reduce either the cost of referring veterans to fee basis providers or the number of veterans their facilities refer to fee basis providers . vamcs have limitations on the services they can offer due to a variety of factors , including the size of their facilities and the types of providers they can recruit , which can affect fee basis care utilization . va officials from the six vamcs we examined reported that the types of clinical services offered at their facilities affected veterans' utilization of fee basis care . for example , officials from the alexandria vamc explained that their facility does not meet va's requirements for providing orthopedic surgery services to veterans and does not provide these services . as a result , they refer veterans who need these services to fee basis providers . similarly , officials from the biloxi vamc explained that they do not have the ability to offer radiation therapy for cancer treatment at their medical center . as a result , they refer veterans who need radiation therapy to fee basis providers and reported that their vamc has little control over increases in fee basis spending for these services . we also reviewed documentation of these planned improvements . we conducted our performance audit from september 2012 to may 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the two main fee basis care delivery methods — preauthorized care and emergency care — are approved using two different processes.preauthorizing fee basis care involves a multistep process conducted by the vamc that regularly serves a veteran . the preauthorization process is initiated by a va provider who submits a request for fee basis care to the vamc's fee basis care unit , which is an administrative department within each vamc that processes va providers' fee basis care requests and verifies that fee basis care is necessary . once approved by the vamc chief of staff or his or her designee , the veteran is notified of the approval and can choose any fee basis provider willing to accept va payment at predetermined rates . ( see fig . va's fee basis care spending increased from about $3.04 billion in fiscal year 2008 to about $4.48 billion in fiscal year 2012 . va's fee basis care spending hit its highest level of about $4.56 billion in fiscal year 2011 . traveling long distances for medical care is often impractical for veterans , particularly those receiving ongoing outpatient medical care , such as dialysis or radiation therapy for cancer .