applicants may abandon their applications at any time during this process . a lack of funding was cited as the primary reason for not implementing these initiatives . with the passage of legislation in december 2004 to increase fees available to uspto for the next 2 years , the agency is reevaluating the feasibility of implementing some of these initiatives . in our reports , we made recommendations aimed at improving the agency's management of its patent automation strategy and related information technology investments and at enhancing communication and collaboration between management and patent examiners , and between management and union officials . uspto generally agreed with the findings , conclusions , and recommendations in both reports , although it only partially agreed with several material aspects of our assessment of its patent automation strategy , including our recommendation that it reassess its approach to automating its patent process . uspto helps promote industrial and technological progress in the united states and strengthen the national economy by administering the laws relating to patents and trademarks . a critical part of its mission is examining patent applications and issuing patents . a patent is a property right granted by the u.s. government to an inventor who secures , generally for 20 years from the date of initial application in the united states , his or her exclusive right to make , use , offer for sale , or sell the invention in exchange for disclosing it . the number of patent filings to uspto continues to grow and , by 2009 , the agency is projecting receipt of over 450,000 patent applications annually . patent processing essentially involves three phases: pre - examination , examination , and post - examination . the process begins when an applicant files a patent application and pays a filing fee . during the pre - examination phase , patent office staff document receipt of the application and process the application fee , scan and convert the paper documents to electronic format , and conduct an initial review of the application and classify it by subject matter . along with this growing workload is a 28-month backlog of approximately 750,000 applications . further complicating this picture , is that uspto's resources have not kept pace with the increases in its patent workload . agency officials acknowledge that , at times , they have had difficulty competing with the private sector to attract and retain staff with the high degree of scientific , technical , and legal knowledge required to be patent examiners . recognizing the need to improve its patent processing capability , over the past 2 decades , uspto has undertaken various efforts to automate its patent process . in addition , as part of an aggressive 5-year modernization effort outlined in its strategic plan , the agency has articulated its approach to creating a more productive and responsive patent organization through accelerating its use of automation and enhancing the quality of its patent examination workforce .