vha no . according to va officials , the agency does not have the capacity to receive medical documentation electronically from community providers . medicare yes . according to cms officials , when medical documentation is requested , the macs can receive the information electronically via a web - based portal . tricare yes . according to dha officials , when medical documentation is requested , the tricare contractor can receive the information electronically via a web - based portal . veterans health administration , timeliness standards for processing non - va provider claims , vha directive 2010-005 ( washington , d.c.: jan. 27 , 2010 ) . tricare mcscs are subject to claims processing timeliness requirements outlined in law and in the tricare operations manual . the requirements listed in the operations manual are more stringent than in the law , which states that 95 percent of clean claims must be processed within 30 days of submission to the claims processor and that all clean claims must be processed within 100 days of submission to the claims processor . in addition to the contact named above , marcia a. mann , assistant director ; elizabeth conklin ; christine davis ; krister friday ; jacquelyn hamilton ; alexis c. macdonald , and vikki porter were major contributors to this report . veterans' health care: preliminary observations on vha's claims processing delays and efforts to improve the timeliness of payments to community providers . gao - 16-380t . ( washington , d.c.: feb. 11 , 2016 ) . va's health care budget: preliminary observations on efforts to improve tracking of obligations and projected utilization , gao - 16-374t ( washington , d.c.: feb. 10 , 2016 ) . va health care: actions needed to improve monitoring and oversight of non - va and contract care . yes . community providers must submit medical documentation so that va clinicians can determine whether the care was related to the veteran's service - connected disability and whether the condition for which the veteran sought treatment meets the prudent layperson standard of an emergency . yes . under their contracts with va , the tpas must collect medical documentation from community providers and return it to va in a timely manner . health . the standard would be met if there was an emergency medical condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity ( including severe pain ) that a prudent layperson who possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine could reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical attention to result in placing the health of the individual in serious jeopardy , serious impairment to bodily functions , or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part . staffing increases . vha officials said that they have recently filled the approximately 300 staff vacancies that resulted from attrition shortly after the october 2014 realignment of claims processing under vha's chief business office for purchased care . the officials also told us that they have supplemented the existing workforce at vha's claims processing locations by hiring temporary staff and contractors to help address vha's backlog of claims awaiting processing .