disqualifying income . for 2 of the 11 applicants , we reported income substantially higher than the amount we initially stated on our applications , and at levels that should have disqualified our applications from receiving subsidies . however , according to the cms data , the marketplace resolved our income inconsistencies and , as noted , our aptc and csr subsidies for both applicants continued . in addition to having fictitious documentation approved , two of our applicants also received notices in early 2015 acknowledging receipt of documents recently submitted , when we had not sent any such documents . we do not know why we received these notices . we found that the cms document - processing contractor is not required to seek to detect fraud . it is only required to inspect for documents that have obviously been altered . according to contractor executives we spoke with , the contractor personnel involved in the document - verification process are not trained as fraud experts and do not perform antifraud duties . in particular , the executives told us , the contractor does not certify the authenticity of submitted documents , does not engage in fraud detection , and does not undertake investigative activities . in the contractor's standard operating procedures for its work for cms , document - review workers are directed to “determine if the document image is legible and appears unaltered by visually inspecting it.” further , according to the contractor , it is not equipped to attempt to identify fraud , and does not have the means to judge whether documents submitted might be fraudulent . cms officials told us there have been no cases of fraudulent applications or documentation referred to the u.s. department of justice or the hhs office of inspector general , because its document - processing contractor has not identified any fraud cases to cms . however , as noted earlier , the contractor is not required to detect fraud , nor is it equipped to do so . according to the cms officials , there has been “no indication of a meaningful level of fraud.” according to cms officials , it would not be practical to have applicants show original documents at time of application . with the healthcare.gov website , the agency decided to move away from in - person authentication , in order to avoid burden on consumers , the officials told us . they also said in - person presentation of documentation is not possible in the current structure , as there are insufficient resources to establish a system to do so . overall , according to cms officials , the agency has limited ability to respond to attempts at fraud . they told us cms must balance consumers' ability to “effectively and efficiently” select marketplace coverage with “program - integrity concerns.” cms places a strong emphasis on program integrity and builds program integrity features into all aspects of implementation of the law , according to cms officials . in any case , the cms officials said the design of the program does not allow for direct consumer profit from fraud , because aptc and csr subsidies are paid to policy issuers , not consumers .