pub . 108-458 ( 2004 ) ( relevant sections codified at 50 u.s.c . in 2007 , dod and the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) formed the joint security clearance process reform team , known as the joint reform team , to improve the security clearance process government - wide . in a 2008 memorandum , the president called for a reform of the security clearance and suitability determination processes and subsequently issued executive order 13467 , which in addition to designating the dni as the security executive agent , also designated the director of opm as the suitability executive agent . specifically , the director of opm , as suitability executive agent , is responsible for developing policies and procedures to help ensure the effective , efficient , and timely completion of investigations and adjudications relating to determinations of suitability , to include consideration of an individual's character or conduct . further , the executive order established a suitability and security clearance performance accountability council ( performance accountability council ) to oversee agency progress in implementing the reform vision . under the executive order , this council is accountable to the president for driving implementation of the reform effort , including ensuring the alignment of security and suitability processes , holding agencies accountable for implementation , and establishing goals and metrics for progress . the order also appointed the deputy director for management at the office of management and budget as the chair of the council . to help ensure the trustworthiness and reliability of personnel in positions with access to classified information , executive branch agencies rely on a personnel security clearance process that includes multiple phases: requirements determination , application , investigation , adjudication , appeals ( if applicable , where a clearance has been denied ) , and reinvestigation ( where applicable , for renewal or upgrade of an existing clearance ) . figure 1 illustrates the steps in the personnel security clearance process , which is representative of the general process followed by most executive branch agencies and includes procedures for appeals and renewals . while different departments and agencies may have slightly different personnel security clearance processes , the phases that follow are illustrative of a typical process . in the first step of the personnel security clearance process , executive branch officials determine the requirements of a federal civilian position , including assessing the risk and sensitivity level associated with that position , to determine whether it requires access to classified information and , if required , the level of access . security clearances are generally categorized into three levels: top secret , secret , and confidential . the level of classification denotes the degree of protection required for information and the amount of damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause to national defense . a sound requirements determination process is important because requests for clearances for positions that do not need a clearance or need a lower level of clearance increase investigative workloads and resultant costs .