they called the expanded program idr . according to program officials , the agency's vision was for idr to become the single repository for cms's data and enable data analysis within and across programs . specifically , this repository was to establish the infrastructure for storing data related to medicaid and medicare parts a , b , and d claims processing , as well as a variety of other agency functions , such as program management , research , analytics , and business intelligence . cms envisioned an incremental approach to incorporating data into idr . specifically , it intended to incorporate data related to paid claims for all medicare part d data by the end of fiscal year 2006 , and for medicare parts a and b data by the end of fiscal year 2007 . the agency also planned to begin to incrementally add all medicaid data for the 50 states in fiscal year 2009 and to complete this effort by the end of fiscal year 2012 . initial program plans and schedules also included the incorporation of additional data from legacy cms claims - processing systems that store and process data related to the entry , correction , and adjustment of claims as they are being processed , along with detailed financial data related to paid claims . according to program officials , these data , called “shared systems” data , are needed to support the agency's plans to incorporate tools to conduct predictive analysis of claims as they are being processed , helping to prevent improper payments . shared systems data , such as check numbers and amounts related to claims that have been paid , are also needed by law enforcement agencies to help with fraud investigations . cms initially planned to have all the shared systems data included in idr by july 2008 . also in 2006 , cms initiated the one pi program with the intention of developing and implementing a portal and software tools that would enable access to and analysis of claims , provider , and beneficiary data from a centralized source . the agency's goal for one pi was to support the needs of a broad program integrity user community , including agency program integrity personnel and contractors who analyze medicare claims data , along with state agencies that monitor medicaid claims . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . like financial institutions , credit card companies , telecommunications firms , and other private sector companies that take steps to protect customers' accounts , cms uses information technology to help detect cases of improper claims and payments . for example , it allows the user to customize and create ad hoc queries of claims data across the different parts of the medicare program . however , while program officials deployed the one pi portal and two analytical tools , the system is not being used as widely as planned because cms and contractor analysts have not received the necessary training for its use .