the president then decided not to provide any import relief . the success rate for china safeguard petitions is similar to communist country safeguard petitions , but differs from that of global safeguard petitions . u.s. firms have filed six petitions for china safeguard relief since section 421 was enacted ( see fig . the petitioners representing the domestic industry ranged from one firm in two cases to seven firms and a union in the most recent petition . the products involved are the following: pedestal actuators ( for raising and lowering seats in mobility scooters ) , certain steel wire garment hangers , brake drums and rotors , ductile iron waterworks fittings ( for municipal water systems ) , uncovered innersprings used in mattresses , and circular welded nonalloy steel pipes . if you or any of your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4347 or yagerl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . to address our objectives , we reviewed u.s. laws and procedures as well as relevant world trade organization ( wto ) agreements and china's accession agreement . to ensure our understanding of relevant laws , procedures , and agreements , we spoke with officials from the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) and the international trade commission ( itc ) . in addition , we interviewed officials from the wto and officials from the government of china . finally , we spoke with law firms that had direct experience in china safeguard cases , as well as law firms with broad experience in trade actions against china . to describe how the safeguard has been applied thus far , we examined each phase of the process . for the itc phase , we reviewed and analyzed each of the determinations the itc commissioners issued during the five china safeguard injury investigations completed as of july 31 , 2005 , to understand the rationale behind them . we further obtained private sector views of the itc process by speaking with law firms that had represented petitioners and / or respondents in each of the five china safeguard injury investigations . for the ustr phase of the process , we spoke with law firms that had represented petitioners and / or respondents that participated in each of the three china safeguard remedy investigations and reviewed the transcripts of all three ustr hearings . ustr neither made the documents related to their analyses nor their recommendations available to us . instead , we relied on detailed briefings from ustr officials on the nature and substance of their deliberations culminating in a recommendation to the president . for the presidential phase of the process , we reviewed each of the president's three determinations made under the china safeguard . to compare the use of the china safeguard with the communist country and global safeguards , we reviewed itc import injury investigation statistics and presidential determinations in the china , communist country , and global safeguard cases .