however , some differences exist between the two authorities . copies of this report are being sent to the commissioner of ssa , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . the report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . we also interviewed officials from disability research , advisory , and advocacy organizations . in addition , we examined other reviews of ssa's disability demonstration and research programs , including prior gao and inspector general reports and reports from disability research and advisory groups . we also reviewed ssa budget documents identifying agency spending on disability program demonstrations and ssa testimony describing agency priorities related to the di program in general and demonstration projects in particular . in addition , we examined ssa's strategic plan , annual performance plans , and annual accountability reports . to obtain detailed information on ssa's di demonstration projects , we reviewed various documents related to ssa's design , implementation , and evaluation of demonstration projects including agency reports to the congress ; public notifications of demonstration projects issued in the federal register ; contract , grant , and cooperative agreement solicitation and award notices issued in the federal register or in the commerce business daily ; and project reports submitted to ssa by grantees or contractors , including project design and evaluation documents . we used information from these sources to identify key characteristics and outcomes of each project , including its broad goals , specific study objectives , types of program waivers applied , methodology , actual or expected costs , funding sources , major project milestones including actual or expected initiation and completion dates , project duration , involvement of outside contractors and grantees , key project strengths and limitations , and final project results , including any recommendations that may have been made . the type and extent of information we obtained for each demonstration project varied widely , in large part because ssa has not maintained comprehensive documentation on its prior demonstrations . in addition , documentation on ssa's more recent demonstrations was very limited given that these projects are in the early planning and design stages . to provide a broader context for understanding ssa's use of its demonstration authority , we reviewed other federal agencies' legislative authorities for conducting demonstration and research activities . we also examined reports from gao and other organizations that evaluated demonstration and research projects conducted by other federal agencies or that identified key evaluation and methodological issues related to such projects . we performed our work at ssa headquarters in baltimore , maryland , and at various locations in washington , d.c. we conducted our work between october 2003 and august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following individuals also made important contributions to this report: jacquelyn d. stewart , erin m. godtland , corinna a. nicolaou , daniel a. schwimer , ronald la due lake , michele c. fejfar . individuals are considered to be engaged in sga if they have countable earnings above a certain dollar level .