the evaluation is on - going . the most recent progress report we reviewed indicated that the evaluation is proceeding as planned , with the recruitment of batterers behind schedule by 1 month , the series of female partner interviews on schedule and very close to expected response rates , and the interviews with the sub - sample of batterers about three - quarters complete . one potential concern we have is that because all men referred by the domestic violence court to the counseling center may not be recommended to participate in the study , any bias in recommending study participants will determine the population to which the study's results can be generalized . testing the impact of court monitoring and batterer intervention programs at the bronx misdemeanor domestic violence court fund for the city of new york operating since 1998 , the bronx misdemeanor domestic violence court handles spousal abuse misdemeanor cases . the court has the power to prescribe various conditions of discharge for batterers , including participation in group counseling and / or court monitoring . given concerns about the effectiveness of these options , it was decided to test the efficacy of batterer counseling programs and court monitoring , alone and in combination with each other . furthermore , court monitoring was tested based on the frequency of its administration — either monthly or on a graduated basis ( less monitoring for fewer incidences of abuse ) . this was to ascertain whether graduated monitoring might give batterers more incentive to change . the evaluation began in september 2001 and is expected to be completed in august 2003 . outcomes included rates of completed prosecution of batterers , rate of guilty findings against batterers , subsequent violence against victims , victims' perceptions of safety , and victims' views of advocacy and the criminal justice process . assessment of evaluation 	 the study was severely affected by numerous problems , many of which the researchers acknowledged . first , the sample selection was based on incomplete or unreliable data , since police officers in writing reports often did not fully describe incidents , and precinct staff inconsistently provided complete case information about incidents to the researchers . second , evaluators were not able to secure cooperation from domestic violence advocates and their supervisors at all service levels in providing reliable reports on service recipients and the type , number , and length of services . additionally , most domestic violence team members were moved out of the precincts and into a centralized location during the period victims in the study were receiving services , thereby potentially affecting the service ( s ) provided to them . further , the researchers were uncertain as to whether women from the comparison precincts received any advocacy services , thereby potentially contaminating the research results between the precincts with the domestic violence teams and the comparison precincts . finally , low response rates and response bias for data collected from victims were problems . the overall response rate for the initial round of telephone interviews was only about 23 percent and the response rates for follow - up interviews were lower . we are providing information in this report about these changes .