iii . the government - wide results are a weighted total of the three strata of our sample: ( 1 ) procurement award transactions , ( 2 ) assistance award transactions , and ( 3 ) budgetary records . for reporting purposes , we combined some of the results for the award strata because some data elements appear in both files d1 ( procurement ) and d2 ( financial assistance ) . see app . i for the list of agencies and number of records randomly selected and tested in each strata . if we determined , after reviewing agency source documents , that a data element was not applicable to the sampled record , we did not factor the data element into our evaluation of completeness and accuracy . trbo region 1.” dod officials explained that this description includes the part number for a medical supply item and the region of the country and is auto populated by an agency system . while the description is consistent with agency sources , it is not easily understood by the public . the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement procedures , guidance , and information provides instructions to use plain english as much as possible , and to explain numbers and acronyms . dod officials said the agency is investigating methods to improve how similar transactions are auto - populated . description of modification . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) used the award description field to describe modifications to contracts instead of the good or service being procured . specifically , dhs reported “de - obligate excess funds and closeout” for a modification to a contract that procured information technology products and services . dhs officials said reporting the nature of the modification , rather than the original purpose of the award , is consistent with practices used in contract writing systems across the federal government and is intended to inform the public of changes made to the contract by the modification . dhs is working with treasury to clarify how this information is displayed on usaspending.gov and suggested that additional information on how award descriptions for modifications are to be reported would be beneficial and should be provided in the daims . we found that some individual agencies have taken steps to provide additional guidance on award description to ensure agency personnel are providing information that is consistent with the standard . four agencies in our sample had additional guidance for their contracting officers . for example , officials from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) said that in june 2019 , va trained hundreds of members of its contracting workforce with curriculum that included an interactive game to illustrate how to provide a brief description of an award that meets the standard for reporting this information . officials from 11 agencies said additional guidance on award description could help ensure those entering the data understand the standard definition and report appropriate information , for example , by providing examples of award definitions that meet the standard . in the absence of government - wide guidance , agencies have reported values that are inconsistent with the data standard and not comparable between agencies .