gender of horse . the results indicate that the value of horses varies both by their gender and the interaction of their gender and age . specifically , the results show that the price of geldings is initially higher than both stallions and mares . this premium holds until approximately age 12 , when the premium relative to stallions has gone to zero . mares do not sell at a premium relative to stallions at any point in the age distribution . location and timing of auction . the results indicate that a horse sold at either the eastern or southern auctions would fetch a higher price than an identical horse sold at the western auction . the premium for horses sold at the eastern auction is greater than the premium for horses sold at the southern auction . the timing of an auction — spring versus fall — was also statistically significant and suggests that horses sold in the fall tend to sell at a discount , although this effect diminishes for the higher price categories . this may be because owners may be more anxious to sell their horses in the fall rather than feed them through the winter . auction no - sales percentage . the results suggest that for every 1 percent increase in an auction's “no - sales” percentage , price decreased by about 2 percent across quantiles . that result was highly statistically significant and consistent across all horse price quantiles . this phenomenon may result from sellers having certain expectations of acceptable bid prices , and , if those expectations are not met , they may be willing to wait for a later auction date to try selling the horse again . horse buyers may have expectations , as well , that prices will be falling even lower and wait until the next auction . this may be especially true during a period of economic slowdown , according to experts . horse breed / type . the results suggest that quarter horses sold at a premium , relative to grade horses , which do not have a declared breed registry . humane methods of slaughter act: actions are needed to strengthen enforcement . gao - 10-203 . february 19 , 2010 . humane methods of slaughter act: usda inspectors' views on enforcement . gao - 10-244sp . february 19 , 2010 . veterinarian workforce: the federal government lacks a comprehensive understanding of its capacity to protect animal and public health . gao - 09-424t . february 26 , 2009 . veterinary workforce: actions are needed to ensure sufficient capacity for protecting public and animal health . gao - 09-178 . february 4 , 2009 . bureau of land management: effective long - term options needed to manage unadoptable wild horses . gao - 09-77 . october 9 , 2008 . humane methods of handling and slaughter: public reporting on violations can identify enforcement challenges and enhance transparency . gao - 08-686t . april 17 , 2008 . usda: information on classical plant and animal breeding activities . gao - 07-1171r . ponies also tend to sell at a premium relative to grade horses , for those ponies sold in the higher categories ( i.e. , quantiles ) .