tex . in addition to the contact named above , david p. bixler , assistant director ; nathan anderson ; ellen w. chu ; charlotte gamble ; rebecca shea ; jeanette soares ; and richard m. stana made major contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were joel aldape , lacinda ayers , muriel brown , and brian lipman . federal lands in california . for two border patrol stations responsible for patrolling federal lands in southern california , the patrol agents - in - charge reported that when they request permission for road maintenance activities , it can take up to 9 months for permission to be granted ; occasionally , border patrol may not receive permission at all . in one case , for example , a patrol agent - in - charge told us that better maintenance was needed for five roads and two surveillance system sites within her station's area of operation , but because permission to maintain these roads was not granted , her agents could not conduct routine patrols or reach the sites for mobile surveillance systems , even in areas of high illegal traffic ( see fig . the patrol agent - in - charge said that without the permission to maintain the poor roads , her agents had to find alternative patrol routes and try to apprehend suspected undocumented aliens farther north . in addition , because the proposed surveillance sites could not be used , agents had to place the mobile surveillance systems in areas less prone to illegal traffic . the bureau of land management state program manager for this area told us that one bureau employee had , at times , told border patrol agents that they could not use or have permission to maintain a road , whereas the employee should have instructed border patrol to seek permission from a bureau of land management specialist , who could have begun the required environmental and historic property assessments . in addition , the state program manager told us that the required assessments for road maintenance activities have not been completed on many routes . he acknowledged that one of the bureau of land management's biggest challenges is being responsive to border patrol timelines . wilderness act of 1964 . the wilderness act of 1964 provides for federal lands to be designated as “wilderness areas,” which means that such lands are to be administered in such a manner that will leave them unimpaired for future use and enjoyment and to provide for their protection and the preservation of their wilderness character , among other goals . if border patrol proposes to patrol or install surveillance equipment on federal land that has been designated as wilderness , the agency must comply with the requirements and restrictions of the wilderness act of 1964 , other laws establishing a particular wilderness area , and the relevant federal land management agency's regulations governing wilderness areas .