i for technology licenses by laboratory. ) user facility agreements , which provide access to unique doe research equipment and facilities , increased from 252 in fiscal year 1992 to more than 2,000 in fiscal year 2001 . in particular , brookhaven national laboratory had 741 agreements in fiscal year 2001 that provided nonfederal entities with access to its specialized facilities such as the national synchrotron light source . similarly , oak ridge national laboratory had 604 agreements with nonfederal entities in fiscal year 2001 . the 12 doe laboratories have reduced their technical assistance to small businesses from a high of 746 agreements in fiscal year 1995 to 246 agreements in fiscal year 2001 . this decline reflected the phasing out of dedicated funding for technology partnerships , which the nnsa and office of science laboratories could use to support technical assistance . more recently , two laboratories have used other , non - doe sources of funding to provide technical assistance to local small businesses . sandia national laboratories have an agreement with the state of new mexico that entitles sandia to up to $1.8 million per year in tax relief for assistance provided to small businesses in the state . similarly , pacific northwest national laboratory has received funding from an economic development agency in washington to provide technical assistance . three laboratories stated that the lack of dedicated doe funding was a “show stopper” for cradas . for example , managers at lawrence berkeley national laboratory told us that because many of the laboratory's research program budgets have been squeezed in recent years , research managers have little flexibility to support cradas or other types of technology partnerships . ( see table 10 in app . i for the type of financial support that partners provided. ) while these funds enabled the doe laboratories to leverage their resources , technology transfer managers at several laboratories noted that many ongoing cradas were terminated early and potentially beneficial crada projects were stopped during negotiations because a business learned that it would have to pay a substantial part , or all , of the laboratory's research costs in addition to its own costs . in recent years , about 33 percent of the cradas were with small businesses , 50 percent were with large or intermediate businesses , and 13 percent were with universities or consortia . ( see table 11 in app . table 3 shows that the doe laboratories' other technology transfer activities funded by businesses and other nonfederal entities have grown substantially in the past 10 years — work - for - others agreements are more than four times greater and technology licenses and user facility agreements are eight times greater . businesses and other nonfederal entities have provided more funding for work - for - others agreements than for all other types of technology transfer activities combined . the working group has no permanent staff positions . the nonfederal entity pays for the entire cost of the project . while intellectual property rights are negotiable , the nonfederal entity typically retains title rights to any inventions . technology licensing agreements: a doe laboratory grants a business an exclusive or nonexclusive license to use its intellectual property in return for a licensing fee and / or royalties .