where do we go from here ? under consideration this year are a number of acquisition reforms . while these aim to change the policies that govern weapon system acquisition , they do not sufficiently address the incentives that drive the behavior . as i described above , the acquisition culture in general rewards programs for moving forward with unrealistic business cases . early on , it was clear that the ford - class program faced significant risks due to the development , installation and integration of numerous technologies . yet , these risks were taken on the unfounded hope that they were manageable and that risk mitigation plans were in place . the budget and schedule did not account for these risks . funding approval — authorizing programs and appropriating funds are some of the most powerful oversight tools congress has . the reality is once funding starts , other tools of oversight are relatively weak — they are no match for the incentives to over - promise . consequently , the key is to ensure that new programs exhibit desirable principles before they are approved and funded . there is little that can be done from an oversight standpoint on the cvn 78 . in fact , there is little that can be done on the cvn 79 , either . regardless of how costs will be measured against cost caps , the full cost of the ships — as yet unknown — will ultimately be borne . for example , while the joint precision approach and landing system has been deferred from the first two ships , eventually it will have to be installed on them to accept the f - 35 fighter . the next real oversight opportunity is on the cvn 80 , which begins funding in fiscal year 2016 . going forward , there are two acquisition reform challenges i would like to put on the table . the first is what to do about funding . today , dod and congress must approve and fund programs ahead of major decision points and key information . with money in hand , it is virtually impossible to disapprove going forward with the program . there are sound financial reasons for making sure money is available to execute programs before they are approved . but they are also a cause of oversold business cases . second , in the numerous acquisition reform proposals made recently , there is much for dod to do . but , congress , too , has a role in demanding realistic business cases through the selection and timing of the programs it chooses to authorize and fund . what it does with funding sets the tone for what acquisition practices are acceptable . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff has any questions about this statement , please contact paul l. francis at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or francisp@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .