stock purchases . the amount of stock that members must purchase varied according to each fhlbank's funding strategy ( see table 2 ) . fhlbank members must hold a certain amount of membership capital stock as a continuing condition of membership . each fhlbank determines as a part of its capital plan the amounts that all members must purchase in membership capital stock and sets its requirement based on the fhlbank's business model . five of the 12 fhlbanks we reviewed calculated the membership stock purchase as a percentage of the member's total assets . the other 7 fhlbanks calculated the purchase as a percentage of a specific asset category , such as mortgage - related assets or certain assets eligible to be pledged as collateral . the fhlbanks also require members to purchase activity - based stock . that is , members must acquire a specific amount of stock based on the product — such as advances or letters of credit — the fhlbank provided to that member . the purchases are specified as a percentage of the dollar amount of each transaction the member conducted with the fhlbank . for example , among the 12 fhlbanks , the purchase requirements on advances ranged from 2 percent to 5 percent . for instance , if a member had a $2 million advance transaction with the fhlbank , it would have to purchase from $40,000 to $100,000 in capital stock . while fhlbank and cdfi industry officials we interviewed cited several membership requirements that could pose a challenge for nondepository cdfi applicants ( including financial condition , long - term home mortgage loan , mortgage - related assets , and stock purchase requirements ) , most of the nondepository cdfis we interviewed were able to meet these requirements or stated that they would be able to meet the requirements . financial condition requirements . officials we interviewed from 9 of the 12 nonmember nondepository cdfis stated that they would be able to meet the financial condition standards , while 2 stated that they would potentially face challenges with the financial condition standards . in addition to interviewing officials from nondepository cdfis that were nonmembers , we reviewed the applications of the 27 nondepository cdfis that were members as of september 2014 . seven of the 27 nondepository cdfis did not meet at least one of the financial condition standards at the time of their application , but made successful rebuttals and became members . making long - term mortgages . of the 12 nonmember nondepository cdfis we interviewed , officials from 1 cited the “makes long - term home mortgage loans” requirement as a challenge for membership . in addition , officials from 1 of the 10 member nondepository cdfi we interviewed cited this as a challenge , but noted that they received an exemption from the minimum quantitative requirement imposed by the fhlbank . the officials from the remaining 11 nonmember and 9 member cdfis did not identify this requirement as a challenge . officials from two fhlbanks stated that cdfis in general may face challenges meeting this requirement , as some nondepository cdfis may not make or hold long - term home mortgage loans if they are not involved in mortgage lending . mortgage - related assets .