( app . i provides an overview of the military services' prepositioned assets and their locations. ) dod has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs , totaling several billion dollars in annual acquisition costs . in addition , the services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets . for example , in fiscal year 2005 , the army spent $386.1 million for storage and maintenance of prepositioned assets , including $76.5 million for assets in south korea and $38.3 million for assets in southwest asia . prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in iraq and afghanistan . the marine corps used equipment from two of its three prepositioned squadrons to support these operations . the army used nearly all of its prepositioned ship stocks and land - based stocks in kuwait and qatar , in addition to drawing some equipment from europe . military equipment and infrastructure are often located in corrosive environments that increase the deterioration of assets and shorten their useful life . the extensive and long - term deployments of u.s. troops in southwest asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment , including prepositioned assets , because of the region's harsh operating environment . higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements , drive up costs , and take critical systems out of action , reducing mission readiness . corrosion can also reduce the safety of equipment items . although reliable cost data are not available , estimates of corrosion costs dod - wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually . we have found in our prior work that dod and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion . we recommended that dod develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals , measurable outcome - oriented objectives , and performance measures . dod concurred and in december 2003 issued its corrosion strategy . according to dod's corrosion strategy , knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy , and having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion . in addition , the defense science board in 2004 stated that “accurate and objective corrosion data collection and new incentives to reward life - cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented” as part of an effective corrosion control program and that such data are critical “not only to understand the depth of the problem , but to enable a quantitative corrosion mitigation strategy , which is founded on fact. the army and marine corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets , but the army could increase its use of storage facilities for land - based assets . prepositioned equipment drawn by army and marine corps units for military operations in iraq during 2003 had mostly been stored in humidity - controlled facilities and was reported to be in good operating condition and was not degraded by corrosion . the primary measure taken to reduce corrosion and achieve this good operating condition was the use of humidity - controlled storage facilities .