reg . the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 added the notice provision and required the plan administrator notify the distributee in writing ( either separately or as part of the § 402 ( f ) notice ) . pub . 107-16 , § 657 , 115 stat.38 , 135 ( codified at 26 u.s.c . §§ 401 ( a ) ( 31 ) ( b ) and 402 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) . in addition , to meet the conditions of dol's safe harbor and therefore , be deemed to have satisfied their fiduciary duties with regard to mandatory distributions , plans must provide participants with a summary plan description , or a summary of material modifications , meeting certain requirements . specifically , it must describe the plan's forced - transfer ira provisions ( including an explanation that the forced - transfer ira will be invested in an investment product designed to preserve principal and provide a reasonable rate of return and liquidity ) , a description of how fees and expense attendant to the individual retirement plan will be allocated ( i.e. , the extent to which expenses will be borne by the account holder alone or shared with the distributing plan or plan sponsor ) , and the name , address and phone number of a plan contact ( to the extent not otherwise provided ) . at a glance since 2005 , individuals in australia have been able to select a plan ( super ) of their choosing to which employers they have throughout their career will contribute . however , workers not actively choosing a plan may accumulate accounts in multiple plans selected by their employers . according to australian treasury officials , many australians lose track of their accounts , especially when they change jobs , names , and addresses . small balances may be eaten away by fees , necessitating forced - transfers to preserve their value . pension registry the australian tax office ( ato ) has established an online tool called superseeker that individuals can use to find lost retirement accounts , via the governmental portal mygov . a smart phone application is also available for accessing the information . information provided to participants can be used for retirement planning purposes , including consolidation , in order to improve participant retirement security . however , the superseeker does not perform analytical tasks , such as showing retirement outcomes under various scenarios , according to government officials we interviewed . participants who find lost accounts upon searching for them are able to consolidate them online in a plan of their choice generally within 3 working days . the superseeker now allows paperless “point and click” consolidation . according to ato , nearly 155,000 accounts were consolidated in 2013-14 with a total value of about aud 765 million . in addition , the number of lost accounts went down by 30 percent between june 2013 and june 2014 . the pension registry is primarily financed through a tax on the superannuation sector , and in some cases such as funding the letter campaign to raise awareness , from general revenue .