evaluation . there have been limited evaluations of the methodology , and one of these evaluations has been significantly delayed . under federal internal control standards , measuring performance allows organizations to track the progress they are making towards program goals and objectives , and provides managers important information on which to make management decisions and resolve any problems or program weaknesses . evaluation of phase i pilot ( conducted in september 2009 ) — ons identified vamc challenges with implementing the methodology — such as difficulties accessing data , and staff nurses having an overall lack of knowledge of the methodology process . the evaluation contained recommendations , such as developing a training guidebook and providing guidelines on the role of the expert panels , to improve the methodology process . according to ons , most of the recommendations from this 2009 evaluation have been addressed ; however , we found that weaknesses identified in the 2009 evaluation still existed for all of the seven vamcs included in our review . evaluations of phase i national implementation and training ( began early 2014 , preliminary results were expected august 2014 ) . similarly , ons did not begin an evaluation of the national implementation of the methodology until january 2014 , more than 2 years after vamcs were required to have implemented it , and , as of august 2014 , had still not been completed . according to ons officials , the phase i national evaluation was to review vamcs' experiences during implementation , including a review of the training provided to vamcs during that phase . hiring delays . staff and officials from six of the seven vamcs in our review said they often faced hiring delays that impacted their ability to execute staffing plan initiatives . some vamc staff noted it could take more than 6 months to fill unit vacancies . although staff from one vamc said hiring was slowed by the dearth of qualified nurses in their community , staff from other vamcs in our review said the supply of nurses was not the problem , but rather the problem was the vha hiring process , which took months to complete for each candidate . additionally , vamc staff noted that new hires also needed to complete necessary internal trainings before joining a unit full time , which added to the delays , and that some new hires were hurried through this training process because their units were so desperate to have them on staff . budget constraints . staff and officials from five of the seven vamcs in our review said their vamcs were not able to fully execute their staffing plans due to budget constraints . for example , at one vamc , one of the approved staffing plan initiatives was the hiring of a large number of nurses for its units , in part , to address the vamc's inability to increase their nursing staff over a period of years . the official told us that , due to budget constraints , the vamc was going to phase in this hiring initiative over the next few years . some vamc staff reported improvements in the adequacy and qualifications of their units' nursing staff when nurse staffing plan initiatives were executed .