gao - 08-436t . washington , d.c.: january 24 , 2008 . we continue to believe such plans are needed . given the challenges facing the department , we believe these actions will enhance dod's ability to validate requirements , develop plans and funding needs , identify investment priorities and trade - offs , and ultimately to embark on a sustainable path to rebuild readiness and move forward with plans to modernize and transform force capabilities . in the absence of a strategic approach based on sound plans and measurable outcomes , neither congress nor the department can be assured that it will have the information it needs to make informed investment decisions and to ensure that it is maximizing the use of taxpayer dollars in both the short and long terms . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any question you or other members of the committee or subcommittee may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call sharon l. pickup at ( 202 ) 512-9619 or pickups@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . military operations: implementation of existing guidance and other actions needed to improve dod's oversight and management of contractors in future operations . force structure: need for greater transparency for the army's grow the force initiative funding plan . gao - 08-354r . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2008 . force structure: better management controls are needed to oversee the army's modular force and expansion initiatives and improve accountability for results . gao - 08-145 . the navy is also reviewing its requirements and plans to modernize its fleet . meeting these requirements will involve both new acquisitions as well upgrades to existing fleets , which will cost billions of dollars . a common theme in our work has been the need for dod to take a more strategic approach to decision making that promotes transparency and ensures that programs and investments are based on sound plans with measurable goals , validated requirements , prioritized resource needs , and performance measures to gauge progress against the established goals . due to the magnitude of current operational commitments and the readiness concerns related to the ground forces , we believe decision makers need to take a strategic approach in assessing current conditions and determining how best to rebuild the readiness of the army and marine corps . as a result , in july 2007 , we recommended that dod develop near - term plans for improving the readiness of its active and reserve component ground forces , and specify the number of ground force units they plan to maintain at specific levels of readiness as well as the time frames for achieving these goals .