some injuries have resulted in fatalities . according to bls fatality data , 151 meat and poultry workers sustained fatal injuries in calendar years 2004 through 2013 . over that time , transportation incidents were the most frequent cause of death . for example , in calendar years 2011 through 2013 , 46 meat and poultry workers sustained fatal injuries and 19 of these fatalities were caused by transportation incidents , such as being struck by a vehicle . other causes of fatalities included violence from a person or animal , contact with objects or equipment , and exposure to harmful substances or environments . meat and poultry workers experienced higher illness rates than other manufacturing workers ( see fig . in calendar year 2013 , there were an estimated 159.3 cases per 10,000 full - time meat and poultry workers , compared to an estimated 35.9 cases for manufacturing overall . to better understand illness rates , osha classifies total recordable cases of illnesses into five categories , such as skin diseases and respiratory conditions , which bls reports per 10,000 workers . in the meat and poultry industry , illnesses accounted for over one - fourth of all reported injury and illness cases in calendar year 2013 . according to bls's website , working conditions can be difficult in the meat and poultry industry because workers are exposed to hazards that may lead to an injury or an illness . in 2013 , bls categorized the poultry industry ( 104.2 cases per 10,000 ) and part of the meat industry — animal ( except poultry ) slaughtering — ( 319.7 cases per 10,000 ) as high - rate industries for illnesses because these industries had the highest incidence rate of total illness cases , compared to other industries with at least 500 cases . usda data show that its inspectors experience injuries and illnesses similar to those experienced by other meat and poultry workers . according to usda's 2014 workers' compensation claims data , falls , slips , and trips were the most frequent causes of injuries among meat and poultry inspectors . usda inspectors at plants we visited told us injuries and illnesses among inspectors vary , depending on whether they work in a meat or poultry plant . specifically , inspectors told us that compared to inspectors in poultry plants , inspectors in meat plants sustain more cuts or lacerations because they make several cuts during hog and cattle inspections , while poultry inspections generally do not require any cuts to animal carcasses . additionally , they said inspectors in poultry plants sustain more repetitive motion injuries due to faster line speeds . some inspectors experience respiratory ailment symptoms due to chlorine used in poultry plants , according to usda inspectors . since our findings in 2005 on meat and poultry workers facing hazardous work conditions , niosh health hazard evaluations and academic studies have found that meat and poultry workers continue to face the types of hazards we cited , including hazards associated with musculoskeletal disorders , chemical hazards , biological hazards from pathogens and animals , and traumatic injury hazards from machines and tools .