we do not agree . we believe the report contains the most important facts relevant to our objectives . nonetheless , in response to dod's comments , we did modify the report to provide some additional details on the results of the california prioritization protocol . however , we made no changes regarding the sources of perchlorate contamination in massachusetts because this information was already included in our description of massachusetts' actions to regulate perchlorate . we did not include information on the amount of perchlorate imported into the united states , the health risks of perchlorate , and the conclusions of the epa office of inspector general's report , because these issues were beyond the scope of our report . for example , we were asked to report on what is known about the likely sources of perchlorate in the nation's water and food supply , not on the amount of perchlorate used for different purposes . although an organization may use a significant amount of perchlorate for a specific purpose , the quantity used is not necessarily indicative of the amount of perchlorate released into the environment . similarly , we were not asked to assess the public health risks of perchlorate exposure , so we did not address it in this report . moreover , the scientific community is still debating health risk and , as we mentioned in the report , epa has not yet made a final decision whether to set a regulatory standard for perchlorate in drinking water . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . dod's comments and our detailed responses are presented in appendix iv of this report . doe and epa did not provide formal comments . however , they provided technical comments by e - mail , which we incorporated as appropriate . nasa had no comments on the report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , secretaries of defense and energy , administrators of the environmental protection agency and national aeronautics and space administration , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v .