partner agencies . all five of the partner agencies we selected for our review — the food and drug administration , the national highway traffic safety administration , the consumer product safety commission , the animal and plant health inspection service , and the fish and wildlife service — work with cbp in the commercial targeting and analysis center while also employing their own import data analysis and targeting systems . in addition , agencies with personnel at u.s. ports of entry may conduct locally focused targeting efforts . the cbp officials said that a fourth enhancement was required to comply with a new electronic filing rule by the u.s. court of international trade and that a fifth was needed to correct technical obsolescence . as table 3 shows , the information that cbp officials provided identified in general terms the enforcement or other benefits that could be realized through addressing these prioritized enhancements . as the table shows , as of september 2017 , cbp had identified funding for three of these seven priorities . accepted but unprioritized enhancements . cbp officials also provided us with a list of 22 unprioritized enhancements suggested by cbp staff and the trade community that had been presented to cbp's product management committee for assessment and possible prioritization . several of these enhancements are aimed at strengthening ace provisions for processing agricultural imports . for example , one enhancement would improve the interface between ace and various department of agriculture subsystems , reducing the need to manually enter data in multiple systems . another enhancement would integrate the ace agricultural workspace and cbp's automated targeting system , strengthening targeting for agricultural imports . the list of unprioritized enhancements also includes initiatives to simplify several import processing steps for the trade community , allowing faster processing and associated cost savings . while cbp has a process for prioritizing enhancements suggested by its own staff or by members of the trade community ( see text box ) , no process has been established for prioritizing enhancements suggested by partner agencies or for making priority decisions among all suggested enhancements , including those submitted by partner agencies . enhancements suggested by partner agencies are provided to the border interagency executive council ( biec ) for prioritization . the biec , which cbp chairs , was created to improve coordination among itds partner agencies . the biec's responsibilities extend to reviewing and prioritizing partner agency suggestions for enhancing ace , according to cbp officials . however , cbp officials told us in september 2017 that the biec did not have explicit criteria for prioritizing partner agency suggestions and had not yet agreed on a cost - sharing strategy that would allow multiple agencies to share the cost of enhancements that might benefit those agencies . faster processing . according to cbp and partner agency officials , ace's automated review of data submitted by importing companies speeds the agencies' processing and clearing of eligible shipments for release . cbp officials at the port of new york commented that although reviewing and clearing incoming cargo for release through acs required approximately 24 hours , performing this process through ace takes only a few minutes if data are complete and properly formatted and if the cargo does not require inspection .