we did not make recommendations in our report . dod officials did not provide written comments on the report but technical comments were incorporated as appropriate . we conducted our review from november 2006 to march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . used by all u.s. military service members and dod civilians in the area of operations , the iba consists of an outer tactical vest with ballistic inserts or plates that cover the front , back , and sides . gao - 07-911t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact william m.solis at ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . dod instruction 3020.41 allows dod to provide body armor to contractors and non - dod civilians where permitted by applicable dod instructions and military department regulations and where specified under the terms of the contract . it is centcom's position that body armor will be provided to contractors if it is part of the terms and conditions of the contract . however , the officials indicated that commanders , at their discretion , can provide body armor to any personnel within their area of operation . mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss our findings regarding army and marine corps's individual body armor systems . as you know , since combat operations began in iraq and afghanistan , u.s. forces have been subjected to frequent and deadly attacks from insurgents using various weapons such as improvised explosive devices ( ied ) , mortars , rocket launchers , and increasingly lethal ballistic threats . since 2003 , to provide protection from ballistic threats , u.s. central command ( centcom ) , which is responsible for operations in iraq and afghanistan and other areas , has required service members and department of defense ( dod ) civilians in its area of operations to be issued the interceptor body armor ( iba ) system . congress has expressed strong interest in the quality of our ground force's body armor protection , especially since combat operations began in iraq and afghanistan and news reports citing concerns regarding body armor shortages and quality issues . in response to these concerns , we reviewed the army and marine corps's actions regarding individual body armor systems , and on april 26 , 2007 , issued a report . my testimony today summarizes the findings in this report . specifically , i will discuss the extent to which the army and marine corps ( 1 ) have met the theater requirements for body armor , ( 2 ) have the controls in place to assure that the manufacturing and fielding of body armor meet requirements , and ( 3 ) have shared information regarding their efforts on body armor ballistic requirements and testing . i will also include additional information concerning whether contractors or non - dod civilians obtain body armor in the same way as u.s. forces and dod civilians given the number of contractors and non - dod civilians in centcom's area of operation .