we identified inconsistencies in how the data were reported by the oas . these inconsistencies affect the reliability of the department's aggregate data , but we determined that the oa - level data were sufficiently reliable to make qualitative observations about staffing and certification challenges at the individual oas . to determine the extent to which the office of the senior procurement executive has provided support and oversight for acquisition workforce planning and management , we reviewed relevant ofpp policy and guidance , as well as dot policy , guidance , and acquisition workforce plans for 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 . we interviewed dot procurement and human resources officials to obtain their views on their roles and responsibilities . we also reviewed budget and strategic planning documents from the office of the secretary and the office of the senior procurement executive and interviewed officials from the five oas with the greatest fiscal year 2011 procurement spending to discuss their approaches to strategic acquisition workforce planning and to obtain their views about the level of support and oversight from the office of the senior procurement executive . based on this review , we identified senior procurement executive responsibilities to support and oversee acquisition workforce planning and management and determined the extent to which these functions are performed . we compared office of the senior procurement executive strategic workforce planning efforts to leading practices for workforce planning identified by gao and others . dot officials could not explain the discrepancy . see appendix i for more information about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from march 2012 to january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . congress has recognized the need for a professional acquisition workforce by establishing education , training , and experience requirements for entry into and advancement in the acquisition career fields for federal agencies . a number of governmental organizations play critical roles in assisting agencies in building and sustaining their acquisition workforces . among these agencies , the office of management and budget's office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) provides government - wide guidance on acquisition workforce issues , and for civilian agencies the federal acquisition institute promotes the development of the civilian acquisition workforce as well as an information management system — the federal acquisition institute training application system — to collect and analyze acquisition workforce data . in 2005 , ofpp issued guidance to civilian agencies on developing and managing the acquisition workforce and directed agency chief acquisition officers — responsible for monitoring and evaluating agency acquisition functions — to carry out specific acquisition workforce actions .