viii ) . to improve global surveillance and detection capacity , the implementation plan assigns u.s. agencies responsibility for action items that focus on ( 1 ) ensuring rapid reporting of outbreaks and ( 2 ) using surveillance to limit their spread . for example , action item 4.2.2.4 assigns hhs lead responsiblity for training foreign health professionals to detect and respond to infectious diseases such as avian influenza with action to be completed within 12 months — that is , by may 2007 ( see fig . in 2006 , hhs established or augmented five regional global disease detection and response centers located in egypt ( $4.4 million ) , guatemala ( $2 million ) , kenya ( $4.5 million ) , thailand ( $6.5 million ) , and china ( $3.9 million ) to enhance global disease surveillance and response capacity . among other things , these centers provide training in field epidemiology and laboratory applications . for example , in july 2006 , the thailand center conducted a workshop aimed at teaching public health officials what to do when investigating a respiratory disease outbreak that may signal the start of a pandemic . more than 100 participants from 14 countries participated in this workshop , which was cosponsored by who and thai authorities . to improve global response and containment capacity , the implementation plan assigns u.s. agencies responsibility for action items that focus on ( 1 ) containing outbreaks ; ( 2 ) leveraging international medical and health surge capacity ; ( 3 ) sustaining infrastructure , essential services , and the economy ; and ( 4 ) ensuring effective risk communication . action item 4.3.1.5 , for example , assigns usda and usaid lead responsibility for supporting operational deployment of response teams when outbreaks occur in poultry ( see fig . in 2006 , usda and usaid supported the creation of a crisis management center at fao to coordinate and respond to avian influenza outbreaks globally . according to fao , the center is able to dispatch its experts to any location in the world in under 48 hours . usaid and usda have provided approximately $5 million in support to the center . usda detailed three veterinary specialists to the center for headquarters operations as well as an official to serve as its deputy director . usda is also providing experts to respond to outbreaks . usaid has directed its support toward enhancing coordination with who on rapid deployment of joint animal health / human health teams and facilitating operations in underresourced african countries . the homeland security council's first progress report on u.s. pandemic influenza - related efforts reported that agencies had completed all of the 22 international action items scheduled for completion by november 2006 . in december 2006 , the council issued a compendium of the action items in the implementation plan , with updates on the corresponding performance measures . the council reported that all 22 of the international action items in the implementation plan that agencies were to complete by november 2006 had been completed . ( the 84 action items in the international section of the implementation plan have time frames for completion that range from 3 months to 2 years. )