calculation errors in the planning documentation . we also found several calculation errors within the updated ( fy10 ) health care requirements analysis report . one table in the report that shows historical ( 5-year average ) , baseline , and projected workload for inpatient and outpatient care had errors in the 5-year average column for inpatient and bed days of care . when we spoke with dod officials , dispositionswe pointed out these errors . dod officials acknowledged the errors and noted that the correct numbers could be found in a separate table in the report's appendix — although the appendix table was not listed as a reference to support the historical workload numbers . additionally , a table in the report's appendix , which illustrated the different projected inpatient and outpatient workload data , calculated using the three different scenarios , had many calculation errors in the projected outpatient workload columns . specifically , in calculating projected workload using scenarios a and b , dod incorrectly used the 5-year average — instead of the fiscal year 2010 data — as a baseline , and when using scenario c , dod adjusted for potential decreases in the beneficiary population , although this scenario did not call for such an adjustment . as a result , outpatient workload data using scenario b , for example , was calculated to be 288,534 encounters instead of 328,944 ( a 14 percent difference ) . the projected data derived by incorrectly applying scenario b were then used in another table in the report's appendix to verify that the projected outpatient provider staffing would be sufficient to treat the projected number of outpatients . dod officials acknowledged the error and provided us with correct data . according to dod officials , even though there was a 14 percent difference in the projected outpatient workload data , the outpatient provider staffing levels would still be sufficient . although these calculation errors may not adversely affect the size of the replacement medical center , it remains unknown to what extent this error will affect facility requirements when combined with the yet to be assessed posture changes , previously discussed deviations or adjustments , and gaps in documentation . standards for internal controls include , among other things , control activities . control activities include policies , procedures , techniques , and mechanisms that enforce management's directives . they can include a wide range of activities — such as authorizations , verifications , and documentation — that should be readily available for examination . detailed and appropriate documentation is a key component of internal controls . without clear documentation of key analyses , and of how adjustments to facility requirements were made , stakeholders lack reasonable assurances that the proposed replacement medical center will be able to provide the appropriate health care capacity to meet the needs of the beneficiary population it is expected to serve . in developing the cost estimate for the replacement facility , dod followed many of the best practices in developing estimates of capital projects , but dod minimally documented the data sources , calculations , and estimating methodologies used in developing the cost estimate .