princeton and the u.s.s . tripoli — were severely damaged and seven sailors injured by sea mines . figure 2 shows the damage 10 feet below the waterline from an iraqi sea mine to the u.s.s . tripoli in the persian gulf on february 18 , 1991 . the navy's existing specialized mine warfare forces , known as dedicated mine warfare forces , consist of 12 coastal mine - hunting ships and 14 mine countermeasures ships , 1 command and support ship , 20 mine - hunting and mine - clearing helicopters , 15 explosive ordnance disposal detachments , a very shallow water detachment , and marine mammal detachments.according to the navy , the coastal minehunting ships and mine countermeasures ships of the dedicated forces lack the speed and endurance needed to accompany carrier battle groups and amphibious ready groups on overseas deployments . because of this shortcoming , the navy is developing organic mine countermeasures systems for carrier battle and amphibious ready groups . organic systems would allow naval forces to counter sea mines without having to wait for the dedicated mine countermeasure forces to arrive . however , even if organic systems prove effective , the navy still intends to retain some of its dedicated mine countermeasures force for larger - scale mine hunting and sweepingoperations , such as those conducted after the gulf war . almost a decade ago , the congress expressed concerns that the navy had failed to sufficiently emphasize mine countermeasures in its research and development program and noted the relatively limited funding allocation to those efforts . to support a continuing emphasis on developing the desired mine countermeasures , the congress added an annual certification requirement in the national defense authorization act for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 . this legislation , and subsequent extensions , provides for the transfer of primary responsibility for developing and testing mine countermeasures systems from the navy to an office within dod unless the secretary of defense certifies that certain conditions are met each year . specifically , the secretary of defense could waive this transfer of responsibility by certifying that the secretary of the navy , in consultation with the chief of naval operations and the commandant of the marine corps , had submitted an updated mine countermeasures master plan and provided sufficient resources for executing the updated plan . the legislation also requires the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff's assessment of whether the navy had programmed sufficient resources to execute the plan . the secretary of defense has certified the navy's mine warfare plan each year since the requirement was enacted . unless the congress extends the certification requirement , it will expire at the end of fiscal year 2003 . in june 1998 , we reported that the navy had spent $1.2 billion since 1992 on research and development to improve the capabilities of mine countermeasures systems , but none of them were ready for production . included in these developments were the distributed explosive technology ( det ) and shallow - water assault breaching system ( sabre ) , which are intended to provide the navy a near / mid - term ( 2001 to 2010 ) breaching and clearing capability in the surf zone .