regulate . multiple federal agencies have a regulatory role associated with indian energy development . for example , bia approves seismic exploration permits for operators to identify oil and gas resources , maintains surface and mineral ownership records , identifies and verifies ownership of land and resources , and reviews and approves a number of energy - related documents — such as surface leases , mineral leases for the right to drill for oil and gas resources , and right - of - way agreements . in addition , blm issues drilling permits to operators developing indian oil and gas resources after receiving bia concurrence to approve the permits . further , epa issues permits for air emissions that may be required for some oil and gas development , and fws issues permits for incidental deaths of certain wildlife species , which may be needed for a wind project . if energy development affects navigable waters , the u.s. army corps of engineers may need to issue a permit . provide transmission access assistance . utility - scale renewable energy projects need to connect to the electric grid to transmit power generated from the project , along transmission lines , to a destination . doe's western area power administration , along with other power administration agencies , is responsible for marketing and transmitting electricity across the united states and can help tribes to better understand transmission capacity , identify options for accessing available capacity on transmission lines , and assist with interconnection requirements . for example , according to officials from the western area power administration , it partnered with a tribal utility authority to resolve transmission congestion affecting a proposed 27-megawatt utility - scale solar project . purchase power . to be economically feasible , utility - scale renewable energy projects need a customer to purchase their power . the federal government is the nation's largest energy consumer . in fiscal year 2013 , the government spent about $6.8 billion on energy for over 3.1 billion square feet of buildings and facilities — an area about the size of 50,000 football fields . gsa has general statutory authority to enter into utility services contracts of up to 10 years for all federal agencies . gsa has delegated the authority to enter into contracts for public utility services to the department of defense ( dod ) and to doe for procurements by those agencies . the energy policy act of 2005 encourages federal agencies to purchase electricity , energy products , and by - products from tribal entities . specifically , the act includes a provision authorizing federal agencies to give preference to a tribe or tribal enterprise when purchasing electricity or any other energy or energy by - product as long as federal agencies do not pay more than the prevailing market prices or obtain less than prevailing market terms and conditions . the council was established by executive order in june 2013 . the executive order calls for the secretary of the interior to lead the council , the council to meet at least three times per year , and interior to provide funding and administrative support to the council .