demand . the expected , potential profitability of a spectrum license influences the level of demand for it . currently , the demand for licensed spectrum is increasing and a primary driver of this increased demand is the significant growth in commercial - wireless broadband services , including third and fourth generation technologies that are increasingly used for smart phones and tablet computers . some of the factors that would influence the demand for licensed spectrum are: clearing versus sharing: spectrum is more valuable , and companies will pay more to license it , if it is entirely cleared of incumbent federal users , giving them sole use of licensed spectrum ; spectrum licenses are less valuable if access must be shared . sharing could potentially have a big impact on the price of spectrum licenses . in 2012 , the president's council of advisors on science and technology advocated that sharing between federal and commercial users become the new norm for spectrum management , especially given the high cost and lengthy time it takes to relocate federal users . certainty and timing: another factor that affects the value of licensed spectrum is the certainty about when it becomes available . any increase in the probability that the spectrum would not be cleared on time would have a negative effect on the price companies are willing to pay to use it . for example , 7 years after the auction of the 1710- 1755 mhz band , federal agencies are still relocating systems . supply . in 2010 , the president directed ntia to work with fcc to make 500 mhz of spectrum available for use by commercial broadband services within 10 years . this represents a significant increase in the supply of spectrum available for licensing in the marketplace . as with all economic goods , the price and value of licensed spectrum are expected to fall as additional supply is introduced , all other things being equal . the estimated 10-year timeframe to clear federal users from the 1755- 1850 mhz band , and potential uncertainty around that timeframe , could negatively influence demand for the spectrum . available wireless services: innovation in the wireless broadband market is expected to continue to drive demand for wireless services . for example , demand continues to increase for smartphones and tablets as new services are introduced in the marketplace . these devices can connect to the internet through regular cellular service using commercial spectrum , or they can use publicly available ( unlicensed ) spectrum via wireless fidelity ( wi - fi ) networks to access the internet . the value of the spectrum , therefore , is determined by continued strong development of and demand for wireless services and these devices , and the profits that can be realized from them . chairman udall , ranking member sessions , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . i am happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact mark l. goldstein , director , physical infrastructure issues , at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov .