iv ) . released in 2014 . several groups have been established to review and comment on the estimates presented in the authority's business plans . for example , an independent peer review group ( prg ) was established in accordance with california law to evaluate the authority's funding plans and report its judgment as to the feasibility and the reasonableness of the plans , appropriateness of assumptions , analyses and estimates , and any observations or evaluations it deems necessary . in addition , the authority convened a ridership and revenue peer review panel ( panel ) to review the authority's ridership and revenue - forecasting process and outcomes and conduct an in - depth review of the models used to estimate ridership and revenue and the forecasts derived from them . the california state auditor is required to periodically audit the authority's use of bond proceeds . in response to the initial high estimated cost of building the san francisco to los angeles route — about $98 billion — and other criticisms of the authority's november 2011 draft business plan , the project underwent substantial revision for the april 2012 revised business plan . most significantly , the authority scaled back its plans to build dedicated high - speed rail lines over the project's entire length . instead , the april 2012 revised business plan adopted a “blended” system in which high - speed rail service would be provided over a mix of dedicated high - speed lines and existing and upgraded local rail infrastructure ( entirely at the bookends of the system on the san francisco peninsula and in the los angeles basin ) . the estimated cost in the april 2012 revised business plan is $68.4 billion . the ridership and revenue forecasts in the april 2012 revised business plan also changed from the november 2011 plan . for example , in the november 2011 draft business plan , the authority provided low and high estimates of ridership in 2030 of 14.4 million and 21.3 million passengers . in the april 2012 revised business plan , these estimates increased by 12 and 26 percent , respectively , to 16.1 million and 26.8 million . revenues similarly increased between the two plans from a low and high estimate of $1.05 billion and $1.56 billion in the november 2011 plan to $1.06 billion and $1.81 billion in april 2012 . the ridership and revenue estimates increased because among other things , a “one - seat” service from san francisco to los angeles would begin sooner under the blended approach than the original solely dedicated lines approach . however , by 2040 ridership forecasts under the blended approach are less than the original full build approach . the range between the high and low estimates also increased between the november and april plans reflecting a greater degree of uncertainty in the estimates . we have previously reported that forecasting ridership and revenue is a complex and iterative process and that early stage estimates should be based on the best available data and what is initially known about the proposed project . as additional information becomes available , the authority's model used to produce the forecasts is intended to be updated .