hhs has not needed the property for many years . in april 2001 , we reported that the property had significantly deteriorated and had environmental and historic preservation issues that would need to be addressed in order for the property to be disposed of or transferred to another federal agency . in the last year , gsa , the district of columbia ( the district ) , hhs , and various public interest groups have been working to resolve the situation at st. elizabeths . in may 2002 , the urban land institute formed an advisory panel that reported on several options for redeveloping the site . the panel recommended that the federal government transfer the west campus to the district and that the district should identify a master developer for the site . the panel further recommended that the master developer consider redeveloping the site into four campus areas without changing the character of the surrounding neighborhoods and without displacing existing residents . the panel recommended preserving the historic buildings through adaptive use and sensitive addition of new buildings . in addition to the panel , an executive steering committee and a working group , each consisting of representation from the district , hhs , gsa , and public interest groups , have been established and hhs and gsa have proceeded with a number of actions to prepare the property for disposal . these include preparing the property for “mothballing,” which is work done to minimize further deterioration of the property while the disposal process proceeds ; determining the extent of environmental remediation needed ; and conducting community outreach . figure 2 shows the vacant , boarded - up center building , which opened in 1855 and served as the main hospital building . at the time of our review , the irs was leasing about 336,000 square feet in additional space in the area . gsa and irs would like to consolidate irs's operations , and the property would be desirable for the city of andover and local developers to develop . the redevelopment strategy involved a partnership to develop a small office park consisting of six , 5-acre pads . under this plan , the project could progress as follows: year 1: build a new 4-story , 700,000 square foot irs facility and parking structure for current and expiring irs leases ; the complex would be at rear of site to allow for security and a phased development of the rest of the site . year 2: irs moves into the new facility and the old building is demolished ; the partnership constructs another 250,000 square foot federal office building for non - irs expiring leases . years 3 and 4: partnership constructs two more 250,000 square foot federal office buildings for compatible agency and private sector occupancy . the analysis of this strategy projected a 14.4 percent lifetime irr for the private partner and a 9.4 percent lifetime irr for the government . figure 4 is an aerial view of the irs service center in andover , mass . the 511 building was also a strong candidate for a partnership in terms of strong federal demand , strong private sector interest in development , and moderate nonfederal demand for use of the property .