gao . train braking: dot's rulemaking on electronically controlled pneumatic brakes could benefit from additional data and transparency . gao - 17-122 . washington , d.c.: october 12 , 2016 . gao . air traffic control: faa needs a more comprehensive approach to address cybersecurity as agency transitions to nextgen . gao - 15-370 . washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2015 . gao . drug - impaired driving: additional support needed for public awareness initiatives . gao - 15-293 . washington , d.c.: february 24 , 2015 . gao . managing for results: implementation approaches used to enhance collaboration in interagency groups . gao - 14-220 . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2014 . gao . managing for results: key considerations for implementing interagency collaborative mechanisms . gao - 12-1022 . washington , d.c.: september 27 , 2012 . gao . transportation - disadvantaged populations: federal coordination efforts could be further strengthened . gao - 12-647 . we did not have the opportunity to evaluate these initiatives . dot and experts also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . omb did not comment on this report . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the department of transportation , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this report addresses the following objectives: ( 1 ) what activities multiple department of transportation ( dot ) modal administrations perform to fulfill their missions and how , if at all , dot coordinates these activities , and ( 2 ) according to experts , what , if any , organizational changes or operational changes could enable dot to more efficiently and effectively carry out its missions . to identify activities performed by multiple dot administrations and how those activities are coordinated , we reviewed dot's organizing statutes and amendments , and documentation on dot's overall mission and the missions of the nine modal administrations , including strategic plans , budget documents , and organizational manuals . we identified the nine dot modal administrations to include in our work by reviewing dot's public website and relevant laws and statutes . we identified the missions of dot as a whole and the modal administrations by reviewing mission statements and organizing statutes . in those cases in which we were not able to find the missions of an administration in statute , we identified the missions by reviewing their strategic plans or publicly available mission statements . we identified the activities conducted by each dot administration and office of the secretary of transportation ( ost ) by reviewing their organizational manuals , if available , and fiscal year 2016 budget requests .