ii ) . while some states have followed naic's guidelines , state consent requirements still differ . since naic revised its guidelines in 2002 , several states have passed legislation requiring employers to obtain employees' written consent before taking insurance on their lives ( others already had such requirements ) . also , while some states have consent provisions that specifically address business - owned life insurance , in some states consent provisions apply to life insurance policies in general . compendiums of state laws prepared by naic and the american council of life insurers and our review of selected state statutes indicated that , as of december 31 , 2003 , 35 states had laws requiring written consent ( either for life insurance in general or specifically for business - owned life insurance ) , and another 4 states had consent requirements that were satisfied if an employee did not object to a notice of the employer's intent to purchase a policy . however , at least 18 of these states exempted group life insurance policies from consent requirements . additionally , 1 state required employers to notify employees when purchasing business - owned life insurance , but did not require employee consent . we spoke with insurance department officials from california , illinois , new york , and texas . the insurable interest and consent provisions of the four states differed , but all allowed some purchases of business - owned life insurance and three required some form of consent ; two required the amount of coverage to be related to employee benefit costs ( table 2 ) . the insurance department officials told us that they conduct limited oversight to test compliance with their states' insurable interest and consent laws . they said that their primary method of addressing this issue was through policy form reviews , or assessments of the proposed forms that insurers would provide to policyholders when selling policies in their states . for example , new york insurance department officials said that department officials review policy forms for compliance with the state's requirements and that , for policies on non - key employees , the form must describe insured employees' right to discontinue the coverage on their lives and must note the statutory limitations on the coverage amounts . also , a submittal letter that insurers must provide to the department along with the policy form must explain how the insurer will verify that new york's insurable interest requirements are satisfied and , for non - key employees , whether the employer or the insurer will prepare the required employee consent notices . in illinois , insurance department officials said that they review policy forms to ensure that the forms include the state's statutory requirements related to business - owned life insurance , but the forms need not detail procedures for obtaining consent or determining appropriate amounts of coverage . naic staff said that state insurance regulators generally have the authority to review policies currently in force for compliance with any state requirements . but the officials from the four states we contacted said that their departments had not routinely verified that employees covered by the policies had consented to being insured or , where applicable , tested whether coverage amounts were appropriate .