plan sponsors are typically the named fiduciaries of the plan . managed account providers and record keepers may also be fiduciaries , depending on their roles and the services they provide . fiduciaries are required to carry out their responsibilities prudently and solely in the interest of the plan's participants and beneficiaries . plan service providers that have investment discretion or provide investment advice about how to invest participant accounts generally may be “3 ( 38 ) investment manager” fiduciaries or “3 ( 21 ) investment adviser” fiduciaries . a 3 ( 38 ) investment manager fiduciary can only be a bank , an insurance company , or a registered investment adviser ( ria ) . under erisa , 3 ( 38 ) investment manager fiduciaries have the power to manage , acquire , or dispose of plan assets , and they acknowledge , in writing , that they are a fiduciary with respect to the plan . 2 ) what are the advantages and disadvantages of managed accounts for 401 ( k ) plan participants ? 3 ) what challenges , if any , do plan sponsors face in selecting and overseeing managed account providers ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant research and federal laws , regulations , and guidance on managed accounts in 401 ( k ) plans . to examine the key issues related to managed accounts in 401 ( k ) plans and gather data about their prevalence and performance , we conducted in - depth case studies of eight selected managed account providers that , according to our estimates , represented over 95 percent of the managed account industry in defined contribution plans , as measured by assets under management in 2013 . we selected providers based on their size , location , and legal and fee structures . we also interviewed industry representatives — including academics , industry research firms , and participant advocacy groups — and government officials , including officials from dol's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) . to gain additional information on the structure of managed accounts in 401 ( k ) plans and the role of service providers , we reviewed securities and exchange commission ( sec ) filings for the eight managed account providers in our case studies and 22 other providers we identified during the course of our work . as part of our case studies , we reviewed available documentation on the structure of managed accounts . to further understand the different methodologies and structures of managed accounts , we developed and submitted participant scenarios to the eight providers and asked them to provide hypothetical asset allocations for those participants , which seven of them completed and returned to us . to identify the advantages and disadvantages of managed accounts for 401 ( k ) plan participants and any challenges sponsors face in selecting and overseeing managed account providers , we reviewed relevant documentation such as quarterly managed account reports to plan sponsors and conducted semi - structured interviews with 12 plan sponsors . to identify sponsors for interviews , we conducted a non - generalizable survey facilitated through plansponsor .