as such , unobstructed passage into and within these watersheds is critical . if you or your staff have any question about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service are assessing culverts on their lands in oregon and washington to identify barriers to fish passage . neither agency has completed this effort , but each of the 10 district and 19 forest offices provided their assessment results as of august 1 , 2001 . in addition , each district and forest office provided the estimated total number of culverts on fish - bearing streams , an estimated number of culverts not yet assessed that may be barriers , and an estimated cost to restore fish passage through barrier culverts . blm districts reported that they have assessed 1,152 culverts for fish passage and identified 414 barriers . in addition , the districts estimate that 282 additional barrier culverts may exist . blm estimates that the cost to restore fish passage at all 696 of these barrier culverts could be about $46 million , as shown in table 1 . forest service national forest offices reported that they have assessed 2,986 culverts for fish passage and identified 2,160 barriers . in addition , they estimate that an almost equal number , about 2,645 , of additional barrier culverts may exist . the forest service estimates that the cost to restore fish passage at all 4,805 barrier culverts could be about $331 million , as shown in table 2 . to determine the number of culverts that may impede fish passage on blm and forest service lands in oregon and washington , we interviewed officials and gathered documentation from blm's oregon state office and the forest service's region 6 office , both located in portland , oregon . specifically , we gathered and analyzed information on the number and maintenance status of culverts located in the 10 blm districts under oregon state office jurisdiction and the 19 national forests under region 6 jurisdiction and the costs and time frames associated with the repair of barrier culverts . we conducted site visits at four blm district offices in oregon — coos bay , eugene , medford , and prineville — and at nine national forest offices — deschutes , ochoco , rogue river , siskiyou , siuslaw , umatilla , and williamette in oregon ; and gifford pinchot and olympic in washington . we met with district and forest office staff and collected information on their culvert inventories and assessment and prioritization efforts and observed completed and potential culvert restoration projects . to identify the factors affecting the agencies' ability to restore passage through culverts acting as barriers to fish , we interviewed blm and forest service headquarters officials , oregon state office and region 6 officials , and district and forest office staff and reviewed policies , procedures , and practices for repairing , replacing , or removing barrier culverts .