salary flexibility . to set entry - level salaries to take into account market conditions . a demonstration project evaluation reported the following effects . employees viewed performance improvements within their control and reported increased recognition of individual performance . was the project implemented and operated appropriately and accurately ? what were the costs , relative to the benefits of the project ? what was the impact on veterans and other equal employment opportunity groups ? were merit systems principles adhered to and prohibited personnel practices avoided ? can the project or portions thereof be generalized to other agencies or governmentwide ? the demonstration projects can link some or all of the funding sources for pay increases available under the current federal compensation system , the general schedule ( gs ) , to an employee's level of performance . table 1 defines selected funding sources . high - performing organizations seek to create pay , incentive , and reward systems based on valid , reliable , and transparent performance management systems with adequate safeguards and link employee knowledge , skills , and contributions to organizational results . to that end , we found that the demonstration projects took a variety of approaches to designing and implementing their pay for performance systems to meet the unique needs of their cultures and organizational structures . specifically , the demonstration projects took different approaches to using competencies to evaluate employee performance , translating employee performance ratings into pay increases and considering current salary in making performance - based pay decisions , managing costs of the pay for performance system , and providing information to employees about the results of performance appraisal and pay decisions . high - performing organizations use validated core competencies as a key part of evaluating individual contributions to organizational results . competencies define the skills and supporting behaviors that individuals are expected to demonstrate and can provide a fuller picture of an individual's performance . to this end , we found that the demonstration projects took different approaches to evaluating employee performance . acqdemo and nrl use core competencies for all positions across the organization . other demonstration projects , such as nist , doc , and china lake , use competencies based primarily on the individual employee's position . applying competencies organizationwide . core competencies applied organizationwide can help reinforce employee behaviors and actions that support the organization's mission , goals , and values and can provide a consistent message to employees about how they are expected to achieve results . acqdemo evaluates employee performance against one set of “factors,” which are applied to all employees . “discriminators” and “descriptors” further define the factors by career path and pay band . according to acqdemo , taken together , the factors , discriminators , and descriptors are relevant to the success of a dod acquisition organization . acqdemo's six factors are ( 1 ) problem solving , ( 2 ) teamwork / cooperation , ( 3 ) customer relations , ( 4 ) leadership / supervision , ( 5 ) communication , and ( 6 ) resource management . discriminators further define each factor . for example , discriminators for problem solving include scope of responsibility , creativity , complexity , and independence . descriptors identify contributions by pay band .