b . what is the users' ability to pay ? c. to the extent that the fees are used to replace funding by general revenues , what is the impact on the distribution of the burden of financing the program ? will the fee recover full or partial costs ? c. will the fee structure include exemptions or reduced fees ? d. will the fee be set as a percentage rate or as a fixed dollar amount ? e. is a similar service provided by the private sector ? if so: will private producers be subject to unfair competition if the fee is not set to recover the full costs of the service ? should their charges be a reference point in setting fees ? f. for programs that have not been paid for by fees in the past , has the value of the program been capitalized into private assets ? d. what would be the impact of a fee on users' competitiveness with others that would not be subject to the fee ? how will the fee be linked to the cost ? omb circulars no . a - 11 instruct agencies to include all direct and indirect costs when determining full cost , including but not limited to personnel costs , including salaries and benefits such as medical insurance and retirement ; physical overhead ; consulting ; material and supply costs ; utilities ; insurance ; travel ; rents or imputed rents on land , buildings , and equipment ; management and supervisory costs ; costs of collecting and enforcing fees ; research ; establishment of standards and regulation ; and imputed costs . in prior work we found inconsistent implementation of this guidance . some fees designed to cover the full cost of a program include all direct and indirect costs , but others do not . the power marketing administrations , for example , include all direct and indirect costs — including the cost of employee retirement benefits paid by the office of personnel management — when setting their electricity rates . on the other hand , in recent work , we found that usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) did not include certain indirect and imputed costs when calculating the agricultural quarantine inspection ( aqi ) fee rate . fees should also be set and adjusted to cover the intended share of costs over time , which means agencies must project and consider future program costs . for example , in 2006 usda's food safety and inspection service set fee rates through fiscal year 2008 for its meat , poultry , and egg products overtime inspection services . the fee rates for each year included adjustments for inflation and employee pay raises , so that future fee collections were projected to grow with program costs . when more than one agency implements — and therefore incurs costs related to — a fee program , those agencies should work together to agree on a method for estimating future costs and collections . aphis and cbp , for example , used different forecasting assumptions related to the aqi fees . in response to our recent work , the agencies now use common assumptions .