other researchers and officials from banking institutions disagreed . they noted that , in some cases , lending decisions may be made by officials who do not interact directly with loan applicants . second , lenders' voluntary collection and use of data on personal characteristics for nonmortgage loan applicants , outside of the ecoa self - test privilege , would also be subject to varying degrees of regulatory scrutiny , which could serve to deter lenders from using such data for discriminatory purposes . similarly , all lenders that chose to collect and use such data for discriminatory purposes would face the risk of public disclosure of such practices through litigation . further , according to a variety of researchers and officials we contacted , as well as frb documents we reviewed , there is no evidence that lenders have used hmda data for discriminatory purposes . these officials generally attributed the transparency of the hmda program , through regulatory reviews and public reporting requirements , as serving to help deter lenders from using the data to discriminate in mortgage lending . finally , frb could potentially have mitigated some of its concerns that voluntarily collected data could be used for discriminatory purposes by including , as part of its 1999 proposal , minimum procedures for the collection and use of such data . frb established such procedures for federally regulated lenders that choose to conduct a self - test . these procedures include developing written policies describing the methodology for data collection and keeping data on personal characteristics separate from loan underwriting data that are used to make credit decisions . imposing such minimum procedures and requirements for a voluntary program could serve to enhance regulators' oversight of lenders' data collection , processes , practices , and uses of the data , and further deter possibly discriminatory practices . even so , many researchers , regulatory staff , and representatives from consumer groups and banking trade groups agreed with frb's conclusion that the reliability of voluntarily collected data may be limited in identifying possible discrimination in nonmortgage lending . in particular , they agreed with frb that , due to potentially inconsistent data collection standards , it would be difficult to use voluntarily collected data to compare fair lending performance across different lenders . additionally , there may be data inconsistency problems for any given lender that chooses to collect data on personal characteristics for nonmortgage loan applicants . for example , a lender could “cherry pick,” or collect racial , gender , and other data on personal characteristics on applicants only for certain loan products that they felt would reflect favorably on their fair lending practices and not collect data for other products . just as frb could potentially have mitigated some of its concerns about the possibility that lenders would use voluntarily collected data for discriminatory purposes by adopting minimum procedures , as mentioned previously , it could also potentially have considered adopting data collection standards . such standards could have served to better ensure the consistency of the data and enabled regulators and others to use the data to assess individual lender performance and compare lending practices across different financial institutions .