this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this statement for the record , please contact gerald dillingham at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this statement include nabajyoti barkakati , christine bonham , colin fallon , carol henn , david hooper , heather krause , elizabeth marchak , edmond menoche , faye morrison , richard scott , sarah veale , and matthew zisman . ( see fig . in late 2003 , recognizing that the current approach to managing air transportation is becoming increasingly inefficient and operationally obsolete , congress created jpdo to plan ngats , a system intended to accommodate what is expected to be three times more air traffic by 2025 than there is today . ( 1 ) what is the status of ato's efforts to implement processes and other initiatives aimed at efficiently managing and modernizing the current atc system ? ( 2 ) what is the status of jpdo's planning efforts , and what are the key challenges that jpdo faces in planning for ngats ? my statement is based on our recently completed and ongoing studies of faa's atc modernization program , together with updated information from ato and jpdo officials and aviation stakeholders . later this year , we expect to issue two detailed reports related to the issues discussed in this statement . one report will provide our assessment of the status of jpdo's efforts to plan for the development of ngats . another report will examine financial management issues at faa , including options for cost savings and alternative funding mechanisms . we are performing our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following is a summary of our findings to date: ato has made significant progress toward the efficient management of the nation's atc system , but faces several challenges . ato has implemented organizational and business process changes to improve management of the atc modernization program . ato has taken several steps to increase its scrutiny of its acquisition decisions , in part by ensuring executive - level oversight of key decisions and improving understanding of system requirements to avoid delays and cost overruns . ato has met its acquisition performance goal for the second consecutive year — that is , 80 percent of its system acquisitions are on schedule and within 10 percent of budget . ato has identified cost savings opportunities through consolidation of administrative activities and outsourcing . however , ato faces several challenges , including sustaining and institutionalizing ato's progress toward operating effectively as a performance - based organization , hiring and training thousands of air traffic controllers , ensuring stakeholder involvement in major system acquisitions , and keeping acquisitions on schedule and within budget . jpdo is making progress in its planning for ngats , but faces several challenges . jpdo is implementing a number of practices that our work has shown facilitates the federal interagency collaboration that is central to its mission and legislative mandate .