these claims were not included in our analysis . therefore , we potentially understated the total number of unique prescribers for each beneficiary who received a prescription for all the claims paid . table 2 shows the breakout by drug class for the approximately 170,000 medicare part d beneficiaries who were prescribed the same class of drug by five or more medical practitioners . because medicare part d beneficiaries may be receiving multiple classes of prescription drugs from five or more medical practitioners , certain beneficiaries may be counted in more than one prescription drug class . as shown in table 2 , hydrocodone and oxycodone were the two prescription drug classes that were most prescribed by multiple medical practitioners . specifically , about 97,000 beneficiaries were prescribed hydrocodone by five or more medical practitioners . in addition , our analysis found that about 57,000 medicare part d beneficiaries received oxycodone drugs prescribed by five or more practitioners . according to doj , doctor shopping is the primary method to obtain highly addictive prescription opioids ( eg , hydrocodone and oxycodone ) for illegitimate use . we obtained additional information on 10 of the medicare part d beneficiaries that showed indications of doctor shopping . in each of the 10 cases , we found evidence that the beneficiary was acquiring highly abused drugs through doctor shopping . we also found that in each example physicians were not aware that their patients were receiving drugs prescribed by other prescribers . some states also monitor certain noncontrolled substances . according to the department of justice ( doj ) , in states that have implemented pdmps , doctor shopping has decreased . however , since determined doctor shoppers can travel to nearby states to bypass a pdmp , doj has also reported an increased need for information sharing between neighboring states to facilitate the interstate exchange of pdmp data . our analysis of medicare part d claims found that 170,000 medicare beneficiaries received prescriptions from five or more medical practitioners for the 12 classes of frequently abused controlled substances and 2 classes of frequently abused noncontrolled substances in calendar year 2008 . this represented about 1.8 percent of the medicare part d beneficiaries who received prescriptions for these 14 classes of drugs during the same calendar year . these individuals incurred approximately $148 million in prescription drug costs for these drugs , much of which is paid by the medicare program . our analysis also found the following:  most of these 170,000 medicare beneficiaries who were prescribed prescriptions from five or more practitioners were eligible for medicare part d benefits based on a disability . specifically , approximately 120,000 medicare beneficiaries ( about 71 percent ) were eligible for medicare part d benefits based on a disability . schedule v includes preparations such as cough syrups with codeine . all drugs but those in schedule i are legally available to the public with a prescription . csa mandates that dea establish a closed system of control for manufacturing , distribution , and dispensing of controlled substances .