i had to do the research myself . it seems to be a secret with information coming out in spurts . when you have things happen to your body , they [the department of veterans affairs] say it is not service connected . sometimes when the government tries to explain something , they don't give the whole thing and they give it piecemeal . it does not carry any essence of importance . i am not hearing anything from the federal government . most of the information i get is from a usveterans.com website and i subscribe to a daily newsletter from the vietnam veterans of america and the veterans of foreign wars . there is information on the va website about conditions attributed to agent orange in that context , i went to the va website and found that there are 21 states where agent orange was used , including on hawaii in kauai . it is because of this list that i became aware that people in hawaii may have been exposed to agent orange . i learned that such exposure might increase the likelihood of having diabetes or cancer . i believe the list is still on the va website and that there is also a list of units that were possibly exposed to agent orange . i have not been contacted by any government agency with regard to agent orange exposure or ill health . i first heard about agent orange and dioxin and cancer related issues / illnesses in late 1980s or early 1990s and later on after doing own research . standards for internal control in the federal government state that management should internally and externally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve an entity's objectives . the standard further states that management should evaluate the entity's methods of communication so that the organization has the appropriate tools to communicate quality information throughout the entity on a timely basis . additionally , dod issued guidance in june 2017 establishing procedures for dod components to implement when there is a scientifically plausible likelihood of a significant long - term health risk from a past environmental exposure to military personnel or civilians resulting from living or working on military installations . even though the testing and storage of agent orange and its components occurred several decades ago , this instruction states that dod components should provide targeted and effective health risk communication early and continuously , as new and credible information becomes available . however , dod and va officials stated that they have not developed a formal process for coordinating on how best to communicate information to veterans and the public regarding the presence of agent orange at locations outside of vietnam . officials stated that the dod - va deployment health working group — an existing forum for exchanging information — meets monthly to discuss health issues , including those related to agent orange . however , the working group is not focused on ensuring the availability and distribution of information on agent orange testing and storage locations .