such assistance is documented in an assistance agreement . both contracts and assistance agreements may result in the production of copyrighted documents . in the case of contracts , federal regulations provide that when a contractor is permitted to assert a copyright in any document ( s ) produced , the government has a license to display the copyrighted work publicly , which includes posting it on a web site accessible to the public . in the case of works produced under assistance agreements , on the other hand , the government has a right to reproduce , publish , or otherwise use a copyrighted work for federal purposes , but epa's office of general counsel has determined that inclusion in epa's online public library would not constitute a federal government purpose . on the advice of epa's general counsel , epa's digitization workgroup has recommended digitizing documents created under contract but not those created under epa's assistance agreements . according to epa's grant awards database , these agreements have resulted in more than 21,000 grants valued at over $40 billion in taxpayer dollars . some of these grants led to publications , resulting in a substantial body of publicly funded written material . according to epa's general counsel , epa may digitize such documents so that staff and others may use them for federal government purposes but may not disseminate them for other purposes . epa may also seek permission from copyright holders to digitize and disseminate online copyrighted documents produced under assistance agreements , although some costs may be associated with obtaining such permissions — tracking down copyright holders after years , or even decades , have passed , for example — further complicating any estimation of total digitization costs . an alternative practice has been in use by the federal library and information network , the business arm of the federal library and information center committee: permission to use copyrighted material produced under assistance agreements is sought at the time an agreement is established . if the prospective copyright holder grants permission , then a statement to that effect is incorporated into the assistance agreement , incurring minimal , if any , additional costs . without permission from copyright holders , however , documents prepared under epa assistance agreements , using taxpayer dollars , will remain unavailable online to the public . epa has taken steps to communicate with staff and other stakeholders about its library network — including providing information about the libraries as well as soliciting information from library users — but a 2009 survey about its staff's information needs was flawed . in general , epa staff and external stakeholders told us the agency is doing a better job of communicating with them and soliciting input on the operations and future direction of the library network , particularly at the local level . representatives from epa's employees' unions and regional science councils stated that communication about the library and its services — such as new resources , training , and open houses — is primarily done at the regional level , either through e - mail or the region's intranet page .