disability access . the caa requires the general counsel to both conduct investigations of charges alleging discrimination in public services and accommodations on the basis of disability , and to inspect covered facilities in the legislative branch at least once each congress for compliance with the public services and accommodations provisions in the ada . from 1997 through december 9 , 2003 , five charges of discrimination have been filed with the general counsel . according to ooc documents , its biennial inspections have included all public areas where constituents , individuals on official business , and visitors have access — approximately 8 million square feet of space . labor - management relations . under the caa , ooc's general counsel is responsible for investigating charges of unfair labor practices and for filing and prosecuting complaints in administrative hearings and before the board of directors as appropriate . since 2001 , the number of charges filed with the general counsel has remained fairly constant , varying between 18 and 19 per year , as shown in figure 5 . in 2000 , ooc experienced a sharp spike in charges filed with the number jumping to 38 in that year . ooc was unable to provide a definitive reason for this increase , but told us that it was probably related to the large group cases going through ooc's dispute resolution process as these cases raised issues that could relate to charges of unfair labor practices . despite the relatively stable number of new unfair labor practice charges received by ooc since 2001 , the backlog of cases still pending at the end of the year has almost doubled , increasing from 6 in 2001 to 11 in 2003 ( as of december 9 , 2003 ) . ooc's executive director is responsible for a variety of other functions relating to labor - management relations including supervising union elections and resolving issues involving such matters as good faith bargaining . ooc has supervised 14 union elections since 1997 , 12 of these in 2000 or earlier . another duty of the general counsel under the caa is to represent ooc in any judicial proceeding under the act , including cases before the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit . in past years , the number of such cases has been low , with no cases filed in 1997 , 2001 , and 2002 and one case each filed in 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 . however , in 2003 the number of federal circuit review cases involving ooc and requiring attention from the general counsel and his staff unexpectedly increased to six . ooc's general counsel told us that this situation has been exacerbated by the loss of two attorneys during 2003 , reducing his previous staffing level of four full - time ooc attorneys to only two , including the general counsel , by december 2003 . according to the general counsel , his office is currently recruiting for a staff attorney and he expects to have that individual hired by spring of 2004 .