( see fig . at the beneficiary level , per - capita spending on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries greatly exceeded that of all other medicaid - only beneficiaries , but was less than what was spent on high - expenditure dual - eligible beneficiaries . ( see table 1. ) overall , per capita spending by states on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries was approximately 18 times higher than per capita spending on all other medicaid - only beneficiaries . this was similar to the pattern of spending for dual - eligible beneficiaries , with per capita spending significantly higher for high - expenditure dual - eligible beneficiaries compared with all other dual - eligible beneficiaries . at the state level , there was wide variation in spending per capita on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries . ( see fig . per - capita expenditures by state per beneficiary ranged from $20,896 to $83,365 . key characteristics — such as having a disability , having certain conditions , delivery / childbirth , and residing in a ltc facility — were strongly associated with being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary . these key characteristics had consistently strong associations with being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary even when the data were examined separately for each eligibility group . we found that about two - thirds of the high - expenditure group was comprised of beneficiaries who were eligible for medicaid due to disability . only beneficiary was 18.3 percent for disabled medicaid - only beneficiaries , which was higher than for any other eligibility group . ( see table 2. ) in contrast , non - disabled children and adult beneficiaries each had less than a 3 percent probability of being in the high - expenditure group , but made up 16.1 and 15 percent , respectively , of the high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries . overall , hospital services and ltss represented the bulk of spending for high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries — almost 65 percent . in contrast , payments to managed care organizations and premium assistance constituted the largest proportion of expenditures for all other medicaid - only beneficiaries . in addition , when we examined medicaid - only high - expenditure and other beneficiaries separately by eligibility group , the differences in service use were generally consistent , but the proportion of expenditures for the different services varied . separately examining high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries in ltc institutions and beneficiaries with spending in the top 1 percent of expenditures showed that these beneficiaries had the highest spending for hospital services and ltss . for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries as a whole , hospital services comprised 30.6 percent , ltss in non - institutional settings comprised 24.3 percent , and ltss in institutions comprised 9.7 percent of their expenditures . other expenditures were for drugs , managed care and premium assistance , and non - hospital acute care .