b . investigation stage ( including the conciliation process ) 6 . to what extent could practical improvements be made to each of the following title viii activities that would improve the overall thoroughness of the entire process ? please consider any ideas or practices that differ from hud's current enforcement process , and that , with proper funding and training , would improve the overall thoroughness of the process . you will have an opportunity to share these ideas and practices during our follow - up interview . to what extent do the following factors influence the amount of time it takes to complete the title viii fair housing enforcement process ? we understand that many things can affect the length of the process . however , we ask that when responding to each specific factor , you hold all others constant and check the box that comes closest to your “best answer.” check one box for each row . human capital management & planning performance management goals set for your region director's elements set for you as a hub director l. workforce analysis ( alignment of staff skill with mission accomplishment ) n. please specify . ( type in the shaded blank below. ) to what extent do the following factors influence the ability of your staff to thoroughly complete the title viii fair housing enforcement process ? we understand that many things can affect the thoroughness of the process . however , we ask that when responding to each specific factor , you hold all others constant and check the box that comes closest to your “best answer.” check one box for each row . l. workforce analysis ( alignment of staff skill with mission accomplishment ) n. please specify . ( type in the shaded blank below. ) to what extent do the following enforcement practices impact the overall length of the title viii fair housing enforcement process ( or to what extent would they impact the length of the process , if your office does not practice them ) ? we understand that many things can affect the length of the process . however , we ask that when responding to each specific practice , you hold all others constant and check the box that comes closest to your “best answer.” check one box for each row . page 5 of 8 conduct investigations while in conciliation 4 . to what extent do the following enforcement practices impact the overall thoroughness of the title viii fair housing enforcement process ( or to what extent would they impact the thoroughness of the process , if your office does not practice them ) ? we understand that many things can affect the thoroughness of the process . however , we ask that when responding to each specific practice , you hold all others constant and check the box that comes closest to your “best answer.” check one box for each row . page 6 of 8 5 . to what extent could practical improvements be made to each of the following title viii activities that would reduce the amount of time required to complete the entire process ?