on land as opposed to in the water . contract file documentation states that the navy's analysis of the shipbuilder's performance on prior hulls indicated that there was a 50 percent premium to complete heavy industrial work in the water ; therefore , the milestone - based incentives were structured to incentivize higher levels of ship completion prior to launch . however , maximizing construction work completed on land is an essential aspect of an efficient build plan — and , presumably , already incentivized through the profit that could be earned through the contract share line . ddg 115 and ddg 116: the navy increased the shipyard investment incentive post - award . contract file documentation states that the additional shipyard investment incentives were added as part of a comprehensive settlement agreement negotiated by the navy and bath iron works in july 2013 on ship construction efforts for the ddg 51 program . lcs 5-23 odd only and lcs 6-24 even only: the navy added millions of dollars in milestone - based incentives to each lcs block buy contract post - award . according to a navy contracting official , the rationale for adding these incentives was twofold: as consideration in exchange for the shipbuilders agreeing to fiscal year 2010 competitive pricing for the fiscal year 2016 ship that was added to each existing contract , and to motivate the shipbuilder to improve performance given poor cost and schedule outcomes on prior ships . these incentives did not apply to lcs 5 and lcs 6 , the first ships on each contract . ssn 784-791: the navy added additional incentives to encourage the shipbuilder to deliver the ships at or below an agreed upon percent of each ship's target cost . this created , in effect , a further incentive for the shipbuilder to minimize target cost overruns: ( 1 ) the share line for overruns provided an incentive for the shipbuilder to minimize costs to avoid losing profit , and ( 2 ) the additional cost incentive further elevated profit opportunity if the shipbuilder could deliver at a total cost that did not exceed the agreed upon percent of the target . under this incentive structure , if the shipbuilder delivered at or below the agreed upon percent above target cost , then its share of an overrun cost would be largely or completely — depending on the amount of the overrun — covered by the additional cost incentive . in essence this means the navy would cover any overruns up to the agreed upon percent . figure 8 illustrates this duplicative incentive structure with a hypothetical example of ssn 791 coming in at the agreed upon percent over target cost . the april 2016 dod guidance stresses that the contractor should be primarily incentivized by receiving profit through the reduction of costs — a primary function of the share line , and in certain cases , by exceeding performance thresholds or reducing schedule . while program officials agreed that the share line should be a primary motivator on a contract , they noted that additional incentives could be used to encourage the shipbuilders to make targeted performance changes .