therefore , the impact of these efforts is unclear . additionally , the small business office collects information on a few of its small business development and support activities , such as attendance at and participants' views on the quality of small business conferences . also , doe's procurement office collects and tracks aggregate data on the extent to which facility management and nonfacility management contracts have been awarded to small businesses and whether such contracts involve multiyear agreements . doe does not , however , collect sufficient information to provide the department with insight on whether or how specific policies or processes should be changed to further increase small business prime contracting . for example , as noted earlier , doe's policy is to set aside for small businesses all new nonfacility management contracts to the extent possible ; in fiscal year 2004 , about half of all new nonfacility management contracts were awarded to small businesses and half were not . however , the department does not require procurement staff to report the reasons that contracts have not been awarded to small businesses . the federal procurement data system allows agencies to report several reasons for nonawards that include the following: no known small business source ; a small business was solicited but did not make an offer ; and a known small business source existed , but no offer was solicited . such information might help doe assess if staff are having difficulty identifying small businesses capable of performing doe contracts , if small businesses are having problems preparing offers , or if time constraints are limiting staff efforts to solicit offers from small businesses , for example . a senior procurement analyst with doe's office of procurement and assistance management said the department does not collect this type of information because it has not viewed it as useful . well - defined objectives help an organization gauge its progress in achieving its programmatic goal . to further gain an understanding of the doe small business office and office of procurement and assistance management roles and responsibilities with regard to small business prime contracting , we reviewed the federal acquisition regulation , as well as the doe - specific supplement to these regulations . we also interviewed doe officials in the small business office and small business officials from the department's program offices , as well as officials in the office of procurement and assistance management and their counterparts at the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) . we also interviewed officials at sba to learn about federal small business policy , how small business goals are established with the federal agencies , how they ensure the federal government meets these goals , and what role they have in overseeing small business activities nationwide . to determine doe's small business prime contracting achievement for fiscal years 2001 through 2004 , we reviewed sba's federal goals report . to determine doe's small business prime contracting achievement for fiscal year 2005 , and to determine expenditures to date toward specific contracts , we relied on the federal procurement data system — next generation ( fpds - ng ) , the federal government's repository of information regarding the nature and value of federal procurement actions .