only one of these companies responded . commerce found that this company qualified for its own duty rate and determined that this rate should be about 135 percent . gao - 06-652sp . ad investigations from 1980 through 2004 . in addition to information on the countries and products involved and the status of each investigation , our database included the duty rates applied upon completion of each new antidumping investigation against china during this period , as well as the duty rates applied against any producers of the same products from other countries . our analyses focused on the 68 cases during this time period wherein commerce imposed ad duties on chinese products , and especially on the subset of 25 cases in which commerce imposed duties against a similar product from one or more market economy countries . specifically , the 25 cases included all market economy cases that had the same product name and were initiated within 1 year of an ad investigation against china . in all , we assembled data on 303 company - specific , weighted average , and country - wide duty rate determinations on chinese products , and an additional 168 duty rate determinations on market economy products . appendix ii provides additional analyses of this data . as part of our examination , we also performed multivariate regression analyses to determine the extent to which duty rate variations could be attributed to differences between china and these other countries , or to other factors , such as the type of product involved . appendix iii provides more information on these analyses and their results . in addition to comparing china and market economies , we also collected information on duty rates that commerce applied to products from other nme countries at the same time as it applied them to similar products from either china or a market economy . appendix iii provides information on the results of our analyses of this data . we did not collect or analyze information on duty rates applied against market economy countries in cases where no parallel action was taken against china or any other nme country . therefore , our analyses of market economy duty rates are specific to the sample of market economy orders in which a corresponding nme order was also in effect . inclusion of other market economy product duty rates may have produced different results . however , we determined that the appropriate comparison between china and market economy countries was between the 25 similar products . we found through our regression analyses ( discussed in app . iii ) that the product being investigated does help explain the variation among rates and it is , therefore , important to make an appropriate comparison . in addition , duty rates for the 43 remaining orders against china alone followed a similar pattern as those contained in the 25 cases where we drew comparisons with market economy duty rates .