, mobilization ) . personnel in title 32 status are federally funded but under state control . title 32 is the status in which national guard personnel typically perform training for their federal mission . personnel performing state active duty are state - funded and under state command and control . army national guard units are responsible for conducting some maintenance of their equipment . while deploying army national guard units have had priority for getting the equipment they needed , readying these forces has degraded the equipment inventory of the guard's nondeployed units and equipment shortages threaten the guard's ability to prepare forces for future deployments . among nondeployed national guard units , the amount of essential warfighting equipment on hand has continued to decrease since we last reported on the army national guard in 2004 . in addition , this estimate includes units that have equipment that is undergoing maintenance after returning from deployment or was left overseas , so these items are not readily available for deployment . the national guard bureau estimates that when substitute items , equipment undergoing maintenance , and equipment left overseas for follow - on forces are subtracted , its nondeployed units had available only about 34 percent of essential warfighting equipment as of july 2005 . with respect to some equipment items , transfers of equipment to deploying units have depleted the inventories of many key items in nondeployed units . we did not examine whether shortages of particular items were the result of industrial base issues . to understand the processes the army adapted to equip units as equipment requirements evolved for the global war on terrorism , we interviewed officials from and analyzed data provided by the 30th brigade combat team in north carolina , the 48th brigade combat team in georgia , the national guard bureau , the department of the army , the u.s. army forces command , the coalition forces land component command , and the first army of the united states . to assess the army national guard equipment retained in theater , we analyzed army national guard data and the guard's estimate of the cost to replace the equipment if it is not returned . additionally , we interviewed officials and reviewed documentation and data from the army national guard , department of the army , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs , u.s. army forces command , and the coalition forces land component command about the lack of reliable data and whether any plans exist to replace the guard's equipment . we supplemented data on how much of the army national guard's equipment has been left in theater with briefings and reviewed internal army messages regarding the accountability and visibility of this equipment . to evaluate how the army national guard has been integrated into the army's plans for a modular structure and force generation model , we interviewed officials at the army national guard , the department of the army , and u.s. army forces command . we reviewed documents such as the army campaign plan , the army transformation roadmap , the army's force generation model , and numerous briefings on the army's plans for a modular force and the new force generation model .