( see fig . while bie schools are primarily funded through interior , they receive annual formula grants from education , similar to public schools . specifically , schools receive education funds under title i , part a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) of 1965 , as amended , and the individuals with disabilities education act . title i — the largest funding source for kindergarten through grade 12 under esea — provides funding to expand and improve educational programs in schools with students from low - income families and may be used for supplemental services to improve student achievement , such as instruction in reading and mathematics . an education study published in 2012 found that all bie schools were eligible for title i funding on a school - wide basis because they all had at least 40 percent of children from low - income households in school year 2009-10 . further , bie schools receive individuals with disabilities education act funding for special education and related services , such as physical therapy or speech therapy . as a result of the staffing declines , school officials said that facility maintenance staff may sometimes defer needed maintenance . within bie , we also found limited staff capacity in another area of school operations — oversight of school expenditures . as we reported in november 2014 , the number of key local bie officials monitoring these expenditures had decreased from 22 in 2011 to 13 , due partly to budget cuts . bie schools tend to have a higher percent of students with special needs than students in public schools nationally . bie schools' educational functions are primarily the responsibility of bie , while their administrative functions are divided mainly between two other interior offices . the bureau of indian education develops educational policies and procedures , supervises program activities , and approves schools' expenditures . three associate deputy directors are responsible for overseeing multiple bie local education offices that work directly with schools to provide technical assistance . some bie local offices also have their own facility managers that serve schools overseen by the office . the office of the deputy assistant secretary of management oversees many of bie's administrative functions , including acquisitions and contract services , financial management , budget formulation , and property management . this office is also responsible for developing policies and procedures and providing technical assistance and funding to bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) regions and bie schools to address their facility needs . professional staff in this division — including engineers , architects , facility managers , and support personnel — are tasked with providing expertise in all facets of the facility management process . the bureau of indian affairs administers a broad array of social services and other supports to tribes at the regional level . regarding school facility management , bia oversees the day - to - day implementation and administration of school facility construction and repair projects through its regional field offices . currently there are 12 regional offices , and 9 of them have facility management responsibilities.health and safety inspections to ensure compliance with relevant requirements and providing technical assistance to bie schools on facility issues .