these schools provided loans through ffelp in 2001-02 . we administered a web survey to financial aid officials at schools we identified as participating in the direct loan program from the 1994-95 to 2001-02 school years . in addition to those named above , the following people made significant contributions to this report: carla craddock , kathleen white , margaret armen , cynthia decker , luann moy , mimi nguyen , mark ramage , bonita vines , and weili shaw . because this was a web survey , the responses were directly entered by respondents and were not subject to other data entry errors . data edits and estimation programs were independently verified to ensure that programming errors did not affect our estimates . to reduce nonresponse , we sent two follow - up emails to all schools that had not responded to the survey by our deadline . additionally , we conducted an intensive follow - up with a randomly selected group of 100 nonrespondents that had participated in the direct loan program in 2001-02 and received responses from an additional 35 schools that were included in our final survey results . in order to examine financial benefits available from different ffelp lenders , we obtained information through the web sites of the eight ffel lenders with the highest amount of loan originations in fiscal year 2002 — each made federal loans of more than a billion dollars — and all 36 guaranty agencies . we also interviewed two ffelp lenders and an organization that represents ffelp lenders . we conducted interviews with financial aid officials at 20 current direct loan schools of various types that were located in the boston , new york city , san francisco , and washington , d.c. , metropolitan areas . we selected schools based on school type and loan volume . we performed validity tests of key variables . we determined that the direct loan , nslds , and ipeds data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we used education's office of postsecondary education's identification number ( opeid ) to match data in each database and excluded all foreign schools . we also excluded schools that did not provide loans through either program in any year between school years 1994-95 and 2001-02 . after applying our criteria , we identified 4,155 schools that provided subsidized stafford , unsubsidized stafford , or plus loans through the direct loan program or ffelp from school years 1994-95 through 2001-02 . we classified schools into three categories: ffelp school — 2,935 schools provided loans through ffelp and never participated in the direct loan program . ( 3 ) what steps has fsa taken to increase the user - friendliness of the direct loan program for schools and students ? to address the first question , we analyzed data from three education databases and identified schools that provided loans through either the direct loan program or ffelp in each school year from 1994-95 to 2001-02 . to address the second question , we surveyed financial aid officials at schools that participated in the direct loan program in 2001-02 , of whom 57 percent responded to our survey .