all agencies have access to these data . when we shared this information with agency officials , several indicated that simply being able to identify major vendors was a useful first step in identifying opportunities to leverage their buying power . several agencies have taken the initiative to begin analyzing their purchase card expenditures to identify opportunities for additional savings , although these initiatives in some cases had limitations , as in the following examples . while analyses conducted by agency components can provide useful insight into opportunities to leverage their purchasing power , they do not reflect the bigger picture of agencywide expenditures or agencywide opportunities to capture savings . several of the agency discount agreements we reviewed require vendors to report periodically on sales made under discount agreements . this information can help agencies determine whether cardholders are taking advantage of favorable pricing . other initiatives are also in place . gsa is working with dod and other agencies to determine what barriers limit the level 3 data agencies receive and to explore ways to overcome these barriers . in addition , the air force materiel command is piloting a system intended to accumulate more consistent and specific information on purchase card transactions . while the lack of level 3 data is a valid concern , agencies can use the information that is available to start taking steps to get better prices . for example , we obtained from the banks a listing of all fiscal year 2002 purchase card transactions for each agency we reviewed . using this listing , we summarized information on the vendors with whom cardholders at each agency had done $1 million or more in business during fiscal year 2002 . agencies have just begun to tap the potential of leveraging the purchase card for better pricing . if greater management attention were paid to capitalizing on the opportunities to obtain more favorable prices , hundreds of millions of dollars in savings could be realized annually . given the volume of purchase card activity , agencies could take advantage of these opportunities without sacrificing the ability to acquire items quickly or compromising socioeconomic goals . if agencies were to build on their initial experiences and duplicate these steps governmentwide , they would have the opportunity to save the taxpayer almost $300 million annually . omb should take the lead in focusing management attention on this opportunity and guiding agencies towards capturing these savings . we are making the following eight recommendations to omb , gsa , and the agencies we reviewed: to focus governmentwide management attention on taking advantage of opportunities to achieve savings on purchase card buys , we recommend that the director of omb take the following two actions: require agencies to report — either through the current quarterly reports or another mechanism — on the steps they are taking to leverage their purchase card buys in areas such as negotiating discount agreements with major purchase card vendors , implementing initiatives to better inform cardholders of opportunities to achieve savings , conducting analyses to identify such opportunities , and assessing , through mechanisms such as vendor reports , whether cardholders are taking advantage of savings opportunities .