identify and require training for the transition . all of the agencies had partially implemented this activity by identifying training needed by certain transition management staff . however , four agencies had not conducted and documented analyses to identify all of the training needed for their transitions , including training for staff carrying out the transition or operating and maintaining new equipment or services . the final agency had developed a draft analysis to identify training needed by staff carrying out the transition , but it had not finalized this analysis . officials from the selected agencies generally explained that they were too early in their transition efforts to identify all of the funding , human capital , and training needed for their transitions . however , there is limited time remaining to complete the transition before the current telecommunications contracts expire . if the agencies do not conduct early planning to identify and justify all of their resources needed for the transition , they may underestimate the complexity and demands of their transition efforts . in addition , without using a rigorous management approach to analyze and document the total number of staff required to support the transition and to identify all of the required training for transition staff , agencies risk having insufficient staff available or may experience gaps in staff competencies . such gaps may lead to delays and unexpected costs as the agencies try to quickly address the lack of resources during the transition's limited time frame . all of the selected agencies had partially implemented the fifth established transition planning practice — to develop transition plans . specifically , all of the agencies had fully implemented one of the three activities associated with this practice and partially implemented another of the activities . for the remaining activity , three agencies had fully implemented it and two had partially implemented it . establish a documented process for updating and maintaining the inventories . all five selected agencies partially implemented this activity by taking steps to document their inventory update and maintenance processes . however , none of the agencies had fully documented these processes . agency officials cited various reasons for partially implementing this first planning practice . for example , officials from three of the selected agencies — all of whom were responsible for their agencies' transitions to eis — stated that they did not track all of the assets and services ordered by the agencies . the officials added that they were not responsible for maintaining inventories of all of their agencies' assets and services . officials from another agency attributed their agency's lack of a complete telecommunications inventory and associated maintenance procedures to the agency's decentralized structure . specifically , the officials stated that the agency's components were responsible for managing the services that are unique to them . however , the officials stated that the agency did not have a policy that required its components to maintain an inventory of telecommunications assets and services that they acquired independently . without complete and accurate telecommunications inventories , the selected agencies may be unable to avoid unnecessary transition delays related to an inability to plan for services not identified in the inventory .