this report examines 1 . ( 2 ) va's special authority under 38 u.s.c . § 8123 to acquire prosthetics without regard to other provision of law . depending on the vamc , these documentation requirements were either completed by vamc prosthetics purchasing staff or a contracting officer at the corresponding nco . compliance with these requirements was as follows at the four vamcs we visited: fair and reasonable price determination: the fair and reasonable price determination was not on file for between 7 and 36 percent of the applicable purchases we reviewed at three of the four vamcs . it was on file for all applicable purchases at the fourth vamc . however , we found that the documentation on file did not provide reasonable assurance that the price was fair and reasonable for the majority of purchases we reviewed . we found multiple instances where the documentation indicated that the determination was based on “prior experience purchasing similar items” but did not cite any prior pricing information . not citing any prior pricing information leaves open questions about the thoroughness of the analysis conducted to determine price reasonableness . we also identified cases where the contracting officer or prosthetics purchasing agent documented the price as “fair and reasonable” when it fell within a broad range of prices . for example , a contracting officer determined that about $6,000 for a bone graft purchased from the open market was fair and reasonable because the sales prices for “similar” items was typically between $3,000 and $20,000 . vamc and nco officials we interviewed stated it is difficult to determine price reasonableness for surgical implants , in part , because they need to be knowledgeable of the exact characteristics of the item in question in order to effectively evaluate price reasonableness . they also said they believed that as contracting officers gain more experience in purchasing surgical implants , they will learn to more effectively complete this documentation . furthermore , an nco official stated that specific guidance from vha on how to effectively complete the fair and reasonable price determination for surgical implants would be helpful . ineffective market research and determination of price reasonableness may result in vha overpaying for surgical implants . jofoc: during our review of selected open - market surgical implant purchases over $3,000 , we found two issues with respect to those purchases made on a sole - source basis for which a jofoc was required under vha's new purchasing process . first , the jofoc was not on file for between 5 and 29 percent of the applicable purchases we reviewed at the four vamcs we visited . second , at three of the vamcs we visited , we found that the officials responsible for completing the jofoc selected the “unusual and compelling urgency” justification for each of the purchases we reviewed , even though some officials told us that they did not have a full understanding of which justifications applied . specifically , we found the following: officials from two of these vamcs told us that they were unclear about which justification to cite on the jofoc for each purchase because they believed vha guidance on this matter was insufficient .