we conducted our own analyses of the information . we discussed results to date and future plans with dod , jsf , and aircraft and engine contractor officials . we obtained information on the recent restructuring , including critical inputs from three independent defense teams established to review program execution , manufacturing capacity , and engine performance . for the engine cost analysis , we employed the same methodology first reported in 2007 , now updated with current cost and program data . we conducted this performance audit from may 2009 to march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the long - term impact on the industrial base is likely to be high given the size of the jsf program , international participation , and the expected supplier base . depending on the assumptions made , a competitive environment could yield enough financial savings over the life of the program to offset the immediate cost of investing in competition . specifically , key assumptions include the number of aircraft purchased , the ratio of engines each contractor wins , and savings competitive pressures drive . the timing of when a competition occurs will also have a direct bearing on the amount of savings that is needed to recoup the additional costs of competition . competition could also provide many intangible benefits that do not result in immediate financial savings but could result in reduced costs or other positive outcomes over time . it is important that dod and congress reach an agreement on the best path forward . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for further information on this statement , please contact michael sullivan at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement are bruce fairbairn , matt lea , kris keener , ridge bowman , charlie shivers , charles w. perdue , and greg campbell . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . continuing cost increases and schedule delays culminated in the extensive restructuring of the jsf program recently announced . restructuring is not complete and further cost growth and schedule extensions are likely . manufacturing test aircraft continues to take more time , money , and effort than budgeted , contributing to substantial flight testing delays and raising questions about the ability to ramp up production as rapidly and steeply as planned .