ii. ) we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees . we will also send copies to the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; and the commandant of the marine corps . the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions on this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this review included an analysis of enlistment and reenlistment bonuses for enlisted personnel , as well as special pays for officers and enlisted personnel in the active components of the army , the navy , the marine corps , and the air force . we analyzed data on 15 special and incentive pays across the services for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 , which represented the top five expenditures for special and incentive pays each year for each service . we focused on pays that were available to most servicemembers . for this reason , we excluded medical pays . to conduct our work , we analyzed service data on enlistment and reenlistment bonuses , reviewed department of defense ( dod ) and service regulations related to the use of bonuses and special and incentive pays ; interviewed dod and service officials on the processes and methodological tools in place to identify occupations eligible for bonuses and steps taken to assess the effectiveness of their bonus programs ; observed two services' meetings that are convened to determine which occupations should be eligible for bonuses ; interviewed researchers knowledgeable about literature on bonus effectiveness ; and reviewed selected studies on this subject . we interviewed dod officials in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area and conducted a site visit to millington , tennessee , to observe the navy's working group convened to determine which occupations should be eligible for bonuses . in the course of our work , we contacted or visited the organizations and offices listed in table 3 . to determine trends in the use of enlistment and reenlistment bonuses , we requested and analyzed service data on enlistment and reenlistment bonuses contracted from fiscal year 2006 through fiscal year 2010 . for enlistment bonuses , the services provided data on the amounts contracted for various types of enlistment bonuses that they used for the purpose of attracting individuals into the service , such as bonuses awarded for entering specific occupational specialties , having certain qualifications , or leaving for basic training within a specific amount of time . some of the bonuses , such as those paid through the army's advantage fund , were only available in some of the years for which the data were requested . in conducting our analyses of enlistment bonuses , we combined the amounts that the services contracted for all enlistment bonuses in a given fiscal year .