these grants are generally for behavioral projects . the department of transportation ( dot ) encourages states to align their nhtsa - or fmcsa - funded programs with the strategic highway safety plans they develop in implementing hsip , but such alignment is not required . my testimony today addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which states have implemented hsip requirements set forth in safetea - lu , including key elements of strategic highway safety plans and crash data analysis systems , ( 2 ) the types of guidance and assistance fhwa provided to the states to support them in planning and carrying out hsip , and ( 3 ) the results to date of states' efforts in carrying out hsip , including the results of the set - aside programs for rail - highway crossings and for high - risk rural roads . my testimony is based on preliminary work we are doing for this committee for a review of hsip scheduled for release later this year . to examine states' strategic highway safety planning , we reviewed strategic highway safety plans and related program reports for a total of 25 states , including 19 randomly selected states and 6 states we visited — california , florida , illinois , iowa , mississippi , and pennsylvania . we based our judgmental selection of these 6 states on our analysis of attributes associated with highway safety , such as fatalities and roadway characteristics , in each of these states and based on comments from highway safety experts . for these 6 states , we also obtained information on the development of their strategic highway safety plans and state officials' views . to identify and assess the types of guidance and assistance fhwa provided to the states in planning and carrying out hsip , we reviewed fhwa guidance and interviewed fhwa headquarters officials and , in the 6 states we visited , fhwa division and state officials . to determine the results of the states' efforts since safetea - lu , we reviewed strategic highway safety plans and analyzed data from hsip annual reports for our 25 selected states . the results of our review of strategic highway safety plans and associated reports and site visits are not necessarily representative of all states . to address all our objectives , we also interviewed other dot safety program officials and other highway safety stakeholders . we began this performance audit in may 2007 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we appreciate the opportunity to participate in this hearing to discuss highway safety . my statement today focuses on our ongoing work on the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) . the program , established in 1973 , provides funds through the federal aid highway program to states primarily for infrastructure and other improvements designed to reduce the number of crashes , serious injuries , and fatalities on the nation's roads .