dissemination of government information . the superintendent of documents is responsible for the acquisition , classification , dissemination , and bibliographic control of tangible and electronic government publications . regardless of the printing source , title 44 requires that federal agencies make all their publications available to the superintendent of documents for cataloging and distribution . printing and related services . in providing printing and binding services to the government , gpo generally dedicates its in - house printing equipment to congressional printing , contracting out most printing for the executive branch . table 1 shows the costs of these services in fiscal year 2003 , as well as the source of these printing services . printing and binding for the congress are funded by appropriations ; in fiscal year 2004 , this appropriation was $90.6 million , and the amount requested for fiscal year 2005 is $88.8 million . a relatively small percentage of the items printed through gpo for the executive branch are designated as depository items . another distribution program under the superintendent of documents is the document sales service , which purchases , warehouses , sells , and distributes government documents . ● further , to address the adequacy of its internal functions , gpo's deputy chief of staff stated that the agency is in the process of searching for a chief technology officer , with the intention that the current chief information officer will focus primarily on internal business processes , and the chief technology officer will focus on identifying the specific technology solutions needed to support its printing and dissemination mission . these efforts are valuable first steps that , if properly followed through and implemented , should contribute to the success of gpo's transformation . the public printer recognizes that to successfully transform , gpo will have to ensure that it strategically manages its people . at the center of any serious change management initiative are the people . thus the key to a successful transformation is to recognize the people element and implement strategies to help individuals maximize their full potential in the organization . in our october 2003 report , we stated that under the public printer's direction , gpo also had taken several steps that recognize the important role strategic human capital management plays in its transformation . for example , gpo established and filled the position of chief human capital officer ( chco ) , shifted the focus of existing training , expanded opportunities for more staff to attend needed training , and enhanced recruitment strategies . we also made numerous recommendations to gpo on the steps it should take to strengthen its human capital management in support of its transformation . these recommendations focused on the following four interrelated areas: ● communicating the role of managers in gpo's transformation , ● strengthening the role of the human resources office , ● developing a strategic workforce plan to ensure gpo has the skills and knowledge it needs for the future , and ● using a strategic performance management system to drive change . if they should be , gpo can then add a rider to the agency's print contract to obtain the number of copies that it needs for dissemination .