gao - 10-213 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 . veterans' disability benefits: preliminary findings on claims processing trends and improvement efforts . gao - 09-910t . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2009 . military disability system: increased supports for servicemembers and better pilot planning could improve the disability evaluation process . gao - 08-1137 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2008 . we continue to believe that dod should establish a plan for meeting its goal . in the course of our review , we also learned that tap participation data may be inaccurate or overstated because unique identifiers were not used to document servicemembers' attendance and servicemembers who attend more than one briefing could be double - counted . currently , the department of labor ( dol ) , va , and dod track participation in their respective tap sessions separately . we recommended that dod establish an accurate measure of servicemembers' participation in tap , including va benefits briefings . dod recently reported it is working in collaboration with dol and va to determine what improvements can be made in measuring servicemembers' participation in all components of tap . most bdd sites employ local mous to establish a cooperative exam process , and implementation of the exam process varies significantly . according to data provided by va during our review , more than 60 percent of bases offering the bdd program had local mous that called for the exclusive use of va physicians , 30 percent used va contractors to conduct exams , and 7 percent used a sequential process involving resources and exams from both va and dod . at bases offering the bdd program overseas , va exams were conducted by physicians under contract with dod because va does not have physicians at these bases . at several bases we visited , we identified resource constraints and communication challenges that have affected servicemenbers' access to the program . resource challenges we identified at five bases included no designated va exam provider for more than 7 months , difficulties hiring physicians , and displaced staff because of construction . at seven bases , we identified communication challenges or a lack of awareness of the local cooperative exam mou caused by uncertainties generally resulting from deployment of a key dod local official or changes in command leadership . in one case , communication between dod and va personnel was conducted on an inconsistent basis , if at all . such constraints and challenges have caused delays in servicemembers' exams or otherwise made it difficult to meet time frames required by the bdd program . at the time of our review , dod and va had provided some guidance on implementing and maintaining local mous ; however , personnel in some sites we visited were interested in learning about promising practices at other bases . we recommended that va and dod identify and disseminate information on promising practices that address challenges local officials commonly face in ensuring servicemembers have full access to a cooperative exam . dod officials recently reported collaborating with va on a september 2009 conference focusing on seamless transition .