dependents . applicants with at least one dependent were granted asylum at a rate 1.7 times higher than applicants without dependents . date of affirmative asylum application . applicants who applied within one year of entering the united states were granted asylum at a rate 2.4 times higher than applicants who applied later . presidential administration under which judges were appointed . judges who were appointed by the attorney general during the administrations of presidents george h.w . bush , reagan , carter , nixon , or johnson were generally more likely to grant asylum than those appointed during the administrations of presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama , holding constant years of experience as a judge . judges appointed during the administrations of presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama granted asylum at rates that were statistically indistinguishable from each other . judge years of experience . judges with more experience were less likely to grant asylum , holding constant the presidential administration of appointment . judges with an additional 7 years of experience were 28 percent less likely to grant asylum . many of the factors we analyzed had similar associations for both affirmative and defensive asylum grant rates . from may 2007 through fiscal year 2014 , we estimate that , for each of the factors noted below , a representative defensive asylum applicant would be granted asylum at a rate higher ( or lower ) than an applicant with differing case factors , and the difference would be statistically significant . judge experience and the presidential administration under which judges were appointed had no statistically distinguishable associations with defensive asylum grant rates . for example: representation . applicants who were represented by legal counsel were granted asylum at a rate 1.8 times higher than applicants who were not represented . dependents . applicants with at least one dependent were granted asylum at a rate 1.7 times higher than applicants without dependents . date of defensive asylum application . applicants who applied within one year of entering the united states were granted asylum at a rate 5.0 times higher than applicants who applied later . this association is substantially larger than the association for affirmative applications made during the same time , and the difference is statistically distinguishable from zero . judge gender . female judges granted asylum for defensive applications at a rate 1.4 times higher than male judges . there was no statistically meaningful association between judge gender and asylum grant rates among affirmative cases . from may 2007 through fiscal year 2014 , we estimated that the affirmative asylum grant rate would vary by 29 percentage points if different immigration courts heard the case of a representative applicant with the same average characteristics we measured . as shown in table 3 , the grant rate for a representative applicant in one court would be 19 percent , whereas it would be 48 percent in another court for the same representative applicant . the size of this range varied across the four time periods we analyzed , from a low of 10 percentage points in the first period to a high of 37 percentage points in the second period .