july 2010 . brandon , richard with scarpa , juliet . supply , demand and accountability: effective strategies to enhance the quality of early learning experiences through workforce improvement . human services policy center whitepaper , evans school of public affairs , university of washington . may 2006 . “teacher education , motivation , compensation , workplace support , and links to quality of center - based child care and teachers' intention to stay in the early childhood profession.” early childhood research quarterly , vol . early , diane , maxwell , kelly , burchinal , margaret , et al . “teachers' education , classroom quality , and young children's academic skills: results from seven studies of preschool programs.” child development , vol . 2 ( march / april 2007 ) : 558-580 . bromer , juliet . the family child care network impact study: promising strategies for improving family child care quality . herr research center for children and social policy at erikson institute , policy brief 2009 , no.1 . paulsell , dianne ; porter , toni ; kirby , gretchen . supporting quality in home - based child care: final brief . mathematica policy research inc. march 31 , 2010 . kipnis , fran and whitebook , marcy . workforce information: a critical component of coordinated state early care and education data systems , policy brief 2011 . center for the study of child care employment . in addition to the individual named above , others making key contributions to this report include janet mascia ( assistant director ) , nancy cosentino , shelby kain , carla rojas , andrew nelson , susan aschoff , alex galuten , shana wallace , ben bolitzer , stewart kaufman , cathy hurley , christine san , and ashley mccall . saracho , olivia n. , spodek , bernard . “early childhood teachers' preparation and the quality of program outcomes.” early child development and care , vol . 1 ( january 2007 ) : 71-91 . torquati , julia ; raikes , helen ; huddleston - casas , catherine . august 2011 . weiss , elaine and brandon , richard . the economic value of the u.s . early childhood sector . the pew center on the states . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . finally , we reviewed other documentation pertaining to the hhs and education ecce funding efforts to determine if and how these funds could be used to improve worker quality . the gao workforce quality improvement activity survey of the 50 states and the district of columbia included the following activities and descriptions . activity description initiatives that provide or give ecce workers opportunities to obtain relevant and ongoing training . these opportunities focus , at least in part , on how to become a more effective early - learning teacher . examples of in - service training include workshops , classes , and conferences . coaching and mentoring include ongoing one - on - one support from more experienced child care professionals . scholarships or other forms of financial aid available to students attending institutions of higher education .