state initiated and funded . indices measuring the health of streams based on health and diversity of aquatic communities . state initiated jointly funded by federal and state . monitor swimming beaches for fecal bacteria contamination using e. coli as test organism . joint federal and state funded program ; administered by state . an analysis of water samples collected within the lake erie basin to assess sediment , nutrient , and metal compositions . state initiated and funded . the lake erie lakewide management plan ( lamp ) contains goals stated as four ecosystem management objectives focused on land use , nutrients , aquatic and terrestrial species , and contaminants . for example , one objective addressing contaminants is that toxic chemical and biological contaminant loadings within the basin must decline to a level that would permit sustainable use of natural resources . each of the objectives have two to four subobjectives that along with the objectives , are not expressed in quantitative terms , priorities , or with established time frames . one subobjective under the contaminants objective is that toxic substances shall not exist in amounts detrimental to human health or wildlife and that exotic species should be prevented from colonizing the ecosystem , controlled where feasible , and reduced to a point where they do not impair the ecological function of lake erie . the plan does not state how progress in achieving these objectives will be tracked or when the objectives should be met . according to the plan , indicators were discussed but not selected by a lamp working group , and tracking progress toward goals will not begin until indicators are selected . while indicators were not selected for the lamp , the lamp stated that extensive monitoring activities were ongoing and that an inventory conducted by environment canada showed that there were over 90 independent monitoring programs under way within the lake erie basin . according to the lamp , the indicators ultimately chosen will determine whether current monitoring will continue or new monitoring efforts will be initiated . the lake michigan lamp sets forth one overall goalto restore and protect the integrity of the lake michigan ecosystem through collaborative partnerships — and 11 subgoals . restore to environmental health the areas of concern identified by the international joint commission as needing remediation . standardize and enhance the methods by which information is collected , recorded , and shared within the region . adopt sustainable use practices that protect environmental resources and may enhance the recreational and commercial value of our great lakes . restore and maintain beneficial uses in each of the 31 u.s. and binational areas of concern or “toxic hot spots,” with a special emphasis on remediation of contaminated sediment . restore and protect the ecological and economic health of the great lakes by preventing the introduction of new invasive species and limiting the spread of established ones . improve great lakes water quality and economic productivity by controlling nonpoint source pollution from water , land , and air pathways . restore 100,000 acres of wetlands and critical coastal habitat while protecting existing high quality fish and wildlife habitat in the great lakes basin .