the costs of modularity are substantial and are likely to grow . since 2004 , the army's cost estimates have increased significantly . in january 2004 , the army estimated that increasing the number of active modular brigade combat teams from 33 to 48 would cost $20 billion from fiscal years 2004 through 2011 based on a “rough order of magnitude estimate.” as of july 2004 , the army added $8 billion to address costs for reorganizing the reserve component , bringing the total estimated cost for reorganizing the entire force to $28 billion . our preliminary work highlighted several limitations in this estimate . for example , the july 2004 estimate: included costs of adding 15 light infantry brigades for the active component to bring the total number of active brigades to 48 , but these costs were based on the current brigade structure , not the tested modular design ; did not take into account the costs for upgrading existing active brigades , or other support and command elements ; and accounted for construction of temporary , relocatable facilities , but did not allow for permanent upgrades to facilities or increases to other services provided at army installations to accommodate the increase in modular units . we plan to issue a report later this year . to address army implementation plans and costs , we conducted interviews with and reviewed documents from the army staff , the army budget office , u.s. army forces command , the u.s. army training and doctrine command , and the u.s. army force management support agency . in addition , we visited the 3rd infantry division and the 101st airborne division , which are among the first active combat divisions to undergo modular conversion . we conducted our work from august 2004 to march 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the army's modular force initiative , which has been referred to as the largest army reorganization in 50 years , encompasses the army's total force - - active army , national guard , and army reserve — and directly affects not only the army's combat units , but related support and command and control . they told us these costs were excluded from the current estimate because it was difficult to differentiate between endstrength increases associated with conducting operations and those needed for modularity . based on our preliminary review of the army's revised estimate and potential costs associated with modularizing the active component , we believe there are certain factors that could affect the overall cost for modularity , including some that will likely make it grow higher than the current estimate of $48 billion . first , the army's current cost estimate does not use the tested design as the basis for determining equipment costs . first , the army's campaign plan calls for a potential decision by fiscal year 2006 on whether to create 5 additional modular brigade combat teams . adding 5 brigades would provide additional capability to execute the defense strategy but would require additional restructuring of people and equipment .