training . members of the senior review advisory committee identified training and development as a critical component for implementing the human capital system . furthermore , participants in the dhs focus groups expressed a need for training and professional development opportunities in a number of areas , including general supervisory capabilities , assessing employee performance , labor - management relations , and alternative dispute resolution . the dhs proposal correctly recognizes that a substantial investment in training is a key aspect of implementing a performance management system . the need for in - depth and varied training will continue as the system is implemented , as indicated by results from the opm fhcs in which 53 percent of respondents believe supervisors / team leaders in their work unit encourage their development at work , which is less than the governmentwide response of 59 percent . furthermore , 47 percent feel they are given a real opportunity to improve their skills , which is less than the governmentwide response of 57 percent . our recently released guides for agencies to help ensure investments in training and development are targeted strategically and could prove helpful to dhs as it develops its training and development programs . employee participation . the undersecretary for management has already noted her commitment to move forward on implementing the human capital system in a collaborative way , and reiterated that support in a december 19 , 2003 memorandum to dhs employees regarding the human capital system . regardless of whether it is a part of collective bargaining , involving employees in such important decisions as how they are deployed and how work is assigned is critical to the successful operations of the department . this is likely to be a significant challenge for the department in light of employee responses to the opm fhcs in which 28 percent of dhs employees indicated a feeling of personal empowerment , which is fewer than the governmentwide response of 40 percent . additionally , 44 percent of dhs employees reported satisfaction with their involvement in decisions that affect their work , compared to 53 percent governmentwide . implementation teams . dhs formed three implementation teams at the end of february 2004 to support the design and implementation of the human capital management system because of the multiple areas that require management attention . this includes a training and communications team ; a pay , performance , and classification team ; and a labor relations , adverse actions , and appeals team . according to agency officials , the teams will initially focus their efforts on data collection and project planning activities until the department issues interim final regulations for the human capital management system , at which time the teams will begin to draft departmental policies to support implementation . agency officials reported that , as they move forward , they will pay particular attention to how their decisions may affect other human capital approaches across the department . the mission of the training and communications team is to develop comprehensive communication and training plans , coordinate and manage the development of training , coordinate the delivery of training , and to disseminate information related to the design and implementation of the department's human capital system .