we revised the report as nrc recommended . see comment 3 . nrc has correctly portrayed one of the overall conclusions of its advisory panel concerning the new safety oversight process ; that is , that the process has made progress toward achieving nrc's four performance goals . the advisory panel also concluded that nrc has the necessary elements to evaluate the new oversight process against the performance goals . but the panel concluded , as we noted in this report , that nrc did not have the necessary data to evaluate the new safety oversight process against the performance goals . and what are the appropriate number , type , and skills needed for its headquarters staff ? in commenting on a draft of this report , nrc said that program evaluations are to assess the manner and extent to which programs achieve their intended objectives and to assess program implementation policies , practices , and processes . nrc's strategies to ensure that licensees use nuclear material safely appear clear and reasonable . for example , nrc will continue to focus on the relative risk of licensees' activities to determine the appropriate level of oversight , determine that licensees' activities are consistent with regulatory requirements , and respond to operational events that have potential safety or safeguards consequences . for its newly developed strategies for the three nonsafety goals , nrc may need to revise them and / or specify how some strategies will help achieve its desired outcomes . for example , one strategy is to improve the regulatory framework to increase nrc's effectiveness and efficiency . without further amplification on how nrc expects to improve the regulatory framework , it is difficult to determine how this strategy will result in more effective and efficient nrc activities and decisions . nrc reported that it had met the safety - related performance outcomes for this key outcome in fiscal year 2000 . although nrc's performance and strategies for achieving the safety - related goal for this key outcome appear reasonable , as with the other two key outcomes , we could not assess nrc's performance relative to the three nonsafety goals for which nrc did not have performance measures . in addition , to ensure that nrc can meet the strategies , goals , and measures , it will have to follow through on its plans to attract and retain individuals with the competencies and skills needed to carry out its mission . on the basis of our prior work , we believe that nrc's achieving some of its strategies and performance goals in this key outcome may be affected by such external factors as the standards that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) eventually issues on the level of residual radiation that can safely remain at a nuclear power plant site after licensees complete their decommissioning activities as well as the recently issued standards for the department of energy's potential high - level waste repository at yucca mountain , nevada . epa started to develop residual radiation standards in 1984 but has not yet finalized them . currently , licensees are using standards that nrc issued in 1997 .