( see fig . for our second high - risk study group — beneficiaries with low income — as well as for beneficiaries who were not in this group , the revised community model produced ma payment adjustments of a similar magnitude to those produced by the current community model . specifically , estimates from the revised model and current model differed by only $5 ( less than 0.1 percent of average actual expenditures ) . both models estimated expenditures for this group of low - income beneficiaries that were within $80 of actual expenditures . within the low - income group , estimates from the revised and current community models were similar for beneficiaries who received the part d lis but were not dually eligible for medicare and medicaid , with the revised community model slightly reducing accuracy by $28 , or less than 0.5 percent of average actual expenditures . both the current and revised community models underestimated expenditures for these beneficiaries by about $450 ( $435 and $463 , respectively ) . the estimates were substantially more accurate for beneficiaries who were dual - eligibles . this greater accuracy for dual - eligibles relative to beneficiaries who received the part d lis but were not dually eligible reflects the design of the models: that both the current and revised community models account for whether a beneficiary is dually eligible and neither model accounts for whether a beneficiary received the part d lis . ( see fig . the revised community model produced a substantial improvement in the accuracy of health care expenditure estimates , and therefore ma payment adjustments , for the approximately 5 percent of beneficiaries diagnosed with dementia . specifically , the revised community model improved the accuracy of estimated health care expenditures for beneficiaries with dementia by $2,674 , or about 16 percent of average actual expenditures . estimates from the revised model matched actual expenditures exactly for beneficiaries with dementia , reflecting the inclusion in the model of two new hccs for dementia ( dementia with complications and dementia without complications ) . the magnitude of the improvement in accuracy was greater for beneficiaries diagnosed with dementia with complications and less for beneficiaries diagnosed with dementia without complications . for the 95 percent of ffs community beneficiaries without dementia , the revised community model improved accuracy by $129 , or about 2 percent of average actual expenditures . ( see fig . compared with the general new enrollee model , the c - snp new enrollee model substantially improved the accuracy of estimated health care expenditures , and therefore of ma payment adjustments , for c - snp - eligible new enrollees but still underestimated expenditures for certain specifically , the c - snp new enrollee groups by considerable amounts.model underestimated expenditures for c - snp - eligible new enrollees by $1,461 , while the general new enrollee model underestimated expenditures for this group by $3,914 — an improvement in accuracy of $2,453 , or about 25 percent of average actual expenditures . the amount by which accuracy improved was similar across 14 severe or disabling chronic conditions: $2,402 to $2,723 ( a range which represented 7 to 24 percent of average actual expenditures ) .