iii. ) cms commented that because protecting nursing home residents from fire hazards was an important goal , it conducted its own analysis of nursing home fire risk at the same time our study was underway . as a result , cms has already taken steps to implement all seven of our recommendations . for example , cms stated that because it is important for every resident room to have a smoke detector , it will pursue a regulatory change requiring their installation . similarly , cms plans to confirm the sprinkler status of each home during upcoming facility surveys and to enter this information in cms's database . cms also plans to make both the sprinkler status and fire safety survey results available to the public on its medicare compare web site by the summer of 2005 . finally , to fulfill the statutory requirement for annual federal monitoring surveys designed to assess the effectiveness of state fire safety surveys , cms has reprioritized resources for a five - fold increase in comparative surveys to about 200 during fiscal year 2005 , with a focus on unsprinklered nursing homes . its goal is to accomplish the remaining approximately 700 observational surveys by redesigning regional office workplans . cms also provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . the connecticut state survey agency provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in discussing the state's comments with survey agency officials , we were told that the agency now ( 1 ) reminds facilities that fire drills on all shifts must be more than a paper review of a home's fire plan and ( 2 ) pays more attention to smoking - related issues during fire safety surveys , including obtaining a list of all smokers at the beginning of a survey . based on our prior work , we believe that connecticut's , and likely other states' , experience underscores the risks of relying on documentation without systematically verifying its accuracy through interviews and observation . nfpa provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the tennessee state survey agency did not comment on our draft . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to the administrator of the centers for medicare & medicaid services and appropriate congressional committees . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or walter ochinko , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7157 if you or your staffs have any questions . gao staff who contributed to this report include eric anderson , dean mohs , and paul m. thomas . corridor walls must be fire - rated , extend from the floor to the roof deck or floor above , and resist the passage of smoke .