additionally , most of those analyses that should have been updated had not been . this access is not without limits . officials said that the level of access must be agreed to in advance on a case - by - case basis and reflects the circumstances of the arrangement and the need for access to certain data to monitor performance or benefits arising from the arrangement . for example , one contract may only provide for man - hour data because that is all that needs to be shared given the circumstances . however , another contract may allow access to direct cost , direct labor hours , and other rates and factors that are relevant for the work involved . according to officials , the ministry of defence has an open book accounting agreement with agustawestland for the merlin contract and the government has full visibility of the accounts pertaining to merlin , including overhead costs . the contract must explicitly address the data access arrangements and not rely on vague and undefined phrases that could be open to misinterpretation . according to the 2007 national audit office report , long - term availability contracts may limit flexibility to respond to changes in resources . in the past , integrated project team leaders in the ministry of defence had some ability to move funding between resource lines to overcome short - term funding issues . however , this flexibility is diminishing because of the transition to availability contracts , as larger portions of the budget are pre - allocated to fund these contracts . the mine warfare patrol and hydrographic team also raised concerns about loss of budget flexibility . this team is responsible for providing support for 2 hydrographic ships , 1 patrol ship ( hms clyde ) , 3 river class ships , 16 mine hunters , and 38 smaller ships . the budget for providing support to these ships is approximately £40 million , with £18 million devoted to the long - term availability contracts for the 2 survey ships , 1 patrol ship , and 3 river class patrol ships . according to ministry of defence officials , these arrangements have for the most part been beneficial . however , as they are structured , these programs do not allow for any flexibility . when the mine warfare patrol and hydrographic team recently had to absorb a 20 percent budget cut , officials said that the mine hunter ships bore the brunt of the cut because they had the majority of the remaining support budget not earmarked for an availability contract . the team views the 20 percent cut to its budget to be , effectively , a 40 percent cut to the mine hunter ship budget . defence equipment and support organization officials said that they are looking to add more flexibility to future availability contracts . the ministry of defence has already incorporated some flexibility in a few availability contracts . officials said that the tornado contract contains both fixed - price elements for management team , training , logistics , and information systems and a variable price element for flying hours .