project phasing . according to gsa officials , omb may request that gsa and cbp divide large projects into separate phases when high - cost projects are unlikely to be funded in a single appropriation . for example , of the eight border crossing locations represented across the 10 projects in our review , cbp and gsa broke three projects at three locations into phases to obtain approval: alexandria bay , calexico west , and san ysidro . however , for similar reasons as those related to funding lags between design and construction , breaking up projects into smaller phases can increase overall costs and add years to project timelines . according to gsa and cbp officials , when appropriations do not align with project schedules , contractors may leave the site after completing a single phase to pursue new work opportunities . to what extent does cbp prioritize infrastructure projects across land border crossings ? to what extent have recently completed or ongoing gsa land border crossing capital projects met cost , schedule , and scope goals , and what challenges , if any , have cbp and gsa reported in developing land border crossing capital projects ? to determine what infrastructure constraints , if any , cbp faces at land border crossings , we visited 16 land border crossings in california , arizona , texas , and new york from june to september 2018 to observe and discuss infrastructure constraints identified by local cbp officers . we selected these locations based on a variety of factors , including high traffic volume ; the presence of passenger vehicle , pedestrian , and commercial vehicle processing capabilities ; and border crossings that cbp has prioritized for infrastructure improvement within the next five years , among others . we also interviewed officials from the nine cbp office of field operations ( ofo ) field offices that oversee cbp operations at all 167 land border crossings to discuss infrastructure constraints at the land border crossings they oversee . the results of our site visits cannot be generalized more broadly to all land border crossings . however , they provide important context and insights into the infrastructure constraints cbp faces at such locations . to determine the extent to which cbp and gsa have information about the condition of infrastructure at land border crossings , we analyzed all cbp facility condition assessments ( fca ) and gsa building engineering reviews conducted from 2016 through 2018 . we assessed cbp's processes for conducting fcas against a dhs directive on the department's real property management program to determine the extent to which cbp conducts fcas in compliance with dhs policy . we also interviewed officials within cbp and gsa who are knowledgeable about each agency's processes to collect information on the condition of infrastructure at land border crossings . we assessed cbp and gsa's processes for sharing and leveraging information on infrastructure condition against key practices for collaboration among federal agencies . we also reviewed system documentation and interviewed officials from cbp's office of facilities and asset management ( ofam ) knowledgeable about tririga — cbp's real property management system — to determine the extent to which tririga effectively maintains information on infrastructure condition .