we disagree . our findings indicate that dod is not using its current processes effectively to evaluate a system's readiness to begin operational testing . while there may be instances where the army uses operational testing to obtain feedback on system performance , dod's system development best practices dictate that a system should not proceed to operational testing until it has completed developmental testing and corrected any identified problems . the nies are a good forum for the army to generate knowledge on its tactical network . however , nies are a large investment and dod and the army should strive to optimize their return on that investment . approving network systems for operational testing at the nies after having poor developmental test results may not be the best use of nie resources because of the strong correlation between poor developmental test results and poor operational test results . moreover , it is much more cost effective to address performance and reliability issues as early as possible in the system development cycle and well in advance of the production and fielding phases . as we note in the report , dod and the army have been pursuing a schedule - based strategy for network modernization rather than the preferred event - based strategy where participation in a test event occurs after a system has satisfied certain criteria . dod concurred with our recommendation that the army provide results to industry on how many successfully demonstrated systems under evaluation have been procured to date and how long it has taken for the procurements . however , dod did not offer specific steps it would take to provide this information or a proposed timeframe . because of the importance of continued industry participation in the development of the army network , we think that it is important for industry to have a clear picture of the army's success in rapidly buying and fielded emerging technologies . finally , dod concurred with our recommendation that the army collaborate with all network stakeholder organizations to identify and correct issues that may result in improved network outcomes , including addressing the observations and recommendations of the test community related to the nies . dod states that a collaborative environment with all stakeholders will assist in identifying and correcting issues and that the forum for doing so is the semiannual network synchronization working group . we agree that a collaborative environment is important in responding to previous test community observations and recommendations and would expect the working group to address these issues . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the army , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact belva martin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or martinb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .