stakeholders . with respect to the decision to allow small knives on aircraft , we also evaluated tsa actions on stakeholder coordination against its internal decision memos citing the importance of , and need for , full coordination with certain aviation stakeholder groups . to determine how tsos are trained to implement modifications to the pil once they are approved , we obtained documentation and interviewed agency officials from tsa's office of training and workforce engagement about the steps tsa takes to ensure that tsos are informed of modifications to the pil and trained to implement them at passenger checkpoints . we reviewed training materials , including briefing documents and training aids , used to prepare tsos to implement the small knives decision . during our airport visits , we also obtained the perspectives of tsa personnel at the airports on how they are prepared to implement changes to the pil . because we did not select tsa employees and airports at random for our interviews , the views obtained during these visits are not generalizable to tsa operations at all airports nationwide . ( 2 ) how are transportation security officers trained to implement modifications to the pil at the checkpoint ? this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . tsa deemed some of the information in the prior report as sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about tsa's risk assessment of various prohibited items . although the information provided in this report is more limited and less specific , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine the basis upon which tsa decides to modify the pil , we reviewed and assessed tsa's criteria and process for making changes to the list , including the factors tsa uses to guide its decision making . we obtained documentation and interviewed agency officials about proposed modifications , including how tsa considered risk information , stakeholder perspectives , and impact on the efficiency of airport operations and customer service during its process for considering changes to the pil . specifically , to assess the extent to which tsa considered risk in its most recent proposal to modify the pil to allow small knives and certain types of sporting equipment aboard aircraft , we reviewed documentation — including decision memos — detailing the risk assessment conducted by tsa that led to its march 5 , 2013 , decision to remove small knives from the pil . for the purposes of this report we will refer to this proposed pil change as the “small knives” pil change . we evaluated tsa's risk assessment of the pil detailed in this documentation against department of homeland security ( dhs ) guidance on managing and assessing risk to determine the extent to which tsa's risk assessment aligned with established risk management principles . we also interviewed tsa officials from the office of security operations and the office of the chief risk officer to discuss details of how they conducted the risk assessment that resulted in the small knives decision .