such an estimate does not yet exist . as we reported in november 2006 , a limited , preliminary cost estimate concluded that faa's budget under a nextgen scenario would average about $15 billion per year through 2025 , or about $1 billion more annually ( in today's dollars ) than faa's fiscal year 2006 appropriation . a jpdo official told us they have submitted a limited nextgen cost estimate to omb with the 2008 budget request . as of february 9 , 2007 , jpdo had not publicly released its cost estimate for nextgen . according to the department of transportation , the administration's budget for fiscal year 2008 includes $175 million to support key faa investments in nextgen . according to jpdo officials , their current estimate focuses only on the near - term capital needs for faa's ato portfolio . to develop what they believed would be a more accurate cost estimate , jpdo also focused on the funding necessary to achieve only the capabilities of the nextgen system around 2016 , rather than the long - term 2025 capabilities . jpdo then laid out the major systems and investments required by ato to achieve the mid - term vision and the related costs for ato . while jpdo's new estimate will be a step toward understanding the costs of nextgen , this estimate is still incomplete . much work remains to develop a comprehensive cost estimate for nextgen that includes the costs to the rest of faa ( beyond ato ) , the other jpdo partner agencies , and industry . a jpdo official told us the agency is working to develop a comprehensive estimate and plans to have one ready to submit with the 2009 budget request . this comprehensive estimate is intended to describe the business case for nextgen and detail the investments that will be required by all the jpdo partner agencies to achieve the nextgen vision by 2025 . the successful implementation of nextgen will depend , in part , on resolving the uncertainty over which entities will fund and conduct the research and development necessary to achieve some key nextgen capabilities and to support the operational roadmaps . in the past , a significant portion of aeronautics research and development , including intermediate technology development , has been performed by nasa . however , our analysis of nasa's aeronautics research budget and proposed funding shows a 30 percent decline , in constant 2005 dollars , from fiscal year 2005 to fiscal year 2011 . to its credit , nasa plans to focus its research on the needs of nextgen . however , nasa is also moving toward a focus on fundamental research and away from developmental work and demonstration projects . faa has determined that research gaps now exist as a result of both nasa's cuts to aeronautical research funding and the expanded requirements for nextgen coming from jpdo . these gaps are in the activities of applied research and development — activities that will be required to implement new policies , demonstrate new capabilities , set parameters for certification of new systems , and develop technologies for transfer to industry .