not assessed . partially met . eleven out of the 20 contracts fully met this best practice , and contractors performed self - assessments or conducted annual reviews for 5 additional contracts . however , em field and headquarters officials were not performing thorough reviews to check whether the evm systems were in alignment with the eia - 748-d guidelines to ensure that the data being reported by the systems were reliable . partially met . the evm data for operations activities contracts contained numerous , unexplained anomalies in all the months we reviewed — including missing or negative values for some of the completed work to date . having anomalies in the evm data occurring each month can cause potential distortions resulting in inaccurate projections of estimates at completion . 1 ) when reviewing the monthly reports em sites present to em headquarters management , we found that none of the sites adequately reported evm data . 2 ) when reviewing the new monthly report format that em's office of project management presents to em headquarters senior leadership since october 2017 , we found that em reported on the performance of 15 out of the 20 contracts . we found that these reports included most of evm indicators for all 15 contracts on which em office of project management reported . however , this monthly report uses unreliable evm data , as we found in the prior characteristic . partially met . we reviewed two sources of information on earned value management reporting to em senior leadership for this best practice . 1 ) when reviewing the monthly reports em sites present to em headquarters management , we found that they contained corrective action plans for only 3 contracts . 2 ) when reviewing the new monthly reports that em's office of project management present to em headquarters senior leadership since october 2017 , em office of project management officials stated that they have only started suggesting corrective action to em headquarters senior leadership since early 2018 ; it is too soon to tell how em headquarters senior leadership is using this information to determine which contracts need the most attention and which corrective actions management will develop and take . substantially met . em provided evidence that 17 out of 20 contractors had a formal process in place for updating the budget baseline . however , the extent to which contractors followed their processes was questionable given the problems we found with the estimates at completion , as discussed in the prior characteristic above . not reviewed assessment for each best practice: not met — provided no evidence that satisfies any of the best practice ; minimally met — provided evidence that satisfies a small portion of the best practice ; partially met — provided evidence that satisfies about half of the best practice ; substantially met — provided evidence that satisfies a large portion of the best practice ; and met – provided complete evidence that satisfies the entire best practice . we determined the overall score for each best practice by taking the average across the 20 contracts we reviewed .