software . the program office told us that modifications to commercial software to separate classified from unclassified information and enable other military capabilities will increase risk associated with software development . however , they also stated that they are focusing on software early in the program to ensure boeing puts the proper emphasis on this area and keeps the program schedule on track . boeing has also identified risks in the program's software development effort that could delay the program's schedule or drive increased cost if realized . software development growth can occur because of bad estimates , poor requirements , and poor execution of the software development plan . if the amount of software being developed grows , more staff and more time will be needed . there can also be delays in the integration of hardware and software if software deliveries from suppliers are late . late delivery can result in hardware and software not being integrated in time to support flight testing , which in turn can mean flight test schedule delays . a further complication to the kc - 46 schedule was boeing's january 2012 announcement that it was closing its wichita , kansas finishing facility at the end of 2013 . when the contract was awarded , boeing had planned to militarize the kc - 46 at the wichita facility . now , that work will be moving to the puget sound facility in seattle , washington to be co - located with the 767-2c development effort . kc - 46 program officials stated that they are working closely with boeing to understand the impact of this decision on the kc - 46 program but will hold boeing to its contractual delivery date of august 2017 . if the provisions in the current contract remain intact , the government's cost liability will be safeguarded should any of the foregoing risks materialize into problems . however , these provisions cannot prevent delays in delivering aircraft should problems be discovered late in development or while production is underway . while a tanker largely based on a commercial platform and subsystems may not be as technically challenging as developing a wholly new weapon system like the joint strike fighter , dod regulations still require requisite critical technologies to be sufficiently mature prior to starting system development in order to minimize technology risk down the road . as required by dod policy , a technology readiness assessment was conducted by an independent team of subject matter experts . overall , the team reviewed and assessed 36 technologies and determined that three are new or novel and are needed for the kc - 46 tanker to meet performance and mission capabilities . these three technologies — 3- dimensional display , airborne estar , and threat correlation software — have been demonstrated in a relevant environment in accordance with dod and statutory requirements . three - dimensional display . the display screens at boom operator stations inside the kc - 46 aircraft provide the visual cues needed for the operator to monitor the aircraft being refueled before and after contact with the refueling boom or drogue .