( fig . 4 illustrates the three phases of the u.s. government's process for intercountry adoptions. ) depending on the type of visa issued , children admitted to the united states may qualify for automatic citizenship . various factors , such as different foreign government's requirements , contribute to varying lengths of time required for the process and the varying costs incurred by adoptive parents . in the first phase of the u.s. intercountry adoption process , uscis determines the potential parents' suitability to adopt a child who resides outside of the united states . the ina defines qualifications for prospective adoptive parents . uscis implements this requirement through its 68 domestic offices . prospective parents submit to uscis fingerprints ; a filing fee ; home study ; proof of compliance with preadoption requirements of the prospective parent's state of residence ; other documents such as proof of citizenship , age , marriage license , and divorce decrees ; and , in some cases , an application for advance processing of orphan petition ( form i - 600a ) . the home study is completed by a party approved under the laws of the prospective parent's state of residence , such as an adoption agency , and includes interviews with the family and an assessment of the prospective parent's suitability to adopt a child . we reviewed documents on u.s. intercountry adoptions , including information on uscis and state web sites , which outlined specific procedures for prospective adoptive parents to complete during the intercountry adoption process , as well as information on the child's eligibility for citizenship . furthermore , we reported on the varying intercountry adoption completion times and costs incurred by adoptive parents in the top four sending countries based on discussions with officials from state's office of children's issues , who obtained this information from state's bureau of consular affairs officers handling intercountry adoption cases in the four overseas locations . these bureau of consular affairs officers provided approximate time frames based on their experiences in reviewing intercountry adoption cases . we did not test the reliability of this data . to assess the u.s. government agencies' efforts to manage the intercountry adoption process , we interviewed uscis and state officials in washington , d.c. we reviewed a uscis task force report from june 2002 , which assessed the u.s. intercountry adoption process and identified areas for improvements . we discussed actions taken to address these issues with uscis officials . we further reviewed uscis and state documents to understand their procedures for handling intercountry adoptions cases and their management of the process . these documents include uscis standard operating procedures and adjudicator's field manual , as well as state's foreign affairs manual . additionally , we reviewed uscis and state's caseload data , documentation of communication and coordination between the two agencies , as well as training materials provided to uscis and state officials related to intercountry adoptions . the estimate of the time that uscis officials took to process intercountry adoption applications relies on their performance analysis system ( pas ) . gao tested the reliability of the pas data and found that it was sufficiently reliable at the aggregate level to identify overall trends .