our results were consistent with what the whistleblower claimed . specifically , of the 3,155 pieces of it equipment recorded in the records for ihs headquarters , we determined that about 1,140 items ( or about 36 percent ) were lost , stolen , or unaccounted for . these items , valued at around $2 million , included computers , computer servers , video projectors , and digital cameras . according to ihs records , 64 of the items we identified as missing during our physical inventory were “new” in april 2007 . during our investigation of the whistleblower's complaint , ihs made a concerted effort to obstruct our work . for example , the ihs director over property misrepresented to us that ihs was able to find about 800 of the missing items from the whistleblower's complaint . in addition , an ihs property specialist attempted to provide documentation confirming that 571 missing items were properly disposed of by ihs . however , we found that the documentation he provided was not dated and contained no signatures . finally , ihs provided us fabricated receiving reports after we questioned them that the original reports provided to us were missing key information on them . figure 1 shows the fabricated receiving report for a shipment of new scanners delivered to ihs . as shown in figure 1 , there is almost a 3-month gap between the date the equipment was received in september and the date that the receiving report was completed and signed in december — even though the document should have been signed upon receipt . in fact , the new receiving report ihs provided was signed on the same date we requested it , strongly suggesting that ihs fabricated these documents in order to obstruct our investigation . we selected a random sample of it equipment inventory at seven ihs field offices to determine whether the lack of accountability for inventory was confined to headquarters or occurred elsewhere within the agency . similar to our finding at ihs headquarters , our sample results also indicate that a substantial number of pieces of it equipment were lost , stolen , or unaccounted for . specifically , we estimate that for the 7 locations , about 1,200 equipment items or 17 percent , with a value of $2.6 million were lost , stolen or unaccounted for . furthermore , some of the missing equipment from the seven field locations could have contained sensitive information . we found that many of the missing laptops were assigned to ihs hospitals and , therefore , could have contained patient information and social security numbers and other personal information . ihs has also exhibited ineffective management over the procurement of it equipment , which has led to wasteful spending of taxpayer funds . some examples of wasteful spending that we observed during our audit of headquarters and field offices include: approximately 10 pieces of it equipment , on average , are issued for every one employee at ihs headquarters .