brac projects . family support initiatives to include the construction of childcare facilities ; funding private - public partnerships to expand military families' access to childcare ; and support for service members' spouses professional development . programs to maintain industrial base capacity ( e.g . “war - stoppers” ) . definition of criteria recruiting and retention bonuses to maintain end - strength . basic pay and the basic allowances for housing and subsistence for permanently authorized end strength . individual augmentees will be decided on a case - by - case basis . support for the personnel , operations , or the construction or maintenance of facilities , at u.s. offices of security cooperation in theater items proposed for increases in reprogrammings or as payback for prior reprogrammings must meet the criteria above . dod reports on the costs of certain contingency operations monthly to congress through its cost of war report . according to the fiscal year 2016 instructions for reporting on the cost of war issued by the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , the cost of war report is intended to provide stakeholders , such as congress , visibility into the ways in which war - related oco appropriations are obligated . dod produces the cost of war reports to address a congressional requirement to report on obligations and disbursements related to select operations identified by congress , such as operation freedom's sentinel ( primarily in afghanistan ) and operation inherent resolve ( primarily in iraq and syria ) . dod also reports on additional operations based on annual guidance from the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) that instructs the components on which contingency operations they are to report against . in addition to operations freedom's sentinel and inherent resolve , the instructions for fiscal year 2016 also included operation enduring freedom , operation noble eagle , and post - operation new dawn iraq activities . dod reports on obligations associated with these operations based on guidance within dod 7000.14-r , financial management regulation , volume 12 , chapter 23 , ( sept. 2007 ) which generally defines what is considered a contingency cost and establishes requirements for how the department is to report on those costs . according to dod's september 2015 cost of war report , of the $1.56 trillion in oco funds appropriated from fiscal years 2001 through 2015 , dod considers about $1.41 trillion as war funds , with the remainder deemed as either unrelated to ongoing contingency operations — a category that dod refers to as “non - war” — or for classified purposes . for fiscal years 2010 through 2015 , dod's cost of war reports have included data on about 94 percent of its oco appropriations . in addition to obligations associated with oco - designated appropriations , the cost of war report includes obligations of base funds if they are considered to be war - related , as well as war - related obligations of funds that are transferred into oco accounts , according to dod officials and guidance . obligations associated with non - war oco appropriations are not included in dod's cost of war reporting .