how would it be measured ? what should be the relationship between the amount of debt reduction required and the amount of surplus reduction ( i.e. , tax cut or direct spending increase ) permitted ? what , if any , relationship should there be between this calculation and the discretionary caps ? while paygo constrained the creation or legislative expansion of direct spending programs and tax cuts , it accepted the existing provisions of law as given . it was not designed to trigger — and it did not trigger — any examination of “the base.” cost increases in existing mandatory programs are exempt from control under paygo and could be ignored . however , constraining legislative actions that increase the cost of entitlements and mandatories is not enough . gao's long - term budget simulations show that as more and more of the baby boom generation enters retirement , spending for social security , medicare , and medicaid will demand correspondingly larger shares of federal revenues . assuming , for example , that last year's tax reductions are made permanent and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy , spending for net interest , social security , medicare , and medicaid consumes nearly three - quarters of federal revenues by 2030 , leaving little room for other federal priorities , including defense and education . the budget process is the one place where we as a nation can conduct a healthy debate about competing claims and new priorities . however , such a debate will be needlessly constrained if only new proposals and activities are on the table . a fundamental review of existing programs and operations can create much - needed fiscal flexibility to address emerging needs by weeding out programs that have proven to be outdated , poorly targeted , or inefficient in their design and management . it is always easier to subject proposals for new activities or programs to greater scrutiny than that given to existing ones . it is easy to treat existing activities as “given” and force new proposals to compete only with each other . however , such an approach would move us further from , rather than nearer to , budgetary surpluses . previously we suggested some sort of “lookback” procedure to prompt a reexamination of “the base” in entitlement programs . under such a process congress could specify spending targets for paygo programs for several years . the president could be required to report in his budget whether these targets either had been exceeded in the prior year or were likely to be exceeded in the current or budget years . he could then be required to recommend whether any or all of this overage should be recouped — and if so , to propose a way to do so . congress could be required to act on the president's proposal . while the current budget process contains a similar point of order against worsening the financial condition of the social security trust funds , it would be possible to link “tripwires” or “triggers” to measures related to overall budgetary flexibility or to specific program measures .