we disagree . as discussed in our report , mas contracting officials and inspector general officials identified a number of factors that in the past contributed to the reduction of the number of pre - award audits . these factors include an organizational culture that stresses making contract awards quickly and performance measures that focus on timeliness . the reduction of the number of opportunities for conducting pre - award audits caused by the extension of contract performance period from 1 year — the contract period in the mid - 1990s — to 5 years was also cited as a factor . however , according to gsa it receives more than 3,000 new mas contract offers each year . despite these opportunities to conduct pre - award audits , the number of pre - award audits has only increased from 14 in fiscal year 2003 to 40 in fiscal year 2004 . fourth , gsa expressed concern about our understanding of the regulatory framework required for postaward audits of commercial contracts and that we underestimated the risk and overestimated the savings associated with these postaward audits . we are aware that the 1997 change to gsa's regulations stimulated substantial disagreement and discussion concerning the extent of gsa audit authority . gsa received numerous comments asserting that the clinger - cohen act ( pl 104-106 ) eliminated its authority to conduct postaward audits of pre - award pricing information . similar views were expressed in post enactment language by the house armed services committee in house report 104-563 . although gsa concluded that it retained authority for postaward audits , gsa's final rule restricted the use of postaward audits . specifically , the final rule allows the contracting officer to modify the examination of records by gsa ( multiple award schedule ) clause to provide for postaward audits only “after the contracting officer makes a determination that there is a likelihood of significant harm to the government without access to verify the information and obtains the senior procurement executive's approval.” we have not recommended that gsa change the postaward audit restriction . rather , we have noted that contracting officers do not understand the rule and need guidance to fulfill their responsibilities under the rule . regarding the savings associated with postaward audits , the estimates were produced and reported by gsa's inspector general . fifth , gsa commented that because the acquisition quality management and improvement program has yet to be fully implemented , it is not reasonable to evaluate the adequacy of the program in achieving improvements . this misses the point . we believe that improvements should be made when the need for them are identified regardless of the program's implementation stage . for example , we found that the program when it was launched in march 2003 was limited to two initiatives — prenegotiation panels and quality reviews — and that other initiatives key to a successful improvement program , such as training , were not formally included as an initiative under the program . coincident with our finding , gsa has initiated a training program . finally , gsa commented that it had made a commitment to establishing a culture of quality contracting and identified 12 improvement actions taken since november 2001 .