development of fpa commenced in 2002 . according to a 2001 report commissioned by the agencies that serves as the foundation of fpa , fpa was intended to establish a common framework for the agencies to determine national budget needs by analyzing budget alternatives at the local level — using a common , interagency process for fire management planning and budgeting — and aggregating the results ; determine the relative costs and benefits for the full scope of fire management activities , including potential trade - offs among investments in fuel reduction , fire preparedness , and fire suppression activities ; and identify , for any given budget level , the most cost - effective mix of personnel and equipment to carry out these activities . in addition , because responding to wildland fires often requires coordination and collaboration among federal , state , tribal , and local firefighting entities to effectively protect lives , homes , and resources , the agencies were directed to develop fpa in conjunction with their nonfederal partners and to recognize the availability of adjacent nonfederal firefighting resources when determining the appropriate amount and location of federal resources . fpa program and senior agency officials told us that , when completed , fpa will allow the agencies to meet the key goals established for it , but preliminary results from our ongoing review have raised questions about fpa's ability to do so . in particular , fpa likely will analyze only 5 years of fuel reduction treatments when modeling the effect such treatments will have on future large fire events , according to fpa program officials , although they have not yet made a final determination on the number of years to be analyzed . the officials said that it is not possible to identify fuel treatment projects more than 5 years into the future with sufficient accuracy to include in the analysis . such a limited time frame , however , substantially impairs the ability of the model to analyze long - term trade - offs between annual fuel reduction treatment costs and future expected suppression costs for large fires , a key goal of fpa . officials say that the fpa model expected to be completed in 2008 is the first step in an iterative development process and can be improved to increase its capability to analyze the trade - offs , but they could not provide a time frame for doing so . in addition , in 2006 , after 4 years of model development , the agencies initiated substantial changes to the process fpa will use to analyze needed firefighting resources and determine where best to locate these resources ; they are also still deciding how senior officials will use the model's output to allocate funds between agencies and geographic regions of the country . it is not clear at this time the extent to which fpa will meet the key goal of identifying the most cost - effective allocation of resources for a given budget level , because the agencies are still developing the fpa model and determining how it will be used .