see 34 comp . finally , a vendor's invoice billed the district for 248 laptop computers . initial documentation provided to us by cfsa showed a handwritten notation on the invoice by the head of cfsa's information technology branch acknowledged receipt of only 247 computers at a cost of $510,796 . district officials could not provide documentation to support the number of computers received . thus , we could not verify the number actually received . additional documentation provided with cfsa's comments on a draft of this report show that the agency purchased 247 computers with the federal funds for foster care improvements and 1 computer with local funds , for a total of 248 laptop computers . while we did not test the physical control environment at the district , our standards of internal control requires agencies to establish physical control to secure and safeguard vulnerable assets to establish accountability , and to properly record transactions . we did not conduct detailed tests of transactions at cog because those transactions were included in cog's financial statement audit performed by an independent public accounting firm who audits cog's financial statements annually . cog received an unqualified , “clean,” opinion for fiscal years ended june 30 , 2004 , and june 30 , 2003 . in cog's 2004 financial statements , the foster care improvements federal funding of $1.1 million was recorded in the supplementary information — project statement of revenues , expenditures , and changes in net assets — and audited as part of the financial audit . furthermore , the independent auditor did not identify any internal control weaknesses over financial reporting and operations or any instances of noncompliance for purposes of the reports on internal controls and compliance that are required by government auditing standards . cfsa , dmh , and cog have implemented the programs and initiatives specified in the appropriations act and spending plans , and some foster families have received needed services . cfsa began its early intervention program a few months later than it had planned . nonetheless , funds from this program , as well as the emergency support program funds have provided needed services to some families . cfsa also established a student loan repayment program , developed an information technology plan , and provided laptops to some caseworkers . dmh increased the mental health services available to foster care children , and cog and fapac worked together to develop a respite program . however , it is too early to assess the effectiveness of some programs , and challenges remain for others . the long - term effectiveness of the early intervention and student loan programs cannot yet be assessed and the information technology improvements have not been completed . furthermore , challenges remain that could affect the success of cfsa's emergency support fund initiative , as well as dmh's ability to build capacity to provide needed assessments and to secure long - term funding for treatment . also , the future success of cog's respite program depends on some factors beyond the organization's control . the early intervention program included two key components — the facilitated family team meeting ( fftm ) initiative and funds for various services and supports .