wastewater processes . energy is needed to convey wastewater to treatment facilities , treat the wastewater to levels required under the clean water act , and discharge the treated effluent into a receiving body of water . as urban populations increase and the demand for water grows , the energy needed for the urban water lifecycle is also expected to grow . in this context , you asked us to review the energy needs of providing drinking water and wastewater treatment services to urban users . specifically , the objectives of this review were to describe what is known about ( 1 ) the energy needed for each stage of the urban water lifecycle and ( 2 ) technologies and approaches that could lessen the energy needs of the urban water lifecycle , as well as any identified barriers that exist to their adoption . to address both of these objectives , we conducted a systematic review of studies and other documents that examine the energy required to extract , move , use , and treat water , including peer - reviewed scientific and industry periodicals , government - sponsored research , and reports from nongovernmental research organizations . we also selected a nonprobability sample of three cities to examine in greater depth and better understand regional and local differences related to urban water lifecycles: memphis , tennessee ; san diego , california ; and washington , d.c. we chose these cities as illustrative case studies based on criteria such as type of water source ; water availability ; type of wastewater system ; unique characteristics , such as potential to treat seawater to help meet drinking water demands ; and economic factors , such as energy costs . while the information derived from our analysis of these cities cannot be generalized to all u.s. cities , these examples provide valuable insights regarding the complexities of assessing the energy needs for the urban water lifecycle . for each of these case studies , we analyzed documentation from , and conducted interviews with , a wide and diverse range of specialists from organizations involved in all stages of the urban water lifecycle . these organizations included drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities , and state and local agencies responsible for water or energy . in addition to specialists associated with the illustrative case studies , we interviewed a range of other knowledgeable individuals whom we identified as having expertise related to the energy needs of all stages of the urban water lifecycle throughout the united states . we selected these specialists using an iterative process , soliciting additional names from each person we interviewed . from among those identified , we interviewed specialists who could provide us with a broad range of perspectives on the energy needs of the urban water lifecycle . we also interviewed specialists whom we identified during our systematic review of studies who have analyzed ( 1 ) the energy needed in one or more stages of the water lifecycle at the national or local level or ( 2 ) techniques available to reduce the energy demands for water .