nevertheless , fcc continued to operate the systems . the results of our review are not generalizable to the commission's other systems . we examined the information security program - related activities implemented for the three selected systems . for example , we analyzed fcc's information security policies ; procedures ; and artifacts associated with risk assessments , security plans , remedial action plans , and contingency plans . specifically , we compared the commission's security policies and procedures to national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) special publications to assess the fcc documents' consistency with federal guidelines . we also examined security - related artifacts , plans , and reports . , dropped ) from the commission's network , ( c ) observable botnet traffic was present ; and ( d ) duplicate comment submissions were accepted into ecfs . the assessment concluded that the commission did not have sufficient information and tools to determine whether there was any malicious intent . deployed additional virtual hardware following the disruption , in early may 2017 , fcc deployed additional virtual hardware to address system performance issues and support system stabilization efforts of ecfs during the period in which service was disrupted . in early july 2017 , the commission installed security sensors and forwarding agents on the ecfs virtual servers . these devices are intended to provide additional layers of security capability for the system . in mid - july 2017 , fcc automated the process for deploying virtual hardware resources to support system availability subsequent to the may 2017 service disruption . optimized and acquired system software from late may 2017 to early june 2017 , fcc acquired a diagnostic tool to measure system performance . according to the commission , this tool is used to determine the maximum amount of simultaneous user capacity within ecfs during periods of high web traffic . in early june 2017 , the commission optimized the search functionality within the ecfs database to reduce the system response time . in mid - june 2017 , fcc removed redundant internal processes for ecfs web requests to increase the responsiveness of the system . during late july 2017 , the commission acquired a security information and event management tool to collect and analyze security - related events that may indicate a cybersecurity incident . in late august 2017 , fcc established rate control limits within ecfs to safeguard against potential distributed denial - of - service attacks aiming to flood one target with network traffic . updated incident response policy and procedures in january 2018 and march 2018 , during its annual policy review , fcc information technology center officials updated the commission's incident response and reporting policy and procedures to incorporate lessons learned from the may 2017 ecfs service disruption and clarify their processes . for example , fcc information technology center officials revised the commission's incident response procedures to document internal escalation time frames for notifying management of potential security incidents and reporting the incidents to the united states computer emergency readiness team within 1 hour of identification of an incident . figure 2 shows a chronological sequence of the hardware and software improvements that fcc officials implemented after the may 2017 event .