we disagree . the mcs report ( annex a to appendix f ) made no distinction between the number of lesser contingencies and the level of effort . specifically , the vignettes for baseline security posture analysis did not report the level of effort by year and instead aggregated the data , in many instances across several modeled years . consequently , we compared the number of operations conducted in the model year . throughout our review , pa&e officials consistently told us that the completed mcs report would contain all the documentation needed to support its analyses . furthermore , although demand in the modeled year may exceed previous efforts , the mcs was chartered to assess the ability of the mobility system to support the national military strategy into the next decade . the size of the selected model year in relation to efforts conducted between 1941 and 2006 is not at issue . as our report makes clear , our concern is that modeling what appears to be the least demanding year does not address whether the united states has sufficient capability to support national objectives during a peak demand period and may underestimate and underreport demands to senior decision makers . dod disagreed with our observation that the mcs report does not provide a clear understanding of the direct relationship of warfighting objectives to transportation capabilities . we disagree . we understand that achieving a combat task requires delivering the right commodity to the right place at the right time . however , the specific combat tasks ( eg , attaining air superiority ) necessary to satisfy the commander's campaign objectives are not a direct measure of mobility capability . for example , the problems in using a single metric are reflected in the mcs appendix h , where the mcs report states that “the study itself still had difficulty in evaluating the operational impact of the delivery of theater support elements,” adding that “we were unable to develop a satisfactory mechanism to capture the linkage of the closely related , but delayed , follow - on support needed...” finally , the mcs concludes that “there was no way to model a decrease in squadron effectiveness if this support was late . additional effort is required to develop a methodology for evaluation the operational impact of support equipment availability.” we continue to believe , and dod agreed with our recommendation , that warfighting metrics , in conjunction with mobility metrics , can give decision makers a full picture of the capabilities needed to meet a specific warfighting goal . dod disagreed with our statement that the mcs was unable to model the flexible deterrent options / deployment order process and that the study in fact analyzed flexible deterrent option ( fdo ) movements to theater . we do not dispute that dod analyzed fdo movements as part of the mcs analysis . however , the degree to which the mcs analyses successfully modeled fdos is in question . the mcs report , appendix h , stated that an individual fdo is essentially the same as a deployment order . it also states in that section that “deployment orders are issued to deploy specific capabilities as commitment decisions are made .