we disagree . the responsibilities of oncrc are outlined in the homeland security act and on page 8 of this report . these include activities such as coordinating with federal , state , and regional agencies and the private sector to ensure adequate planning and execution of domestic preparedness activities among these agencies and entities , and assessing and advocating for resources that state , local , and regional authorities in the ncr need to implement efforts to secure the homeland . the responsibilities further require an annual report to congress that identifies resources required to implement homeland security efforts in ncr , assesses progress made in implementing these efforts , and makes recommendations regarding additional resources needed . ” “how do first responders know that they have met their preparedness goals ? ” ncr is an example of the difficulties of answering the second and third questions in particular . oncrc and its jurisdictions face three interrelated challenges that limit their ability to jointly manage federal funds in a way that demonstrates increased first responder capacities and preparedness while minimizing inefficiency and unnecessary duplication of expenditures . first and most fundamental are the lack of preparedness standards and a baseline assessment of existing ncr - wide first responder capacities that is linked to those standards . as in other areas of the nation generally , ncr does not have a set of accepted benchmarks ( best practices ) and performance goals that could be used to identify desired goals and determine whether first responders have the ability to respond to threats and emergencies with well - planned , well - coordinated , and effective efforts that involve police , fire , emergency medical , public health , and other personnel from multiple jurisdictions . the gilmore commission's most recent report noted that there is a continuing problem of a lack of clear guidance from the federal level about the definition and objectives of preparedness , a process to implement those objectives , and how states and localities will be evaluated in meeting those objectives . the report states the need for a coordinated system for the development , delivery , and administration of programs that engages a broad range of stakeholders . over the past few years , some state and local officials and independent research organizations have expressed an interest in some type of performance standards or goals that could be used as guidelines for measuring the quality and level of first responder preparedness , including key gaps . however , in discussing “standards” for first responders , it is useful to distinguish between three different types of measures that are often lumped together in the discussion of standards . functional standards generally set up to measure such things as functionality , quantity , weight , and extent and in the context of first responders generally apply to equipment . examples include the number of gallons of water per minute that a fire truck can deliver or the ability of a biohazard suit to filter out specific pathogens , such as anthrax . benchmarks are products , services , or work processes that are generally recognized as representing best practices for the purposes of organizational improvement .