however , the charter is silent on performance audits . board is not represented on the board of trustees because the board is a federal agency . however , as required by law , an independent qualified public accountant audits the trust's financial statements each year . it has been reported that these aspects of the trust stemmed from concerns about government involvement in investment decisions that were repeatedly raised in congress and elsewhere . it was reportedly feared , for example , that politically motivated investment decisions would lead to suboptimal investment returns and would provide political advantages to those influencing the decisions . concerns about this “political risk” were of particular concern because the partial privatization of the much larger social security trust fund was a prominent public policy issue at the time . these concerns led to a desire to eliminate even the appearance of possible political influence and significantly influenced the trust's current structure . while the trust manages the pool of assets in a manner similar to that of a private or public sector traditional db plan , it also differs significantly from such plans in certain ways . what performance audit policies and practices exist for the oversight of the national railroad retirement investment trust ( trust ) ? the board assumes various other responsibilities of a db pension plan , such as keeping track of benefit accruals and ensuring benefit payments . as a result , the trust is a relatively small organization compared to the board and pension plans of comparable size . what performance audit policies apply to comparable organizations , such as large state public pension plans ? what options , if any , could be pursued to improve trust performance audit policies and what tradeoffs do stakeholders believe such options entail ? to answer the first question , we interviewed representatives of the board , the railroad retirement board office of inspector general ( oig ) , and the trust , including officials who were intimately involved in creation of the trust . we also reviewed relevant federal law , regulations , and legislative histories , the trust's written policies and publications — including annual reports and audit reports — and related publications of other federal agencies such as the social security administration . to answer the second question , we interviewed officials of large public retirement plans in each of the 50 states , and conducted in - depth case studies of seven large state plans.officials , such as the executive director of the largest plan or investment entity , and representatives of state auditors general or comparable entity with authority to audit or otherwise review state plans . as internal audit reports are generally not publically available , we asked officials to provide us with copies of these reports particularly those that reviewed aspects of the plan related to investment strategy and management that would be most applicable to the functions of the trust . we also reviewed relevant audit reports pertaining to each plan we contacted .