( see fig . in west virginia , provider groups did not provide us with specific numbers of physician departures , but did offer anecdotal reports of physicians who have moved out of state or left practice . despite these reports , the number of physicians per capita increased slightly between 1997 and 2002 . some providers in each of the five states also reported that physicians have recently cut back on certain services they believe to be high risk to reduce their malpractice insurance premiums or exposure to litigation . evidence was based on surveys conducted by state and national medical and specialty provider groups and anecdotal reports by state provider groups , generally between 2001 and 2002 . what is known about how rising premiums and fear of litigation cause health care providers to practice defensive medicine ? how does the growth in medical malpractice insurance premiums and insurer payments for malpractice claims compare in states with varying levels of tort reform laws ? gao also recently issued a related report that more fully describes the extent of malpractice insurance premium growth and the factors that contributed to that growth . its findings are summarized on pages 9 through 11 of this report . to evaluate how actions taken by health care providers in response to malpractice premium increases have affected consumers' access to health care , we interviewed providers and their representatives , including the american medical association ( ama ) , the american health care association , the american hospital association ( aha ) , and many of their state - level counterparts . ( see app . i for the complete list of national and state associations we contacted during the course of our work. ) in the absence of reliable national sources of data concerning provider responses to rising malpractice premiums , we focused our review on nine states selected to encompass a range of malpractice premium pricing and tort reform environments . five of these states were among those cited by ama and other national health care provider organizations as malpractice “crisis” or “problem” states based on such factors as higher than average increases in malpractice insurance premium rates , physicians' reported difficulties obtaining malpractice insurance coverage , and reports of actions taken by providers in response to the malpractice - related pressures of rising premiums and litigation . the remaining four states were not cited by provider groups as experiencing malpractice - related problems . in the five states with reported problems , provider organizations reported through surveys and anecdotal reports several actions taken by physicians in response to rising malpractice premiums . although we did not attempt to confirm each report cited by state provider groups , we targeted follow - up contacts with local providers where the reports suggested potentially acute consumer access problems or where multiple reports were concentrated in a geographic area . in these five states , we contacted 49 hospitals and 61 physician practices or clinics to corroborate the reports and explore the implications for consumers' access to health care .