3 and app . iv for organizational charts ) . according to the conference report accompanying the legislation , the priorities framing the conference discussions on reorganization included elevating the mission of advancing technology and innovation within dod , and fostering distinct technology and acquisition cultures . the report further states that the conferees expect that the under secretary of defense for research and engineering would take risks , test , and experiment , and have the latitude to fail , as appropriate . additionally , the report states that the conferees expect the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment to focus on timely , cost - effective delivery and sustainment of products and services , and seek to minimize any risks to that objective . it is too early to say whether the goals of the reorganization have been realized . in july 2018 , the deputy secretary of defense issued a memorandum outlining the overall organizational structures , roles , and responsibilities of the two new under secretary offices . responsibilities of many prior subordinate offices were realigned to one of the two new under secretary offices as part of the reorganization . for example , systems engineering falls under the under secretary of defense for research and engineering and contracting policy and oversight falls under the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment . new offices or positions were also created during the reorganization . for example , the office of the under secretary of defense for research and engineering created eight assistant director positions to serve as resident experts in strategic technology areas , such as cyber , quantum science , and hypersonics . similarly , the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment created an assistant secretary of defense for sustainment . previously , sustainment activities were spread across several organizations headed by two assistant secretaries of defense . while foundational steps to stand up the two new under secretary offices have been taken , as of march 2019 , reorganization actions were ongoing in two major areas: completing chartering directives that define the scope of responsibilities for the two new offices and hiring additional people for the new offices , including for several senior leadership positions . chartering directives: officials from the office of the chief management officer originally expected charters for the two offices to be completed by january 2019 , but progress has been delayed . according to dod policy , chartering directives are required to define the scope of functional responsibilities and identify all delegated authorities for the chartered organizations . according to a july 2018 memorandum issued by the deputy secretary of defense , the chief management officer is to oversee the development of the charters . officials from the office of the chief management officer stated that they are doing so with significant input from the under secretaries of defense for research and engineering and acquisition and sustainment . these officials told us that the development of the charters has taken longer than expected because redistributing the responsibilities of a single office into two new offices was complicated due to the number of shared or partially overlapping interests .