faa has implemented most of our recommendations . the agency established a chief information officer position that reports directly to the administrator and gave this position responsibility for process improvement . the chief information officer's process improvement office developed a strategy and led the way in developing an integrated framework for improving maturity in system acquisition , development , and engineering processes . the second way , called staged representation , groups process areas together and focuses on achieving increased maturity levels by improving the group of process areas . the cmmi appraisal methodology calls for assessing process areas by determining whether the key practices are implemented and whether the overarching goals are satisfied . under continuous representation , successful implementation of these practices and satisfaction of these goals result in the achievement of successive capability levels in a selected process area . table 3 displays the cmmi process areas that we reviewed for each project . for each process area reviewed , we evaluated project - specific documentation and interviewed project officials to determine whether key practices were implemented and goals were achieved . this process allows users to objectively plan and estimate project activities and identify and resolve potential issues . as a result of these weaknesses , faa is exposed to increased risks that projects will not meet cost , schedule , or performance goals and that projects will not meet mission needs . looked at another way , of the 96 practices we evaluated in this process area , faa projects had 88 practices that were fully or largely implemented and 8 practices that were partially or not implemented . additional details on each project's appraisal results at successive capability levels are provided in tables 5 through 12 . specifically , tables 5 and 6 provide results for vscs ; tables 7 and 8 provide results for eram ; tables 9 and 10 provide results for itws ; and tables 11 and 12 provide results for asde - x . the purpose of project monitoring and control is to provide an understanding of the project's progress so that appropriate corrective actions can be taken when the project's performance deviates significantly from the plan . key activities include monitoring activities , communicating status , taking corrective action , and determining progress . as shown in figure 5 , three of the four faa projects satisfied all criteria for the “performing” capability level ( level 1 ) in this process area . the fourth project would have achieved level 1 if it had performed one more practice ( see the overview in table 13 for details ) . none of the four projects satisfied all criteria for the “managing” capability level ( level 2 ) . while the projects had differing weaknesses that contributed to this result , a common weakness across most of the projects occurred in the area of ensuring quality assurance of the process . as a result of this weakness , faa is exposed to increased risks that projects will not meet cost , schedule , or performance goals and that projects will not meet mission needs .