credit structure . after the risk assessment and due diligence is performed , the loan officer determines the financing terms and conditions to be recommended . the loan officer is generally required to structure the transaction to include a security interest ( collateral ) in the financed goods or other assets of the borrower . if it is determined that collateral is not necessary , the loan officer is to document the explanation and other mitigating factors to indicate this is acceptable to ex - im ( eg , ex - im support is small relative to borrower's size ) . for all aircraft transactions , the loan officer is required to perform an assessment and loan - to - value analysis of the collateral,requirements for the borrower to maintain the ownership and condition of collateral . and the financing terms must include credit decision . the loan officer is to document the due diligence performed , including any analyses performed by external advisors , in a credit or board memo , which also contains the loan officer's recommendation to approve or decline the transaction . these memos and applicable supporting documentation are then to be forwarded to the approving party . the credit memo applicable to working capital or medium - term transactions is to be provided to ex - im officials with individual delegated authority to approve transactions of $10 million and board memos for long - term transactions or transactions greater under.than $10 million or those within certain sensitive sectors ( eg , steel ) are to be presented to the ex - im board of directors for consideration and approval . when the underwriting and credit decision is delegated to preapproved lenders , ex - im does not perform the underwriting procedures . however , ex - im's established procedures call for delegated authority lender examinations to be performed at least annually to assess lenders' compliance with ex - im's underwriting standards . to conduct these examinations , an ex - im examiner selects a sample of the lender's outstanding ex - im guaranteed loans to analyze.assess the lender's credit underwriting practices to ensure they meet ex - im's requirements and include due diligence and financial analyses . the examiner is required to review a loan's application , authorization notice , credit memo , and loan agreement . any exceptions to ex - im standards are to be noted in the examination report . based on the seriousness of any exception ( s ) , the lender receives either a pass , pass with qualification , or fail rating . pass ratings indicate substantial compliance with only minor weaknesses ; pass with qualification indicates overall adequate compliance except within a limited area of concern ; fail indicates a lack of compliance . a pass with qualification rating requires subsequent corrective action , while a fail rating requires immediate suspension of delegated authority . in addition , while ex - im generally identified collateral associated with its transactions , it did not consistently document an assessment of collateral prior to loan guarantee approval .