i will focus on two topics . first , i will discuss the types and funding levels of global food security programs and activities of relevant u.s. government agencies . second , i will discuss progress in developing an integrated u.s. governmentwide strategy to address global food insecurity , as well as potential vulnerabilities of that strategy . to address these objectives in our report , we administered a data collection instrument to the 10 u.s. agencies that are engaged in global food security activities and participated in the food security sub - policy coordinating committee on food price increases and global food security ( food security sub - pcc ) of the nsc in 2008 . the 10 agencies are the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , department of the treasury ( treasury ) , u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , state , department of defense ( dod ) , u.s. trade and development agency ( ustda ) , peace corps , office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , and office of management and budget ( omb ) . in addition , we conducted fieldwork in bangladesh , ethiopia , ghana , haiti , and malawi on the basis of multiple ongoing programs addressing food insecurity , the proportion of the chronically hungry in these countries , and geographic coverage of u.s. efforts in africa , the western hemisphere , and asia . in these countries , we met with u.s. mission staff and host government , donor , and nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) representatives . we also visited numerous project sites funded by the u.s. government and other donors . in addition , we attended the 2009 world food summit as an observer and met with rome - based united nations ( un ) food and agriculture agencies — namely fao , the world food program ( wfp ) , and the international fund for agricultural development ( ifad ) — as well as the u.s. mission to the united nations and representatives of other donor countries . we conducted this performance audit from february 2009 to march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . while the u.s. government supports a wide variety of programs and activities for global food security , it lacks comprehensive data on funding . we found that it is difficult to readily determine the full extent of such programs and activities and to estimate precisely the total amount of funding that the u.s. government as a whole allocates to global food security . in response to our data collection instrument to the 10 agencies , 7 agencies reported providing monetary assistance for global food security programs and activities in fiscal year 2008 , based on the working definition we developed for this purpose with agency input .