gao - 12-12 . washington , d.c.: october 14 , 2011 . va education benefits: actions taken , but outreach and oversight could be improved . gao - 11-256 . ( see figure 2. ) some subgrantees received more than one type of grant depending on the nature of the adaptive sports programming they planned to offer . subgrantee reported using olympic opportunity funds to provide cycling and sled hockey activities , such as weekly hand cycling clinics and training sessions on adaptive equipment . another subgrantee reported using olympic opportunity funds to hold a weekly power - lifting group , an indoor kayaking clinic , and a judo clinic . the remaining 22 subgrants generally were larger , ranging from $15,000 to $500,000 , and were provided to athlete development organizations and national and model community partners . these organizations provided a wider range of activity types through national networks , local chapters , or community organizations in various geographic regions . for example , one athlete development subgrantee reported holding an outreach clinic at a nearby va hospital where they educated staff and potential participants about adaptive sports options and hosted a ski camp which included a sit - ski clinic , a race , and strength and conditioning training for a cross - country skiing marathon . in addition , a national partner subgrantee reported using its funds to train and educate staff and program leaders on adaptive and paralympic sports , and to conduct outreach and recruitment campaigns . this organization also awarded and administered subgrants to some of its local chapters to hold archery , cycling , fencing , wheelchair basketball , and swimming activities , among others . all subgrantees' grant agreements required them to report how va funds were used to cover program expenses . as part of their agreements , subgrantees provided a projected budget detailing plans to spend program funds in six categories: personnel , operations , equipment , supplies , travel , and administrative costs ( see appendix ii for usoc's cost definitions for subgrantees' use of funds ) . although subgrantees could not spend more than 10 percent of the total amount granted on administrative costs , no other category had spending limits . of the approximately $4.4 million usoc awarded for fiscal year 2011 , subgrantees projected using over half , or about $2.6 million , on operations and personnel costs . subgrantees projected that these costs would remain about the same for fiscal year 2012 . ( see figure 3. ) inconsistent with federal internal control standards , we found that during the first program year , usoc did not have reporting requirements or electronic reporting systems in place for subgrantees to provide information on how va funds were used separate from other sources . as a result , there was a lack of reliable information on actual expenditures . our review of a sample of subgrantees' files raised concerns with how subgrantees reported their actual expenditures . in 7 of the 21 subgrantees' files we reviewed , it was difficult to determine how the subgrantees spent their grant funding , and 4 out of these 7 files reported spending more than they were actually granted by va to provide adaptive sports activities .