rulemaking . while faa has efforts under way supporting a rulemaking for small uas , as required by the 2012 act , it is uncertain whether faa will meet the august 2014 deadline . in fact , the agency's rulemaking efforts for uas date back more than 5 years , when it established the small uas aviation rulemaking committee in 2008 . in august 2011 , faa initially provided the secretary of transportation with its draft notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) . faa officials told us in january 2013 that the faa is still internally reviewing the draft and working to agree on the nprm's language . according to the officials , faa has not determined when it might issue the nprm . as we reported in 2012 , many entities have research and development efforts under way to mitigate obstacles before uas are allowed to operate safely and routinely in the national airspace . some of these obstacles and related research include vulnerabilities in uas operations , such as sense and avoid ; command , control , and communications , including lost link , dedicated radio - frequency spectrum , and global positioning system ( gps ) jamming and spoofing ; and human factors . however , these research and development efforts cannot be completed and validated without safety , reliability , and performance standards , which have not yet been developed because of data limitations . to date , no suitable technology has been deployed that would provide uas with the capability to sense and avoid other aircraft and airborne objects and to comply completely with faa regulatory requirements of the national airspace . however , research and development efforts by faa , dod , nasa , and mitre , among others , suggests that potential solutions to the sense and avoid obstacle may be available in the near term . since 2008 , faa and other federal agencies have managed several research activities to support meeting the sense and avoid requirements . dod officials told us that the department of the army is working on a ground - based sense and avoid system that will detect other airborne objects and allow the pilot to direct the uas to maneuver to a safe location . the army has successfully tested one such system , but it may not be useable on all types of uas . another potential system to address this obstacle is an airborne sense and avoid system , which could equip uas with the same gps - based transponder system that will be used in faa's nextgen air - traffic - management system and with which some manned aircraft are starting to be equipped . in 2012 , nasa researchers at dryden flight research center successfully tested an automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) transponder system on its ikhana uas . an airborne sense and avoid system could include ads - b , along with other sensors such as optical / infrared cameras and radar . ensuring uninterrupted command and control for both small and large uas remains a key obstacle for safe and routine integration into the national airspace .