gao - 05-760t . i f washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2005 . flu vaccine: recent supply shortages underscore ongoing challenges . gao - 05-177t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2004 . communicating information from a primary source . having a primary and timely source of information will be important in a pandemic . in the 2004 – 05 influenza season , individuals seeking vaccine could have found themselves in a communication loop that provided no answers . for example , cdc advised people seeking influenza vaccine to contact their local public health department ; in some cases however , individuals calling the local public health department would be told to call their primary care provider , and when they called their primary care provider , they would be told to call their local public health department . this lack of a reliable source of information led to confusion and possibly to high - risk individuals' giving up and not receiving the protection of an annual influenza vaccination . recognizing that different communication mechanisms are important and require resources . another challenge in communicating plans in the event of a pandemic will be to ensure that the communication mechanisms used reach all affected populations . during the 2004 – 05 influenza season , public health officials reported the importance of different methods of communication . for example , officials from the seattle – king county public health department in washington state reported that it was important to have a hotline as well as information posted on a web site , because some seniors calling seattle – king county's hotline reported that they did not have access to the internet . according to state and local health officials , however , maintaining these communication mechanisms took time and strained personnel resources . in minnesota , for example , to supplement state employees , the state health department asked public health nursing students to volunteer to staff the state's influenza vaccine hotline . educating health care providers and the public about all available vaccines . for the 2004 – 05 season , approximately 3 million doses of nasal spray vaccine were ultimately available for vaccinating healthy individuals aged 5 – 49 years who were not pregnant , including some individuals ( such as health care workers in this age group and household contacts of children younger than 6 months ) in the priority groups defined by cdc and acip , yet some of these individuals were reluctant to use this vaccine because they feared that the live virus in the nasal spray could be transmitted to others . state health officials in maine , for example , reported that the state purchased about 1,500 doses of the nasal spray vaccine for their emergency medical service personnel and health care workers , yet administered only 500 doses . challenges in ensuring an adequate and timely supply of influenza vaccine and antiviral drugs — which can help prevent or mitigate the number of influenza - related deaths until an pandemic influenza vaccine becomes available — may be exacerbated during an influenza pandemic .