schedule . in addition to the individual named above , other key contributors to this report were dan haas , assistant director ; david marroni ; andrew moore ; and jacqueline wade . important contributions were also made by cheryl arvidson , brian bothwell , nikki clowers , elizabeth curda , r. scott fletcher , cindy gilbert , jason lee , karen richey , and barbara timmerman . analysis . actual progress and logic . rec . h 878 ( daily ed. , jan.15 , 2014 ) , to the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2014 , contained in division d of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , pub . 112-331 , at 855 ( dec.15 , 2011 ) ( conf . the fiscal year 2014 explanatory statement further directed that the strategic plan doe submitted should assume u.s. participation in iter and assess its priorities for the domestic fusion program based on three funding scenarios . fusion program using the advisory committee process and with broad u.s. fusion community input . further , 9 of the 10 fusion energy and project management experts we interviewed agreed that it would be useful for doe to develop such a plan . doe officials told us they have not completed a strategic plan for the u.s. fusion program to date , for three reasons . first , they said an effort in 2012 to obtain the fusion energy sciences advisory committee's input on u.s. fusion program priorities had been unsuccessful because the committee did not address program priorities under a constrained budget scenario due to conflict of interest issues . second , doe officials said there had been too much budget uncertainty in fiscal year 2013 regarding the u.s. iter project and the overall u.s. fusion program to complete a plan . they explained that the house and senate appropriations committees proposed different direction and funding levels for the u.s. fusion program in fiscal year 2013 , and these differences were not resolved until the passage of the fiscal year 2014 appropriations act in january 2014 . third , doe officials said an effort in 2012 and 2013 to develop a high - level strategic document for the u.s. fusion program was unsuccessful because omb did not concur with the document developed by doe . doe officials said they are in the early stages of developing a strategic plan in response to the house and senate appropriations committees' direction in the explanatory statement that accompanied the fiscal year 2014 appropriations act . these officials said they would ask the fusion energy sciences advisory committee in april 2014 to provide input on u.s. fusion program priorities by october 2014 . according to the officials , doe will consider the committee's input in developing a strategic plan for the u.s. fusion program , and it hopes to finalize a plan no later than the january 2015 deadline set by the house and senate appropriations committees . however , doe officials could not provide a specific date when they expect to complete the strategic plan .