these contracts will expire in 2007 . we have periodically reviewed the development and implementation of the fts2001 program and assessed its progress . in march 2001 we reported to you on the delays encountered during the government's efforts to transition from the previous fts2000 to the fts2001 contracts , the reasons for those delays , and the effects of the delays on meeting fts2001 program goals of maximizing competition for services and ensuring best service and price . we recommended that gsa take numerous actions to facilitate those transition efforts . in april 2001 testimony before you , we reiterated those recommendations and noted that the process of planning and managing future telecommunications service acquisition would benefit from an accurate and robust inventory of existing telecommunications services . ultimately , gsa acted on our recommendations and the transitions were successfully completed . gsa is now planning its networx acquisition to replace the contracts that are expiring . gsa has worked with representatives of federal agencies , the telecommunications industry , and other interested parties to lay the groundwork for the new program . agencies work directly with gsa and through the interagency management council ( imc ) , a group of senior federal information resource officials who advise gsa on issues related to telecommunications contracts . gsa and the imc proposed eight goals for the networx program , including an emphasis on ongoing support and performance - based contracts . the table lists each of the program goals . program goals proposed for networx service continuity: contracts should include all services currently available under fts2001 to facilitate a smooth transition . competitive prices: prices should be better than those available elsewhere in the telecommunications marketplace . high quality services: contracts should ensure a high quality of service throughout the life of the contracts . it is scheduled to expire in november of this year . satellite services are provided through a series of contracts for a variety of commercial off - the - shelf satellite communications products and services , including mobile , fixed , and broadcast services . full service vendors: vendors should be capable of providing a broad array of services to avoid duplication of administrative and contracting costs . alternate sources: agencies should be able to choose from a greater number of vendors and have access to emerging technologies . operations support: gsa should provide fully integrated ordering , billing , and inventory management . transition assistance and support: contracts should include provisions for transition support . performance - based contracts: contracts should be performance based and include service level agreements where possible . in october 2003 , gsa released a rfi describing its initial strategy for the networx program . in the rfi , gsa proposed two acquisitions — networx universal and networx select . the universal acquisition was expected to satisfy requirements for a full range of national and international network services . according to gsa , this acquisition was intended to ensure the continuity of services and prices found under expiring contracts that provide broad - ranging service with global geographic coverage . universal offerors were to provide a full range of voice and data network services , managed networking services and solutions , and network access , wireless , and satellite communications services .