program year . job corps operates on a program year basis , which begins on july 1 of the fiscal year for which the appropriation is made , and ends on june 30 of the following year . according to eta officials , operating on a program year gives job corps the flexibility to respond to budget uncertainty . for example , if congress passes a continuing resolution , job corps would be minimally affected , if at all , because its program year funding would cover its ongoing operations until june 30 . however , eta officials noted that if a continuing resolution lasts beyond june 30 , it would likely affect job corps' operations . in response to these findings , dol's inspector general recommended that eta improve job corps' internal controls in four areas: ( 1 ) policies , procedures , and communication of information ; ( 2 ) budget execution ; ( 3 ) data supporting spending projections and monitoring ; and ( 4 ) monitoring of projected and actual costs . eta officials told us that they have addressed all of the recommendations ; however , as of january 2015 , dol's inspector general had not closed most of them because it had not received sufficient documentation of eta's actions . eta officials said that they plan to provide the additional documentation to the dol inspector general , and are aiming to have all the recommendations closed in 2015 . eta addressed job corps' financial challenges in program years 2011 and 2012 through a combination of funding transfers and spending cuts . in program year 2011 , eta primarily used transferred funds to resolve job corps' projected funding gap , whereas in program year 2012 , eta relied more heavily on spending cuts . over both program years , eta used $38.4 million in funding transfers and implemented $75.3 million in spending cuts ( see table 2 ) . most of these spending cuts — $60.3 million — were made through modifications to individual job corps center contracts and reductions to the usda forest service budget for operating its job corps centers ; the remaining cuts were implemented by the office of job corps across all centers and at the national level . over both program years , eta's spending cuts included: three temporary enrollment suspensions . eta suspended enrollment of new students in june 2012 , from late november to december 2012 , and from late january to late april 2013 . temporary cuts to training . job corps ended program year 2013 with $11 million in obligated but unexpended funds , which eta officials described as a typical amount of “carry - over funds.” in a february 2014 response to a congressional inquiry and in its fiscal year 2015 congressional budget justification , eta stated that the $40 million in obligated but unexpended program year 2012 operations funds were to be “offset” from the contractors' remaining program year 2013 allocations . however , in program year 2012 , eta officials said they used transferred funds to a lesser extent because they believed that making permanent spending cuts would better position the program to absorb reductions under sequestration in the following program year .