washington . d.c.: may 23 , 2013 . defense acquisitions: further actions needed to improve accountability for dod's inventory of contracted services . gao - 12-357 . washington , d.c.: april 6 , 2012 . human capital: dod should fully develop its civilian strategic workforce plan to aid decision makers . gao - 14-565 . no date was provided for when these tools will be available . dod has not issued an updated acquisition workforce strategy to help guide future hiring decisions . according to human capital initiatives officials , budget uncertainties have been the primary reason for the delay . the director of human capital initiatives noted that senior dod and military department leadership regularly discuss the state of the acquisition workforce and its capacity to address emerging needs and challenges . the director also noted that similar discussions occur at various levels within dod components . as a result , the director stated that while the size and composition of the workforce differs from what was called for in dod's 2010 acquisition workforce plan , dod's current and projected workforce largely reflect the decisions made during these discussions . however , according to acquisition officials we met with , dod components and sub - components make thousands of individual hiring decisions , based not only on the need to obtain critical skills , but to also sustain growth already achieved in a career field , address emerging issues , and meet other priorities . human capital initiatives officials said that they are working to issue an updated acquisition workforce plan in 2016 . section 115b requires that dod issue a biennial acquisition workforce strategy that , among other things , assesses the appropriate mix of military , civilian , and contractor personnel capabilities and includes a plan of action to meet department goals . further , as we have previously reported , issuing a workforce strategy and an associated plan of action is crucial for dod to effectively and efficiently manage its civilian workforce during times of budgetary and fiscal constraint . for example , continuing cuts to operation and maintenance budget accounts and efforts to reduce headquarters spending by 20 percent over the next few years could result in additional reductions to acquisition workforce positions in some career fields . in addition , section 955 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 requires dod to plan to achieve civilian and service contractor workforce savings that are not less than the savings in funding for military personnel achieved from reductions in military strength , which could also affect the size of the acquisition workforce . dod may also be faced with another round of sequestration cuts , which could result in hiring freezes or workforce reductions . without issuing an updated workforce strategy , as statutorily required , dod may not be positioned to meet future acquisition needs . aligning the use of the defense acquisition workforce development fund to high priority workforce needs is also crucial . in the past , some hiring decisions made by dod components using the defense acquisition workforce development fund exceeded initial 2010 career field targets .