reviewed by gao . in addition to the person named above , key contributors to this report were anne montgomery , carmen rivera - lowitt , george bogart , and elizabeth t. morrison . ii. ) most but not all of these lawsuits were intended to be class actions against large public institutions for persons with mental retardation and other developmental disabilities . moreover , p&as reported that , relative to other activities , they spent a small proportion of staff time on filing class action lawsuits on behalf of individuals with developmental disabilities . nationally , p&as reported spending about 2 percent of their staff time for this purpose in 2001 . from 1975 through 2002 , p&as in the three states we reviewed filed or intervened in six lawsuits related to deinstitutionalization on behalf of individuals with developmental disabilities . ( see table 1. ) of the six lawsuits , four were brought in federal court and two were brought in state court . three of these suits were settled as class action lawsuits . the other three suits were intended as class actions but not certified as such by their respective courts . of these three , one in maryland was dismissed by mutual agreement of the parties , one in california was settled by a multiparty agreement , and another in california is pending . although most of the suits were settled a number of years ago , the impact of the suits can be ongoing . for example , the nelson v. snider suit in pennsylvania was settled in 1994 but was part of the impetus for closing the embreeville center in 1998 . complaints brought in these lawsuits included allegations of inappropriate care and treatment in state institutions , including abuse and neglect , and violations of constitutional due process rights as well as rights under the rehabilitation act of 1973 and the americans with disabilities act . the three class action suits resulted in court - ordered settlements requiring state officials to take a variety of actions , including placing of individuals with developmental disabilities in community settings , downsizing or closing of state institutions , and establishing and overseeing of certain quality assurance standards . p&as in california , maryland , and pennsylvania used litigation infrequently to address client problems according to available data from fiscal years 1999 to 2001 . in their annual reports to add , p&as in these states reported using litigation to address 272 client problems over the 3- year period , or about 1.5 percent of all problems addressed . ( see table 2. ) this included litigation on behalf of named plaintiffs in deinstitutionalization litigation , such as class action lawsuits , and other litigation , such as litigation filed on behalf of individuals . by contrast , p&as reported using other services to address 17,947 client problems , more than 98 percent of all problems addressed . these services include contacting state officials for individuals in need of services such as health care , negotiation and mediation help , technical assistance in self - advocacy , and representation at administrative hearings . p&as in the three states communicated with parents and guardians as required by federal rules in the lawsuits we reviewed .