visibility . this process enables officials at marine corps programs and resources and headquarters marine corps to have direct control over and closely monitor the major subordinate commands' civilian personnel budget execution . however , weaknesses exist with the marine corps' manage to payroll approach to managing its civilian personnel budget execution . our analysis of the department of the navy's annual budget request , which includes marine corps civilian personnel fte data , found that the number of civilian ftes the marine corps reported does not match the number of civilian ftes it requested . this discrepancy between the number of ftes requested and the number of ftes reported is a result of the marine corps managing civilian personnel to dollar amounts and not to ftes . specifically , funding provided by congress annually for the marine corps to manage its civilian personnel is based on the number of ftes the marine corps requested for a particular fiscal year . however , during the budget execution process , headquarters marine corps distributes funding to the major subordinate commands by dollar amount and not by ftes requested . the president's budget request , which is the sole single document with budget information for the entire government , contains ( 1 ) a record of actual receipts and spending levels for the fiscal year just completed , ( 2 ) a record of current - year estimated receipts and spending , and ( 3 ) estimated receipts and spending for the upcoming fiscal year and 9 years beyond , as proposed by the president . additionally , omb circular a - 11 requires that current year fte estimates should be consistent with previous year actuals , should be fully funded , and should be very close to the actual usage reported at the end of the fiscal year . for example , the estimates in the previous year's budget should be very close to the actuals published in the current budget . table 1 shows the difference between the marine corps ftes estimates in its annual civilian personnel budget request and its reported usage of actual ftes for the previous year's budget execution contained in the budget requests from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . when asked about the difference between estimates and reported usage of actual ftes , a headquarters marine corps official stated that they were generally unaware of the importance of the budget data in measuring the degree to which an agency was exceeding or not reaching its requested ftes . however , the official also acknowledged that a possible consequence of not managing to estimated ftes could be a reduction in future funding for civilian personnel because budget data provided to congress for civilian personnel is based on fte workload and not the amount of dollars spent on civilian personnel . therefore , a result of the marine corps managing to dollar amounts and not to ftes may result in congressional decision - making based on incorrect data , which may result in the major subordinate commands having to eliminate civilian positions . department of the navy officials confirmed this and told us that the marine corps' use of manage to payroll puts department of the navy resources at risk of reduction .