ssa outreach . as previously mentioned , ssa completed an outreach campaign in 2009 and has sent letters with information about msps to millions of potentially eligible individuals . our prior work indicates that letters sent by ssa to potentially eligible individuals in 2002 resulted in more beneficiaries enrolling in msps than would have likely enrolled without receiving an ssa letter . other mippa provisions . the mippa provision that more closely aligned asset limits for msps with the limits for lis expanded the number of beneficiaries eligible for msps in 2010 . specifically , the requirement effectively expanded eligibility in 41 states by increasing the asset limits . in addition , mippa - funded outreach conducted by states and other organizations that began in 2009 may have increased the likelihood that applications resulted in enrollment . according to data from the national council on aging ( ncoa ) , the national resource center funded to track the outreach , grantees assisted about 200,000 individuals from january 2010 through december 2011 in submitting a complete msp application . ncoa reported that grantees in most states are able to access the applications transferred by ssa to identify those beneficiaries who potentially need assistance completing the msp application . economic downturn . it is unclear how the economy affects the population potentially eligible for msps . in 2011 , we reported that during the economic downturn , from 2007 through 2010 , unemployment among those aged 65 and older doubled and food insecurity increased . in addition , awards of ssa disability benefits to those ages 50 to 64 increased . however , our past work also found that the percentage of adults 65 and older with incomes below 200 percent of the federal poverty level did not increase . officials from four of the six states we contacted to supplement our survey reported making changes to medicaid eligibility systems , specifically , changes to both information systems and business processes , to receive and act upon the applications transferred by ssa . for example , officials from arizona reported modifying the state's information system to accept the data and automatically create records for the individuals in the eligibility system and generate notification letters asking the applicants for additional information in order to complete the application . officials also said that the state established new business rules for processing applications received through the transfers . officials from colorado , one of the two states that did not report making changes , told us that the state plans to make changes to its system pending the availability of funding to implement the changes . because the state did not have the funds to make the necessary system changes , officials said that they had to develop an interim process , under which transferred applicants receive an assessment of msp eligibility only if the applicant completes the state's request for additional information . officials from the final state , pennsylvania , told us that the state did not make changes to its information system as a result of the application transfers but did establish business processes for sorting the applications and forwarding them to county assistance offices for processing .