pub . 113-28 , § 4 , 127 stat . we focus on direct loans in this report because they represent the large majority of federal student loans currently issued by education . calculate certain administrative costs for all loan programs , and do not track direct loan costs separately because doing so has not been necessary for management purposes . as direct loan administrative appropriations make up the large majority of funds appropriated to education's administrative account , we determined that these data were sufficient to illustrate direct loan administrative cost trends . for our second research question , we analyzed data from education subsidy cost estimates and reestimates for the 2007-2012 direct loan cohorts , in order to understand trends in cost estimates . for our third research question , we worked with education officials to alter key variables in the agency's subsidy cost estimate to illustrate how changes in certain variables , such as risk of default , could affect the overall cost of the direct loan program . we used reported data from fiscal years 2007 through 2012 to illustrate a range of possible government costs . see appendix i for more detail on these analyses . throughout the report , cost figures are reported in nominal dollars . in addition to our various analyses , we interviewed officials at education and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) regarding key issues related to direct loan administrative and subsidy costs . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and guidance , as well as past gao reports for the purposes of all of our research questions . we conducted this performance audit from august 2013 to january 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under the direct loan program , education issues three main types of loans — subsidized stafford , unsubsidized stafford , and plus loans . subsidized stafford loans are available only to undergraduate student borrowers with demonstrated financial need . the government subsidizes these loans by not charging borrowers for the interest that accrues while they are still in school and during a 6-month grace period after leaving school . unsubsidized stafford loans are available to both undergraduate and graduate student borrowers , irrespective of financial need . borrowers are responsible for paying all interest from disbursement to final payoff of the loan . finally , plus loans are available to graduate students and parents of dependent undergraduates , who must pay all interest on these loans as well . borrower rate: the interest rate charged to federal student loan recipients . rates and caps vary by loan type and borrower characteristics , as seen in table 1 below . undergraduate student borrowers pay the lowest interest rate , with graduate student and parent borrowers paying somewhat higher rates . there are a variety of repayment plan options available to eligible student loan borrowers .