reg . 6370 ( feb. 21 , 1986 ) ) , the president directed the establishment of a common system for debarment and suspension for assistance programs . common rules are largely identical regulations that are binding on their grantees . there were several grant - related laws enacted during the 1980s that focused on promoting accountability and transparency , and preventing abuse , within federal assistance programs . the single audit act , as amended , provides uniform requirements for annual audits of nonfederal entities that expend more than $500,000 in federal awards annually . prior to this act's enactment , there were no uniform audit requirements for state and local government grantees , and these grantees were often subject to overlapping and conflicting audit requirements associated with each of the assistance programs in which they participated . congress enacted other federal statutory provisions applicable to all recipients of federal funds , including the prohibition against lobbying with grant funds under the “byrd amendment” and the requirement to maintain a drug - free workplace as a precondition of receiving grant funding . subsequent to the enactment of each of these acts , omb issued guidance for agencies to implement the requirements of the acts . one of the key efforts to make government operations more efficient and effective and to prevent waste , fraud , abuse , and financial mismanagement came with the passage of the chief financial officers the act builds off other legislative initiatives , such as the act of 1990 . single audit act , to improve financial management practices in the federal government . the chief financial officers act created within omb the office of federal financial management with specific statutory responsibility for financial management policy , including grants management , for the federal government.the lead role in financial management , no entity had been statutorily vested with the responsibility to coordinate financial management practices in the federal government . while omb had long taken along with the executive branch's efforts to streamline and simplify grants management in the 1980s and 1990s , congress enacted the federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 , commonly known as “public law 106-107,” which required each federal grant - making agency to develop and implement a plan that simplifies the application , administration , and reporting procedures for financial assistance programs . coming up with a common application and reporting system . following public law 106-107 and the president's announcement of the e - government initiative in his 2002 fiscal year management agenda , omb established grants.gov as a central storehouse for information on thousands of grant . to further improve transparency and provide the public with information on federal spending , congress enacted the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 . the act directed omb to ensure the existence and operation of a single searchable website to be used by the public that shows the name of the entity receiving a federal award , the amount of the award , information on the award , and other information.2007 to fulfill the act's requirements . pub . 106-107 , 113 stat . omb consolidated its grants - related circulars as well as the agency common rules into title 2 of the code of federal regulations .