approve . if a uscis adjudicator determines that the evidence submitted by the self - petitioner satisfies the eligibility requirements noted above , the self - petition is approved . once uscis approves a self - petition , dhs will generally defer any removal action against the individual , as he or she goes through the process of applying for lpr status . according to uscis data , of the 82,357 self - petitions adjudicated from fiscal year 2009 through fiscal year 2018 , 72 percent were approved . self - petitioners who obtain lpr status are not eligible for u.s. citizenship until they have been an lpr in the united states for at least 3 years . deny . an adjudicator may deny a self - petition if the petitioner has not demonstrated that he or she is more likely than not eligible for petition approval , considering all credible evidence provided by the self - petitioner . in some circumstances , an adjudicator will issue a request for evidence to the petitioner to provide an opportunity for the petitioner to send additional information or documents . in response to this request , the petitioner has an opportunity to provide additional evidence ; if that evidence does not sufficiently demonstrate that the petitioner meets the eligibility requirements , or additional evidence is not provided , uscis may deny the self - petition . in other circumstances , an adjudicator will issue a notice of intent to deny to the self - petitioner in cases where it does not appear likely that the self - petitioner could overcome the deficiencies . this provides the self - petitioner an opportunity to respond . if the self - petitioner's response does not sufficiently demonstrate that the petitioner meets the eligibility requirements or a response is not provided , the self - petition is subsequently denied . an adjudicator may also deny a self - petition if the petitioner abandons his or her self - petition or withdraws the self - petition by providing notice to uscis in writing . according to uscis data , among self - petitions adjudicated from fiscal year 2009 through fiscal year 2018 , about 28 percent were denied . of that , about 3 percent were withdrawn , revoked , or closed administratively . if a self - petition is denied and the self - petitioner has other valid immigration status , he or she may remain in the united states . otherwise , the self - petitioner may be placed in removal proceedings . adjudication withheld . an adjudicator may also withhold adjudication of a visa petition or other application if there is an ongoing investigation involving eligibility , in connection with a benefit request , and disclosure of information to the applicant or petitioner concerning the adjudication would prejudice the investigation . if adjudication is withheld from a self - petition , uscis takes no further adjudicative action at that time , pending completion of the related investigation . refer a petition for an administrative investigation . in addition to approving or denying a self - petition , an adjudicator may refer a self - petition to cfdo for an administrative investigation in cases when an adjudicator suspects fraudulent activity within the self - petition .