thank you for your help . in this section we refer to remote control and switch technologies . please use the following descriptions as a guide when thinking about these specific technologies . skip to part 2 ( question #10 ) skip to part 2 ( question #10 ) continue to question #2 continue to question #2 continue to question #2 2 . how much potential , if any , does further development and implementation of the following remote control and switch technologies have for improving rail safety ? considering the potential for additional safety benefits and likely research and development ( r&d ) costs — regardless of funding source — do you believe further r&d of the following remote control and switch technologies would be worth the investment ? considering the potential for additional safety benefits and likely implementation costs — regardless of funding source — do you believe the procurement , operation , and maintenance of the following remote control and switch technologies would be worth the investment ? at what product development stage are the following remote control and switch technologies in the united states ? how much of a challenge , if any , do the following issues present for the implementation of remote - control locomotives ? how much of a challenge , if any , do the following issues present for the implementation of remote - control switches ? how much of a challenge , if any , do the following issues present for the implementation of switch position monitors / indicators ? what other challenges , if any , that are not listed above impede the implementation of remote control and switch technologies in the united states ? in this section we refer to rolling stock and condition monitoring technologies . please use the following descriptions as a guide when thinking about these specific technologies . systems installed on rail cars that continuously monitor mechanical components including bearing temperature , bearing and wheel defects , and longitudinal impacts condition monitoring systems installed along tracks that can identify defects in various rolling stock components as trains drive by . for example , acoustic bearing detectors , wheel impact load detectors , truck performance detectors , cracked wheel detectors , wheel profile measurement . how would you rate your overall level of knowledge of increasing railroad safety through the development and use of the following rolling stock and condition monitoring technologies ? skip to part 3 ( question #21 ) skip to part 3 ( question #21 ) continue to question #11 continue to question #11 continue to question #11 11 . how much potential , if any , does further development and implementation of the following rolling stock and condition monitoring technologies have for improving rail safety ? rolling stock and condition monitoring technology b . considering the potential for additional safety benefits and likely research and development ( r&d ) costs — regardless of funding source — do you believe further r&d of the following rolling stock and condition monitoring technologies would be worth the investment ? rolling stock and condition monitoring technology b .