otherwise , we considered the controls partially effective . these 19 orders totaled over $7,200 . officials agreed that this set of transactions was a split purchase because the buyer knew all the requirements and probably knew the total was above the threshold and still placed the orders at one time . another type of improper purchase occurs when cardholders do not buy from mandatory sources of supply . various laws and regulations require the purchase of certain products from designated sources such as the javits - wagner - o'day act ( jwod ) vendors . the program created by this act is a mandatory source of supply for all federal entities . the jwod program generates jobs and training for americans who are blind or have severe disabilities by requiring federal agencies to purchase supplies and services furnished by nonprofit agencies , such as the national industries for the blind and the national institute for the severely handicapped . at portsmouth and wilford hall , items such as day planner refills , other miscellaneous office supplies , and plastic utensils were bought from a commercial source when they , or substantially similar products , could have been bought from jwod vendors . further , portsmouth and wilford hall did not have documentation to show that the cardholders had checked item availability from these vendors before purchasing them elsewhere . each location had examples of either abusive or questionable purchase card transactions . abusive transactions are those that were authorized , but the items purchased were at an excessive cost or for a questionable government need or both . abuse can also be viewed as when the conduct of a government organization , program , activity , or function falls short of societal expectations of prudent behavior . one example of an abusive transaction was the purchase of a $650 sony digital camera at wilford hall that was justified as needed to “take photos for christmas party and other events put on for squadron morale boosters,” while the digital camera bought by the pass office to update its badge security system only cost $350 . the purchase of the more expensive model for the reasons given was excessive , and a more modest camera could have been bought . questionable transactions are those that appear to be improper or abusive but for which there is insufficient documentation to conclude either . many of the transactions we selected in the data mining were without supporting documentation , which makes a firm determination of their legitimacy impossible without a thorough investigation . also , we have found that the lack of documentation can be an indicator of fraud , as in the $30,000 eisenhower fraud case . questionable purchases often do not easily fit within generic governmentwide guidelines on purchases that are acceptable for the purchase card program . because they tend to raise questions about their reasonableness and subject the activity to criticism , they require a higher level of prepurchase review and documentation than other purchases . an example of a questionable transaction involved the purchase of food by a psychiatric clinic at portsmouth .