this issue was not noted in the independent review . the economic analyses for privatization of the electric distribution system at fort leavenworth and the water and wastewater systems at three army installations in the tidewater virginia area incorrectly included financing costs under the government option . although this favored the privatization option , the amount was not enough to change the outcome of the analyses . this issue was not identified in the independent review . the economic analyses for the water and wastewater privatization projects at andrews air force base were based on the systems' inventory ( i.e. , the wells , pumps , water treatment equipment , valves , fire hydrants , water distribution mains , meters , storage tanks , reservoirs , and other components that constitute the systems ) and condition 2 years prior to contract award . the air force stated that adjustments to the contract could be made after contract award , if needed , to reflect changes in the inventory . however , because the analyses were not updated to reflect inventory changes before contract award , the reliability of the analyses is less certain . this issue was not identified in the independent review . however , army officials told us that they would ensure that this did not occur in future analyses . second , although dod noted in its march 2006 report to congress the importance of postconveyance reviews as an additional measure to help ensure reliable economic analyses , dod has not issued guidance that requires the services to perform the reviews . service officials stated that they had performed only a limited number of postconveyance reviews and do not have plans to perform the reviews in the manner or frequency described in dod's report to congress . also , dod's report cited seven army audit agency postconveyance reviews , four additional army postconveyance reviews , and one air force postconveyance review . however , only three of the army audit agency reviews included a comparison of actual contract costs with estimates from the economic analyses . although dod has taken steps to help ensure that the services adequately consider the increased costs from utility privatization projects during budget preparation , questions remain over the availability of the additional funds needed to complete the program . the services estimate that they potentially will need $453 million more than is currently programmed for continuing government utility operations to pay implementation and contract costs associated with the remaining number of utility systems that might be privatized through 2010 for the air force , the navy , and marine corps , and through 2011 for the army . dod's november 2005 supplemental program guidance directed the services to continue to prepare economic analyses based on the “should costs,” which is defined as an independent government estimate of the costs required to bring the system up to and maintain it at current industry standards . further , dod's march 2006 report to congress stated that the “should cost” estimate is the government's best tool for predicting the future requirement for individual systems and is the most realistic methodology . this , in turn , could negatively affect those other functions , such as the maintenance of installation facilities .