an applicant . these checks are not necessarily a purely automated function , and staff may need time to review images that are potential matches to determine if they really are of the same individual . while states' facial recognition programs are focused on detecting in - state license fraud , states also have some procedures in place that may detect cross - state fraud . as of march 2012 , 23 states and the district of columbia were participating in a photo - sharing program facilitated by aamva that is designed to help detect fraud across state lines . this program allows a participating state to obtain the facial image associated with a surrendered license from the issuing state if that state also participates in the program . through this process , a fraudulent license could be detected if a state query yields either no photo or a photo that does not match the applicant . in addition , state licensing agencies may detect cross - state fraud through other systems . for example , all states plus the district of columbia participate in the problem driver pointer system ( pdps ) , to check if license applicants have adverse driving records . actions in other states , pdps may also help states identify applicants who already have licenses in other states that they have not divulged . also , a few state licensing agencies said they may use the national law enforcement telecommunications system to check if a license applicant already has a license in another state . this system is generally only available to law enforcement personnel , not to all front - line staff in license issuance offices . officials in one state told us they use it only in limited circumstances , such as when there is reason to suspect license fraud . the pdps searches the national driver register , a database of state - provided driver information maintained by the department of transportation's national highway traffic safety administration , and if an individual is identified as having an adverse record , the pdps “points” to the state where the individual's record may be obtained . a pdps check is typically used to detect certain serious traffic violations or license suspensions or revocations associated with an applicant in other states , which might make the applicant ineligible to receive a license in a new state . example , officials in almost all the states we interviewed said front - line staff may not override a non - match in an electronic verification system such as ssolv in order to issue a license . additionally , officials in most states told us managers examine licensing transactions to ensure proper procedures were followed . for example , officials in one state told us an audit team checks to make sure all required identity documents were collected as part of the transaction .