workforce structure . sec's workforce plan does not inform decision making about the structure of the workforce . opm guidance states that an agency's workforce plan should inform decision making about how best to structure the organization and deploy the workforce . however , the plan does not identify the optimal number of attorneys ( key staff responsible for carrying out sec's mission ) sec should employ or the percentage of the workforce that should be located in the regional offices . it also lacked information on the type of skills needed by , for example , attorneys . links to budget . sec's workforce plan is not clearly linked to its budget formulation , which we and opm have previously identified as a best practice . for example , the workforce plan does not identify the personnel costs of the current workforce , nor does it identify the number of employees sec intends to hire and their associated cost . when linked to the budgeting process , workforce planning provides information that agencies need to help ensure that their annual budget requests include adequate funds to implement their human capital strategies . in addition , the component of sec's workforce plan that addresses succession planning lacks information on workforce attrition and lacks a process for identifying future leaders . opm guidance states that agencies should have a leadership succession planning and management system that is based on accurate data on the current workforce and accurate projections of attrition at all leadership levels . opm guidance also states that agencies should develop a fair and accurate process to identify a diverse pool of high - potential leaders . sec's succession plan describes the various levels of leadership at sec and what is required for successful performance at each level . it also includes the leadership competencies for all leadership positions and senior officers and the courses and services available to develop those competencies . however , it does not include data on sec's current workforce and attrition projections for sec leaders , which are important for determining current and future workforce needs . in addition , the succession plan does not identify a fair and accurate process for identifying and selecting leaders , which may prevent the process from being transparent to employees . developing a clearer process for selecting leaders could help to address employee concerns related to the promotion process . for example , only 15 percent of the nonsupervisory staff who responded to our 2016 survey agreed that the criteria for promoting staff are clearly defined , a modest improvement from our 2013 survey but still a relatively small percentage ( see fig . since our 2013 report , sec has provided us with various documents and plans to demonstrate their response to our recommendations . however , as we previously discussed , sec's recently developed workforce plan lacks a comprehensive skills gap analysis plan , does not inform decision making about the structure of the workforce , and is not clearly linked to its budget formulation . as a result , sec has not fully addressed the recommendations from our july 2013 report related to workforce planning , and we maintain that these 2013 recommendations are still valid .