iv . we took several steps to determine efforts the u. s. department of labor has made to expand apprenticeship to new occupations and to understand the impediments to starting apprenticeship programs in fields not traditionally apprenticed . we interviewed labor officials at the national , regional , and state levels to obtain an understanding of how apprenticeable occupations are identified and how apprenticeship programs are registered . we visited four states to discuss how each state implements and manages the apprenticeship program , particularly how they approve new programs . from those programs registered in recent years , we judgmentally selected 10 programs in each state that addressed labor market needs or were in nontraditional occupations . we collected detailed information on the approval process and any impediments to it from the responsible federal or state apprenticeship representative and from the employers . we also spoke with members of the federal committee on registered apprenticeship , national association of state and territorial apprenticeship directors , as well as trade associations , unions , and other knowledgeable individuals to discuss their roles and obtain their views on expanding apprenticeship to respond to labor market needs . in order to describe examples of apprenticeship programs that responded to current labor market needs and how they have done so , we studied in depth several apprenticeship programs that either had been established or were being established in occupations that are not traditionally apprenticed . to identify these , we obtained suggestions from labor officials , state apprenticeship council officials , and other knowledgeable experts in apprenticeship . our activities in reviewing these programs included speaking to employers , observing and touring a training facility , and speaking to developers of the formal training . following are summaries of programs that exemplify efforts to develop new apprenticeships that respond to labor needs . in 1995 , high - level representatives of at&t's wireless telephone facilities and the union , international brotherhood of electrical workers ( ibew ) , met to discuss their mutual concerns about the workforce's capability to meet the company's needs as manufacturing processes changed . from that meeting , development of a new apprenticeship was undertaken in an occupation called production technologist . production technologists were to be responsible for both direct production work on products and for indirect work , such as production planning , routine equipment maintenance , and training . management at the shreveport , louisiana , and denver , colorado , plants agreed to implement the apprenticeship with the union . one issue needing resolution was concern that the position involved combining the skills of a variety of different workers , such as engineers , electricians , and machinists . some union members believed it would hurt workers in individual trades if the production technologists worked across trades . however , union management convinced them of the importance of including specific training in the apprenticeship , such as less - complicated machine repairs that could reduce production downtime . labor approved the occupation as apprenticeable in december 1997 . the production technologist apprenticeship was developed as an 8-year program .