this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . ยง 720 to submit a written statement on the actions taken on the recommendations by the head of the agency . the statement must be submitted to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of this report . a written statement must also be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with your agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . because agency personnel serve as the primary source of information on the status of its open recommendations , we request that the commission also provide us with a copy of its statement of action to serve as preliminary information on the status of open recommendations . we are also sending copies of this report to interested congressional parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report or need assistance in addressing these issues , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov or nabajyoti barkakati at ( 202 ) 512-4499 or barkakatin@gao.gov . gao staff who made significant contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objective was to determine the effectiveness of the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) information security controls for ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its key financial systems and information . to assess information systems controls , we identified and reviewed sec information systems control policies and procedures , conducted tests of controls , and held interviews with key security representatives and management officials concerning whether information security controls were in place , adequately designed , and operating effectively . this work was performed to support our opinion on sec's internal control over financial reporting as of september 30 , 2015 . we evaluated controls based on our federal information system controls audit manual ( fiscam ) , which contains guidance for reviewing information system controls that affect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of computerized information ; national institute of standards and technology standards and special publications ; and sec's plans , policies , and standards . federal personnel and payroll system / quicktime processes personnel and payroll transactions . the sec's general support system provides ( 1 ) business application services to internal and external customers and ( 2 ) security services necessary to support these applications .