state did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the administrator of usaid , and the secretary of state . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . economic growth and infrastructure . the largest share — about 60 percent — of usaid's esf project assistance for the west bank and gaza for fiscal years 2015 and 2016 supported the agency's economic growth and infrastructure development objective . according to usaid documents , as of march 31 , 2018 , the agency had obligated about $239 million and expended approximately $89 million ( about 37 percent ) for projects under this objective . usaid officials stated that the agency funded these projects under the following standard state - budgeted program areas: health ( including water ) , infrastructure , private sector competiveness , and stabilization operations and security sector reform . the largest project — the architecture and engineering services project — received about $20 million of fiscal year 2015 esf assistance and $17 million of fiscal year 2016 esf assistance . the purpose of the project was to rehabilitate and construct infrastructure through the procurement of infrastructure services , including engineering design and construction management , among other things . the contractor was required to coordinate with relevant pa and israeli entities , as well as with usaid , to assist in the selection of pa water and wastewater projects and in the planning and design of water projects such as small - to large - scale water distribution systems , water treatment systems , and institutional capacity building . investing in the next generation . the second - largest share — about 27 percent — of usaid's fiscal years 2015 and 2016 esf project assistance for the west bank and gaza supported the agency's investing in the next generation development objective . according to usaid documents , as of march 31 , 2018 , the agency had obligated about $107 million and expended approximately $79 million ( about 74 percent ) for projects under this objective . program areas funded included education , health , social and economic services and protection of vulnerable populations . the largest project funded under this objective — a grant to the world food program for assistance to vulnerable groups — received $12 million in fiscal year 2015 and $15 million in fiscal year 2016 esf assistance . the project focused on ensuring food security , including meeting food needs , of the nonrefugee population ; increasing food availability and dietary diversity for the most vulnerable and food - insecure nonrefugee population ; and establishing linkages with the palestinian private sector ( shopkeepers , farms , and factories ) to produce and deliver the aid being provided to palestinians . for example , the project directly distributed a standard food ration through both direct food distribution and electronic food vouchers to vulnerable nonrefugee families . governance and civic engagement .