( see app . to determine the extent to which tma provided guidance and oversight of the new contractor's preparation for health care delivery , we reviewed and analyzed tma's guidance on how the transition period was to be structured , including the roles of tma and tro - west in overseeing unitedhealth's transition . additionally , despite its concurrence , dod did not always provide details on how it plans to implement our recommendations . dod's specific responses to each of our recommendations are as follows: dod partially concurred with our first recommendation to require that all significant oversight communication between the tro and the contractor be sufficiently documented . while dod agreed with the substance of this recommendation , it disagreed with our finding that it could not provide us with sufficient documentation of the communication of its concerns to unitedhealth about its ability to meet transition and performance requirements and deadlines . dod noted that it provided thousands of pages of comprehensive documentation of both formal and informal correspondence with unitedhealth — essentially stating that it is already meeting this recommendation and implying that no additional action is necessary . while we agree that dod was able to provide documentation of its oversight , not all of it reflected its communication of specific concerns with unitedhealth . for example , dod could not provide documentation regarding its concerns about the call center staffing that unitedhealth had proposed — discussions that unitedhealth officials did not recall during our interviews . further , the documentation of dod's communications with unitedhealth was largely dependent upon handwritten notes , which were difficult to understand without extensive explanation by dod officials . we therefore continue to believe that our recommendation remains valid . dod concurred with our second recommendation to require that the tro and contracting officers have sufficient data and information to make an informed determination about whether to extend the transition period . dod's comments indicate that it has already undertaken steps to implement this action , but did not provide any time frames for when this activity would be complete . dod concurred with our third recommendation to require a process for the identification and monitoring of all key focus areas , including the pretesting of key functions . dod noted in its comments that prior to our review , dha began redefining contract requirements for transition and oversight . dod added that this effort would include revised transition requirements for pretesting . in addition , dod stated that an independent contractor will be used to assess key systems , interfaces , and performance . dod partially concurred with our fourth recommendation to review existing transition guidance and revise as needed to include sufficient specificity and accountability for meeting transition requirements or deadlines . dod noted that during its review of existing transition guidance , it will consider whether specific guidance for the contracting officer is needed . although dod stated that contract administration matters require a certain degree of discretion and business judgment , we found that the contracting officer was inconsistent in using his authority to take formal action against unitedhealth when it missed transition requirements .