done for jarc . also , the statutory matching requirement for jarc was inconsistent with other fta programs because jarc projects could receive grants for up to 50 percent of the project's capital expenses , rather than 80 percent . while we have reported that fta had met its jarc program goal of improving collaboration between grantees and stakeholders , we also have reported that more collaboration is needed at the federal level to enable grantees to obtain federal funding for jarc projects . tea - 21 required fta to report to congress on the results of an evaluation of jarc ; however , fta has struggled to develop comprehensive performance measures that assess a national program when individual programs , operations , and features vary . safetea - lu made a number of changes to the jarc program , the most notable of which was the creation of a formula to distribute jarc funds beginning with fiscal year 2006 . whereas in recent years , jarc projects were competitively selected by fta or congressionally designated for funding , safetea - lu created a formula to distribute funds to states and large urbanized areas . this change is significant because some states and large urbanized areas will receive substantially more funds than under the discretionary program , while others will receive substantially less . in addition , the formula program will result in some areas receiving jarc funds that had not received them in the past . other jarc changes resulting from safetea - lu include ( 1 ) the need for states and large urbanized areas to designate a recipient for jarc funds , competitively select projects for funding , and certify that selected projects came from a locally developed coordinated plan and ( 2 ) the ability to use a portion of jarc funds for planning activities . table 1 compares key jarc provisions under safetea - lu and tea - 21 . a key safetea - lu change to the jarc program was the creation of a formula to distribute jarc funds . under tea - 21 , jarc was a discretionary grant program for which fta competitively selected jarc projects and , more recently , awarded funds for congressionally designated projects . under safetea - lu , states and large urbanized areas have been apportioned funding for jarc projects through a formula that is based on the relative number of low - income individuals and welfare recipients in each area . forty percent of jarc funds each year is required to be apportioned among states for projects in small urbanized and other - than - urbanized areas , and the remaining 60 percent is required to be apportioned among urbanized areas with a population of 200,000 or more . for fiscal year 2006 , the allocation was as follows: nonurbanized areas - $27.3 million , small urbanized areas - $27.3 million , and large urbanized areas - $82.0 million . the change to a formula program is significant because some states and urbanized areas will receive substantially more funds than they received under the discretionary program , while others will receive substantially less ( see fig .