we plan to report the results of our assessment this fall . our statement today will focus on issues associated with measuring the performance of the nfip . specifically , we will address ( 1 ) whether fema could better evaluate the program's results by adding to the performance goals it currently uses a goal tied to rates of participation in the program — the percentage of structures in flood - prone areas that are insured ; and ( 2 ) what obstacles and opportunities exist for measuring these participation rates . to meet these objectives , we reviewed fema reports that provide some information on participation rates , analyzed fema's performance goals , and interviewed officials from fema and other federal agencies on mapping technologies that can help determine participation rates . this statement will also summarize other work we have under way at fema . in summary , we found the following: fema has a number of performance goals aimed at improving the results of the nfip , including increasing the number of insurance policies in force . while these goals provide valuable insights into how well the nfip's mission of reducing flood - related losses is being carried out , they do not assess the degree to which the most vulnerable residents — those living in flood - prone areas — participate in the program . the costs of using technology to accurately identify the number of structures in sfhas are not fully known . in march 2000 , fema estimated the total costs to modernize flood maps from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2007 to be $773 million above expected annual funding levels , with digitization and map maintenance costs alone totaling $156 million.the modernization of maps includes converting paper flood maps to a digital format , which is the first step in using available technology to identify the number of structures within sfhas . fema continues to refine the cost estimate as it updates its projection of needs and improves its cost data , including the impacts on costs of partnerships with communities and other local , regional , state , and federal agencies , and new technologies . the partnerships that fema has developed with state , local , and other federal agencies should reduce some of its costs to modernize its flood maps . along with enabling the agency to share some of the costs to modernize flood maps , the partnerships will facilitate the development of technology that can be used to estimate the number of structures within sfhas . for example , through fema's cooperating technical partners initiative , 62 partnerships had been developed with local communities as of september 2000 . through this effort , communities , states , and regional agencies perform all or portions of data collection and mapping tasks to create their own firms . an fia official told us that the cost benefits to fema from this effort have not yet been determined . fema has also entered into partnerships with other federal agencies to fund cooperatively the production of doqs and high - accuracy elevation data . as discussed previously , doqs provide detailed images of land , including the location of houses . elevation data are useful because they help make flood maps more accurate .