marshals service . we included these doj law enforcement agencies in our review to provide context to help understand dhs's ammunition purchases relative to those of other federal law enforcement agencies . we selected fiscal year 2008 as the starting point for our analysis because data on dhs ammunition purchases , cost , and usage were not readily available or reliable prior to 2008 , according to dhs officials . nevertheless , obtaining data going back 5 fiscal years provides historical perspective on dhs's ammunition purchases and use over time , and allows for comparisons with purchases in fiscal year 2013 and planned purchases for fiscal year 2014 . we analyzed the data to identify any changes in the amount of ammunition purchased or used year to year and interviewed knowledgeable agency officials to understand the reasons why changes occurred . for each fiscal year , we calculated the amount of ammunition purchased per agent and officer authorized to carry firearms at each dhs and doj component in our review , using component - provided data on the amount of ammunition purchased and the number of firearm - carrying personnel . we calculated the average number of rounds purchased per agent or officer per year for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 at dhs , excluding fletc , by determining the average amount of ammunition purchased across dhs law enforcement components in each fiscal year and dividing that by the average number of agents or officers at dhs for each fiscal year . what policies and guidance does dhs have for managing firearms and ammunition inventories ? to address our first question , we obtained available data from dhs and doj law enforcement components with firearm - carrying personnel regarding their ammunition purchases , costs , usage , inventory , and the size of the authorized firearm - carrying workforce . we also obtained data on dhs planned ammunition purchases for fiscal year 2014 . specifically , we selected all dhs law enforcement components with firearm - carrying personnel — cbp , ice , tsa , usss , fps , as well as fletc . we excluded the u.s. coast guard — a dhs component with firearm - carrying personnel — because the u.s. coast guard does not procure ammunition through dhs ; rather , the u.s. coast guard procures its ammunition through department of defense contracts . similarly , we selected all doj law enforcement components with firearm - carrying personnel . however , the federal bureau of prisons could not provide ammunition purchase data comparable to that of the other components based on its method of record keeping and data retention policy . we determined that data from the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) were not sufficiently reliable for our purposes , because dea could only provide estimates of purchases . therefore , the doj components included in our review are atf , fbi , and u.s . we determined that ammunition purchase data for doj components were not sufficiently reliable prior to 2011 for all components , so we used data from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 to do the same calculation .