jail . figures 1 and 2 depict the typical case flow processes for ( 1 ) adult felonies and ( 2 ) misdemeanors prosecuted by the usao . appendix v describes the typical case flow for offenses prosecuted in the superior court of the district of columbia ( superior court ) by the office of the corporation counsel for the district of columbia ( corporation counsel ) . corporation counsel is responsible for prosecuting “minor” misdemeanor violations ( d.c. offenses ) , criminal traffic offenses , and offenses committed by children . examples of misdemeanor offenses within the prosecutive jurisdiction of corporation counsel include “quality of life” misdemeanors , such as drinking in public or possession of an open container of alcohol . criminal traffic offenses include offenses such as leaving the scene of an accident , driving while intoxicated ( dwi ) , no permit , and speeding 30 miles over the limit . the office of the united states attorney for the district of columbia ( usao ) is responsible for prosecuting felony and serious misdemeanor violations committed by adults in d.c. ( u.s. offenses ) . the case flow process for u.s. offenses is described in appendix iv . the case flow process for offenses committed by children is described in appendix vi . this case flow process description reflects process - related information as described to us by relevant agency officials . we did not verify the accuracy of the information provided to us . as such , we did not test to determine if the descriptions of the processes were functioning as was described to us . we recognize that there may be aspects of a specific case that make its processing unique and that there may be exceptions in the normal progression of the stages in the justice system . however , this description will focus on the case flow process for a typical adult case , prosecuted by corporation counsel , as it progresses through the basic stages of the criminal justice system . most cases begin with an incident and subsequent arrest . however , at the incident a police officer has the option of arresting the violator or giving the violator a ticket for certain enumerated offenses . the completed ticket lists the charge and advises of the fine that must be paid at one of the police districts within 15 days . when the violator pays the fine , s / he may elect to forfeit the collateral or stand trial . in the event that the violator fails to pay the fine or elects to stand trial , the officer is notified to report to corporation counsel to paper the case . in d.c. , over 30 law enforcement agencies other than the metropolitan police department of the district of columbia ( mpdc ) , such as the u.s. capitol police and the u.s. park police , may make arrests for crimes committed within d.c . however , mpdc makes a large majority of arrests in d.c. arrests can be made with or without an arrest warrant .