if these conditions were not met , owners had to close or remove their tanks . in closing , the states and epa cannot ensure that all regulated tanks have the required equipment to prevent health risks from fuel leaks , spills , and overfills or that tanks are safely operated and maintained . many states are not inspecting all of their tanks to make sure that they do not leak , nor can they prohibit fuel from being delivered to problem tanks . epa recognizes the need to collect better data to determine the extent and cause of leaks from upgraded tanks , the effectiveness of the current equipment , and if there is a need to strengthen existing equipment standards . the agency has launched studies in several of its regions to obtain such data , but it may have trouble concluding whether leaks occurred after the upgrades . in a study of local tanks , researchers in santa clara county , california , concluded that upgraded tanks do not provide complete protection against leaks , and even properly operated and maintained tank monitoring systems cannot guarantee that leaks are detected . at the end of fiscal year 2000 , the fund had a balance of about $1.5 billion . because the states are primarily implementing the provisions of the program , we conducted a survey of all 50 states and the district of columbia to determine whether tanks are complying with program requirements , how epa and the states are inspecting tanks and enforcing the requirements , and whether upgraded tanks still leak . the findings we are discussing today and that were included in our report are based primarily on the survey results , as well as on visits to the three epa regions with the largest number of tanks to monitor . in summary , we found that: about 1.5 million tanks had been permanently closed since the program was created , leaving about 693,000 tanks subject to ust requirements . based on the states' responses to our survey , we estimated that about 89 percent of these tanks had the required protective equipment installed , but that almost 30 percent of them — more than 200,000 tanks — were not being operated and maintained properly , thus , increasing the chance of leaks . for example , 19 states reported frequent problems with corrosion - prevention equipment and 15 states reported that leak detection equipment was frequently turned off or improperly maintained . the states and epa attributed these operation and maintenance problems primarily to poorly trained staff . of the remaining 11 percent , or 76,000 , tanks that we estimated had not been retrofitted with the required equipment , epa and the states speculated that the tanks were probably inactive and empty . nevertheless , it is important to address them because experience has shown that they may have leaked in the past , but the contamination , which poses health risks , is not discovered until the tank is dug up for removal .