gao - 11-424t . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2011 . indian country criminal justice: departments of the interior and justice should strengthen coordination to support tribal courts . gao - 11-252 . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2011 . epa's approval was upheld . in other disagreements , some tribes and states have addressed the issues more collaboratively . for example , the navajo nation and the arizona department of environmental quality entered into a cooperative agreement that , among other things , recognizes the jurisdiction of the navajo nation within its reservation and establishes a plan to share the cost of pilot projects . regarding the use of federal legislation to address disagreements , a federal statute enacted in august 2005 , requires indian tribes in oklahoma to enter into a cooperative agreement with the state before epa can approve a tribe's tas request . at the time of our october 2005 report , the pawnee nation was the only oklahoma tribe that had been awarded tas status to set its own water quality standards , and we have not conducted any more recent work on this issue . the tax code has also been used to promote economic activity in indian country . we have reported on tax provisions regarding ( 1 ) the uncertainties that tribes faced regarding the types of activities that they could finance with tax - exempt bonds and ( 2 ) the impact of accelerated depreciation provisions . in september 2006 , we reported on indian tribal governments' use of tax - exempt bonds under section 7871 ( c ) of the internal revenue code . section 7871 ( c ) , which was originally enacted in 1983 , generally limits the use of tax - exempt bonds by indian tribal governments to the financing of certain activities that constitute “essential government functions.” in 1987 , section 7871 ( e ) was added to the code to limit the essential governmental functions standard further to provide that an essential governmental function does not include any function which is not customarily performed by state and local governments with general taxing powers . to date the internal revenue service has not issued regulations defining essential government function . the lack of a definition has created uncertainty among tribes regarding the types of activities that they can finance using tax - exempt bonds . in addition , this custom - based essential governmental function standard has proven to be a difficult administrative standard and has led to audit disputes , based on difficulties in determining customs , the evolving nature of the functions customarily performed by state and local governments , and increasing involvement of state and local governments in quasi - commercial activities . in trying to determine what the customary practices were of state and local governments that tribes should be held accountable to , we reported that state and local governments had provided financial support for a variety of facilities , including rental housing , road transportation , parking facilities , park and recreation facilities , golf facilities , convention centers , hotels , and gaming support facilities .