acquisition . the good outcomes on the ea - 18g and ec - 130h programs can be attributed , in part , to acquisition strategies embodying elements of best practices . other airborne electronic attack acquisition programs have not progressed as efficiently , however . these systems have proceeded through product development with lower - than - desired levels of knowledge and subsequently faced technical , design , and production challenges , contributing to significant cost growth , fielding delays or both . most notably , these systems entered — or are on track to enter — production before completing key development activities , including achievement of stable designs . we previously reported that concurrency in development and production activities limits the ability of an acquisition program to ensure that the system will work as intended and that it can be manufactured efficiently to meet cost , schedule , and quality targets . mald / mald - j: mald was authorized for low rate initial production in june 2008 with an initial plan for 300 low rate initial production units in two lots , beginning in march 2009 . pub . dod's strategy for meeting airborne electronic attack requirements — including both near - peer and irregular warfare needs — centers on acquiring a family of systems , including traditional fixed wing aircraft , low observable aircraft , unmanned aerial systems , and related mission systems and weapons . department analyses dating back a decade have identified capability gaps and provided a basis for service investments in airborne electronic attack capabilities . however , budget realities and lessons learned from operations in iraq and afghanistan have driven changes in strategic direction and program content . most notably , the department canceled some acquisitions , after which services revised their operating concepts for airborne electronic attack . these decisions saved money , allowing the department to fund other priorities , but reduced the planned level of synergy among airborne electronic attack systems during operations . as acquisition plans for these systems have evolved , operational stresses upon the existing inventory of weapon systems have grown . these stresses have materialized in the form of capability limitations and sustainment challenges for existing systems , prompting the department to invest in improvements to these systems to mitigate shortfalls . key dod analyses completed since 2002 identified capability gaps , provided a basis for service investments in airborne electronic attack systems , and supported an overarching acquisition strategy for achieving these requirements . the department outlined its findings in reports that included an analysis of alternatives , a capabilities - based assessment , and initial capabilities documents . figure 1 highlights a chronology of these analyses and identifies key airborne electronic attack components of each report . the 2002 airborne electronic attack analysis of alternatives established the primary framework by which the department began investing in new airborne electronic attack capabilities . the analysis focused on those capabilities needed to suppress enemy air defenses from 2010 to 2030 . the study identified two primary components required to provide a complete and comprehensive airborne electronic attack solution: core component: a recoverable platform or combination of platforms operating in enemy airspace . the core component provides the airborne electronic attack detection and battle management capabilities for reactive jamming .