reconcile them . you asked that we examine: ( 1 ) the trends of the past decade in the number of appeals reviewed by the district courts and their decisions ; ( 2 ) the reasons for court remands and factors that may contribute to the incidence of those remands ; and ( 3 ) ssa's process for responding to appellate court decisions that conflict with agency policy and the agency's response in recent years . to address the first research objective , we analyzed data from ssa on the number and types of decisions made by federal district courts for fiscal years 1995 to 2005 . we also grouped and analyzed district court decisions by circuit for fiscal year 2005 , the only year for which complete data by circuit were available . furthermore , we analyzed agency data on the decisions ssa made after a case was remanded ( i.e. , allowances or denials of claims ) for fiscal years 1995 to 2005 . we also analyzed these remand data to identify trends over time and by circuit , a category that we created using ssa data on claimant state of residence . ssa officials were interviewed to gather information on potential reasons for any trends . to address the second objective , we obtained data on cited reasons for remands from two ssa databases that are maintained by two separate offices in ssa responsible for litigating claims in court and re - adjudicating remanded cases . we compared the data to determine how effectively ssa was capturing information on reasons for remands within the agency . in addition , we interviewed ssa officials and other stakeholder groups , including federal court judges and claimant representatives , on reasons for remands and factors that influenced them . for the third objective , we interviewed ssa officials and obtained available documents on how ssa determines whether a court of appeals decision conflicts with its policies and what option to pursue to address conflicting decisions , eg , appeal or issue an acquiescence ruling whereby the agency agrees to abide by the court judgment in future cases , albeit only in that jurisdiction . we also obtained data on the number of acquiescence and other rulings that ssa issued since establishing its regulations on acquiescence in 1990 . for acquiescence rulings , we further reviewed ssa's timeliness in issuing acquiescence rulings , as well as the number issued by circuit and how ssa replaced acquiescence rulings with nationwide policies . we were unable to independently determine how significantly any given court decision conflicted with ssa policy or whether ssa should have pursued one option over another . we also interviewed ssa officials and relevant stakeholders — including selected federal court judges and claimant representatives from the seventh and ninth circuits , which represent those with the lowest and highest numbers of ssa policy changes associated with acquiescence rulings — to obtain information on how court decisions and their related agency rulings have affected ssa's disability adjudication policy in recent years .