split purchases . during our data mining and detailed tests of transactions , we found 997 split purchase transactions — purchases that had been split into more than one transaction to stay within established single purchase limit — totaling $5.1 million . for example , a cardholder with a single purchase limit of $5,000 purchased a printer and accessories totaling $8,391 . the cardholder had the vendor make three separate charges to the purchase card , on the same day , to avoid exceeding the single purchase limit . another cardholder informed us that she was directed by her supervisor to issue multiple convenience checks to pay a vendor in order to work around the $2,500 convenience check limit , despite the fact the cardholder advised her supervisor that this was contrary to procurement policy . after the split purchases were discovered , the cardholder stated that the incident was investigated , she was counseled , and her account was subsequently closed in january 2002 . however , no disciplinary action was taken against the supervisor . we noted that cardholders and approving officials generally were not disciplined when these types of policy violations occurred . we identified another 201 transactions totaling over $543,000 that we considered potential split purchase transactions , but could not confirm this because cardholders did not provide adequate documentation to enable us to fully assess the transactions . the purpose of the single purchase limit is to require that purchases above established limits be subject to additional controls to ensure that they are properly reviewed and approved before the agency obligates funds . by allowing these limits to be circumvented , faa has less control over the obligation and expenditure of its resources . purchases that exceeded limits established by faa policy . we found that several purchases exceeded faa's established purchase card thresholds for the procurement of services and the dollar limit for purchases made with convenience checks . when cardholders circumvent these management controls , faa has no assurance that purchases comply with certain labor laws and that cardholders are making contractual commitments on behalf of faa within the limits of their delegated purchasing authority . faa's operating procedures prohibit the use of the purchase card and convenience checks when procuring certain nonconstruction services of $2,500 or more , such as janitorial , grounds , and guard services , or when procuring certain services , such as temporary help and consulting services , regardless of the amount . during our detailed tests of transactions , we identified four transactions totaling $16,460 for nonconstruction services costing $2,500 or more . we also identified seven transactions totaling $111,648 for consulting services even though faa prohibits using the purchase card for these types of purchases . for example , a cardholder procured consulting services for engineering , technical analysis , and program management support activities from the same vendor over a 3-month period totaling $67,000 because management had directed that these services continue while a new contract was awarded . faa's operating procedures also prohibit the use of the purchase card or convenience check when procuring construction services valued at $2,000 or more . multiple accounts . we also found that apcs were not monitoring for increased risk of improper purchases by cardholders with multiple purchase cards .