( see fig . dod agreed with our recommendation , but state did not . our scope and methodology are discussed in more detail in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . there are certain statutory authorities under which the president may draw down articles and services from the inventory and resources of u.s. government agencies . section 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , allows for drawdowns of defense articles from the stocks of dod and defense services of dod and for military education and training to foreign countries or international organizations in emergency situations . before exercising this authority , the president must determine and report to congress that an unforeseen emergency exists , requiring immediate military assistance that cannot be met under any other law . this special authority was more recently used in 2013 to provide airlift and refueling support for counterterrorism efforts in mali ; in 2014 to provide defense articles and services , as well as military education and training to assist the government of iraq in combating the islamic state of iraq and syria ; and in 2015 to provide military assistance to ukraine . the maximum aggregate value of drawdowns under section 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) cannot exceed $100 million in any fiscal year . section 506 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the foreign assistance act , as amended , authorizes the president to draw down articles and services from the inventory and resources of any u.s. government agency and military education and training from dod and use them to assist foreign countries or international organizations in a number of nonemergency situations . before exercising this authority , the president must first determine and report to congress that any such drawdown is in the national interest of the united states . the maximum aggregate value of drawdowns under section 506 ( a ) ( 2 ) is $200 million in any fiscal year , with no more than $75 million provided from dod inventory and resources . section 552 ( c ) ( 2 ) of the foreign assistance act , as amended , authorizes the president to direct the drawdown of commodities and services from the inventory and resources of any u.s. government agency . in order to exercise this authority , the president must determine that an unforeseen emergency exists , that providing assistance in amounts in excess of funds otherwise available is important to the national interests of the united states , and that the unforeseen emergency requires the immediate provision of such assistance . the maximum aggregate value of drawdowns under section 552 ( c ) ( 2 ) in any fiscal year is $25 million .