this concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to take your questions . the un did not provide us with written comments . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact director thomas melito , ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . other major contributors to this testimony were phyllis anderson , assistant director ; joy labez , pierre toureille , jeffrey baldwin - bott , joseph carney , kristy kennedy , clarette kim , and barbara shields . my statement is based on two reports that we are releasing today . furthermore , un officials acknowledged that the un has not committed sufficient resources to a comprehensive training and certification program for its procurement staff . in addition , the un has not established a career path for professional advancement for procurement staff , which could encourage staff to undertake progressive training and work experiences . the un has been considering the development of specific ethics guidance for procurement officers for almost a decade , in response to general assembly directives dating back to 1998 . while the procurement service has drafted such guidance , the un has made only limited progress towards adopting it . such guidance would include a declaration of ethics responsibilities for procurement staff and a code of conduct for vendors . we found weaknesses in key un procurement processes or control activities . these activities consist of processes that are intended to provide reasonable assurance that management's directives are followed and include reviews of high - dollar - value contracts , bid protest procedures , and vendor rosters . the chairman and members of the headquarters committee on contracts stated that the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload . the number of contracts reviewed by the committee has increased by almost 60 percent since 2003 . the committee members stated that the committee's increasing workload was the result of the growth of un peacekeeping operations , the complexity of many new contracts , and increased scrutiny of proposals in response to recent un procurement scandals . concerns regarding the committee's structure and workload have led oios to conclude that the committee cannot properly review contract proposals . without an effective contract review process , the un cannot provide reasonable assurance that high - value contracts are undertaken in accordance with un rules and regulations . the committee has requested that its support staff be increased from four to seven , and its chairman has stated that raising the threshold for committee review would reduce its workload . the un has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests , despite the 1994 recommendation of a high - level panel of international procurement experts that it do so as soon as possible . an independent bid protest process is a widely endorsed control mechanism that permits vendors to file complaints with an office or official who is independent of the procurement process . establishment of such a process could provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding and would also help alert senior un management to situations involving questions about un compliance . in 1994 , the un general assembly recognized the advantages of an independent bid protest process .