dhs agreed with all of our recommendations in this report . specifically , dhs agreed with our recommendation related to the need for border patrol and ice to ( 1 ) more fully identify the information needs of local and tribal agencies along the borders and ( 2 ) periodically assess the extent to which partnerships and related mechanisms to share information exist . for example , cbp agreed that a systematic and standardized process to disseminate information and receive feedback is vital to situational awareness for local and tribal law enforcement partners who are within the immediate areas adjacent to the border . cbp noted that border patrol plans to develop a list of individuals who will serve as liaisons to local and tribal agencies and also develop a list of local and tribal contacts . according to cbp , the border patrol liaisons will then make initial efforts to assess the information needs of the law enforcement partners and take other actions to determine and publish guidance on information sharing . the remaining locality did not comment on why the products were not received . according to officials from the other three fusion centers we visited , the presence of additional federal personnel would support their efforts to develop border intelligence products that help to provide local and tribal law enforcement agencies along the borders with situational awareness of potential terrorist threats . for example: washington fusion center: the washington state fusion center is colocated with the local joint terrorism task force , which facilitates access to fbi information , and has representatives from dhs's i&a and ice . according to border patrol headquarters officials , as of august 2009 , the agency was in the process of assigning a full - time representative to the fusion center . the fusion center director noted that this official , once integrated into the center's report development process , would contribute greatly towards producing a border intelligence product . the fusion center director added that the border intelligence product would focus on all border crime issues , including any suspected terrorist activity . montana all threat intelligence center: the montana all threat intelligence center is colocated with the local joint terrorism task force , which facilitates access to fbi information . according to the fusion center director , a cbp analyst has supported the center part - time , though most of the time that person is working at the cbp office located 90 miles away . the patrols are designed to prevent the illegal entry of individuals into the united states and the smuggling of contraband . gao staff that made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .