gao - 03-1173 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2003 . aviation security: progress since september 11 , 2001 , and the challenges ahead . gao - 03-1150t . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2003 transportation security: federal action needed to help address security challenges . tsa has been addressing these and other challenges through a variety of efforts . we have work in progress that is examining tsa's efforts in addressing many of these challenges . ensuring the security of our nation's commercial aviation system has been a long - standing concern . as demonstrated by the 1988 bombing of a u.s. airliner over lockerbie , scotland , and the 1995 plot to blow up as many as 12 u.s. aircraft in the pacific region discovered by philippine authorities , u.s. aircraft have long been a target for terrorist attacks . many efforts have been made to improve aviation security , but as we and others have documented in numerous reports and studies , weaknesses in the system continue to exist . it was these weaknesses that terrorist exploited to hijack four commercial aircraft in september 2001 , with tragic results . on november 19 , 2001 , the president signed into law the aviation and transportation security act , with the primary goal of strengthening the security of the nation's aviation system . atsa created tsa as an agency within the department of transportation with responsibility for securing all modes of transportation , including aviation . atsa mandated specific improvements to aviation security and established deadlines for completing many of them . tsa's main focus during its first year of operation was on meeting these ambitious deadlines , particularly federalizing the screener workforce at commercial airports nationwide by november 19 , 2002 , while at the same time establishing a new federal organization from the ground up . the homeland security act , signed into law on november 25 , 2002 , transferred tsa from the department of transportation to the new department of homeland security . virtually all aviation security responsibilities now reside with tsa , including the screening of air passengers and baggage , a function that had previously been the responsibility of air carriers . tsa is also responsible for ensuring the security of air cargo and overseeing security measures at airports to limit access to restricted areas , secure airport perimeters , and conduct background checks for airport personnel with access to secure areas , among other responsibilities . tsa has implemented numerous initiatives designed to enhance aviation security but has collected little information on the effectiveness of these initiatives . atsa requires that tsa establish acceptable levels of performance and develop annual performance plans and reports to measure and document the effectiveness of its security initiatives.although tsa has developed these performance tools , as required by atsa , it currently focuses on progress toward meeting atsa deadlines , rather than on the effectiveness of its programs and initiatives . however , tsa is taking steps to collect objective data to assess its performance . tsa currently has limited information on the effectiveness of its aviation security initiatives .