( fig . 5 shows the rate of violations per observation hour. ) also , analysis of driver behavior in the intervention corridors found that crash risk decreased and driver behavior was less illegal and less intimidating , among other things . the tact initiative improved driver behavior by successfully reaching its intended audience . tact evaluators demonstrated this by using a survey to measure the extent to which the initiative changed the awareness of the target audience . in each of the four communities selected for the project , tact administrators distributed surveys to the public at driver licensing offices both before and after the enforcement waves . for example , the percentage of respondents on the intervention corridors that reported general exposure to media about giving trucks more space nearly quadrupled , from about 18 to 67 percent . these data contrast with data for the comparison corridors , where the percentage only increased from about 17 to 20 percent . ( fig . 6 shows the percentages of respondents that reported hearing or seeing tact - related media outreach. ) additionally , the evaluation found significant increases in the percentages of respondents on the intervention corridors that specifically reported hearing the radio message and seeing the tact road sign , television , and newspaper messages . furthermore , surveys of drivers also showed a significant increase in drivers reporting that they leave more space when passing trucks ( the intended behavioral change theme of the project ) from about 16 to 24 percent for the intervention corridors as compared with a slight increase from about 15 to 16 percent for the comparison corridors . we found that the evaluation of tact was generally well - designed , since it appropriately used an experimental design to attribute outcomes to tact's initiatives . an experimental design permits researchers to attribute outcomes to the effects of the program and rule out other influences . often with this kind of evaluation design , the participants in the intervention group are exposed to the initiative , while similar participants in the comparison group are unexposed . aside from the initiative , participants experience the same influences . that is , they face conditions that are alike during the same period . more specifically , the evaluation of the tact initiative exposed drivers in the intervention corridors to paid and earned media and high - visibility law enforcement waves , while simultaneously leaving unexposed comparable drivers in similar comparison corridors . then the evaluation compared outcomes in the two groups . this procedure was repeated in two additional corridors to make sure that any detected differences in outcomes were not unique to the first two corridors . our 2003 review of strs recommended that dot establish a systematic process for evaluating the effectiveness of the program . therefore , the evaluation of tact's methodology represents a positive step toward meeting our 2003 recommendation . the evaluation report concludes that the initiative was a success , but it did not report on tact's effect on the long - term results of the initiative , such as the impact on the number of crashes , despite earlier plans to do so .