va has addressed 22 of our prior recommendations . for example , in november 2017 , gao recommended that va develop , document , and communicate an overarching medical - surgical prime vendor - next generation ( mspv - ng ) strategy — to include how the program office will prioritize categories of supplies and increase clinician involvement in this effort . our preliminary observations from our ongoing work indicate that although va has taken some steps to address this priority recommendation , it has yet to fully implement it . further , va has also begun efforts to modernize its supply chain , but our ongoing work indicates that several key initiatives are delayed , further limiting va's ability to have an agile , responsive acquisition management system . like most medical institutions nationwide , va has faced difficulties obtaining personal protective equipment ( ppe ) for its medical workforce during the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic , and va's antiquated inventory management system hampered its ability to identify the extent to which each of its 170 medical centers faced these shortages . va officials reported that they had difficulty obtaining sufficient supplies from their existing supply chain and associated contracting vehicles ; thus , va used new contracts and agreements to fill some of this void . my remarks today are based on two issued reports — our 2019 high risk report segment on va acquisition management and our 2017 report on va's mspv - ng program — as well as our ongoing audits of va's covid - 19-related medical expenditures and va's mspv program . today , i will summarize a few key findings from these reports and some of our initial observations from this ongoing work related to va's progress toward building a more resilient supply chain . as part of our work for our november 2017 and march 2019 reports and our ongoing mspv 2.0 work , we reviewed va policies , communications , briefings , prior gao reports on best practices for organizational transformation , relevant legislation , and other documents . specifically , va plans to transition to the defense logistics agency's ( dla ) inventory management system , called defense medical logistics standard support ( dmlss ) . dmlss serves as dla's primary mspv ordering system and supports dla's inventory management , among other things . according to dla officials , dmlss produces data that vamcs could use to analyze their order history and find recommendations for future purchases . va's implementation schedule shows that it will take seven years to roll out dmlss and its successor at all vamcs . in the near - term , va had planned to implement dmlss at three medical centers in mid - to - late 2019 . however , due to technology integration issues between va's financial system and the dmlss system , implementation at these three vamcs is delayed . according to the chief supply chain officer at one of these vamcs , the original dmlss implementation date has changed several times from an initial start date of august 2019 , which may be delayed to at least october 2020 .