vi . our review focused on three objectives related to the management of peacekeeping operations: ( 1 ) the status of restructuring and strengthening peacekeeping management , including the authority for field procurement ; ( 2 ) the status of reforms to address previously identified problems with peacekeeping procurement ; and ( 3 ) un logistics base's ( unlb ) support of peacekeeping operations and its recent expansion . to assess the status of restructuring and strengthening peacekeeping management , we reviewed un documents , including the secretary - general's peacekeeping restructuring proposal , restructuring status reports , department of peacekeeping operations ( dpko ) and department of field support ( dfs ) documents , general assembly ( ga ) resolutions , advisory committee on administrative and budgetary questions ( acabq ) reports , office of internal oversight services ( oios ) reports , and other un documents . we also reviewed previous gao reports . we also used a framework that is widely accepted in the international audit community and has been adopted by leading accountability organizations , including the international organization of supreme audit institutions , the u.s. office of management and budget , and gao . this framework includes the following elements of internal control: ( 1 ) the control environment , ( 2 ) risk assessment , ( 3 ) control activities , ( 4 ) information and communications , and ( 5 ) monitoring . in addition , we conducted interviews at un headquarters in new york , with officials from the office of the secretary - general , dpko , dfs , oios , and the procurement division ( pd ) . we also met with officials at the u.s. mission to the united nations and with representatives of the acabq and with individual un member states , including leading contributors to the un and developing countries . in addition , we conducted structured interviews with chief procurement officers at 20 field missions to discuss management authority for field procurement and other issues related to the dpko / dfs restructuring . for more information on these structured interviews , see the detailed description below . in washington , d.c. , we also met with state and department of defense ( dod ) officials . to assess the status of peacekeeping procurement reforms , we reviewed un documents , including un secretariat reports on the status of procurement reforms , pd and dfs documents , acabq reports , oios reports , and other documents . we also collected data on un field procurement and on procurement staff vacancies . in addition , we reviewed previous reports and the internationally accepted internal control framework referred to above . in addition , we conducted structured telephone interviews with chief procurement officers at 20 current peacekeeping and special political missions . for these structured interviews , we selected the population of 17 current peacekeeping missions , as well as the 3 special political missions that are led by dpko . besides being led by dpko , these special political missions are also similar to the peacekeeping missions in that they have their own delegated procurement authority from un headquarters .