pay the costs but not the fees . for almost half of the questioned costs , dod decided to pay the contractor but removed those costs from the amount used to calculate the contractor's fee . these costs were composed primarily of the difference that remained between the prices paid by the contractor and by desc for fuel and fuel delivery from kuwait after the contracting officer took into account the financial positions . in concurring with the recommendation , dod noted a number of factors that exist in this contingency operation that it believed demonstrated the difficulty of conducting an analysis of the administrative feasibility of using an award fee contract in future contingency situations . these factors included urgent contracting time frames , uncertain requirements , and difficulties in identifying appropriate oversight personnel . as specified in federal regulations , the use of an award fee contract is suitable when the expected benefits of such a contract are sufficient to warrant the additional effort and cost required to monitor and evaluate contractor performance . it is precisely factors such as those outlined by dod that we believe are important for consideration when determining the administrative feasibility of a cost - plus - award fee contract in a contingency environment . the corps also experienced challenges in establishing and maintaining a consistent , reliable , and sufficient source of funding for the rio i contract , which exacerbated the problem of fully defining the requirements . the rio i task orders were funded using several sources , including the army's operation and maintenance appropriation , iraqi vested assets , and the development fund for iraq . for the fuel mission , a high - level corps official involved in the funding aspect of the contract told us that the corps had a difficult time finding enough funding to support the mission , a fact that contributed to short - term requirements . for example , this official told us that the corps received funding on a short - term basis rather than the longer - term funding it requested , which affected the quantity of fuel the corps could direct the contractor to purchase . additionally , to support the fuel mission when funding was tight , the corps began using funds from the infrastructure repair and restoration task orders to fund the fuel mission task orders , resulting in the delay of work the corps believed was critical to the repair of the oil infrastructure . dod officials and contractor representatives also told us that the contractor's business systems were not fully prepared to handle the growth in work the company experienced as a result of the war in iraq , and this contributed to the delays in proposal submission . from 2002 to 2004 , the contractor's revenues grew from $5.7 billion to $11.9 billion . subsequent to the issuance of the rio i contract , and after the war in iraq began , dcaa identified deficiencies in several of the contractor's business systems . for example , dcaa considered the contractor's estimating system — a system important for proposal development — adequate prior to the issuance of the rio i contract .