dhs acquisition guidance . secret service acquisition guidance . among these topic areas , we then selected five areas that , in our professional judgment , were of particular importance to successful workforce planning and management . they were also previously identified as part of our high - risk and key issues work on human capital management . these areas include: ( 1 ) strategic planning , ( 2 ) recruitment and hiring , ( 3 ) training and development , ( 4 ) employee morale , and ( 5 ) performance management . we also reviewed these same sources and identified numerous leading practices associated with the five topic areas . among these leading practices , we then selected three leading practices within each of the five areas ( for a total of 15 selected practices ) . the selected practices were foundational practices that , in our professional judgment , were of particular importance to successful workforce planning and management . table 14 identifies the five selected workforce areas and 15 selected associated practices . to determine the extent to which the secret service had implemented the selected leading workforce planning and management practices for its it workforce , we obtained and assessed documentation and compared it against the 15 selected practices . in particular , we analyzed the secret service's human capital strategic plan , human capital staffing plan , it strategic plan , documentation of the component's staffing model that it used to determine the number of it staff needed , an independent verification and validation report on the component's staffing models , documentation of the current number of it staff , the secret service's recruitment and outreach plans , documentation of dhs's hiring authorities ( which are applicable to the secret service ) , the secret service's training strategic plan , it workforce training plan , action plans for improving employee morale , and templates used for measuring and reporting employee performance . we also interviewed secret service officials — including the cio , deputy cio , and workforce planning staff — about the component's workforce - related policies and documentation . further , we discussed with the officials the secret service's efforts to implement the selected workforce practices for its it workforce . regarding our assessments of the secret service's implementation of the 15 selected workforce planning and management practices , we assessed a practice as being fully implemented if component officials provided supporting documentation that demonstrated all aspects of the practice . we assessed a practice as not implemented if the officials did not provide any supporting documentation for that practice , or if the documentation provided did not demonstrate any aspect of the practice . we assessed a practice as being partly implemented if the officials provided supporting documentation that demonstrated some , but not all , aspects of the selected practice .