additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this review was undertaken in response to that request . the objectives of our review were to determine which , if any , railroad retirement benefits are portable ; what changes could be made to the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) that might enhance the portability of railroad retirement benefits into fers for former railroad employees who obtain federal civilian employment and the cost and management implications of those changes for fers and whether such changes could be made cost - neutral to fers ; and what changes could be made to railroad retirement that might enhance the portability of its retirement benefits and the cost and management implications of such program changes for railroad retirement . portability refers to an employee's ability to retain retirement benefits when leaving one job for another while maintaining the value of those benefits until retirement . to determine which , if any , railroad retirement program benefits are portable , we first reviewed our prior work and retirement literature and interviewed experts at the employee benefit research institute , watson - wyatt worldwide , office of personnel management ( opm ) , congressional research service ( crs ) , railroad retirement board ( rrb ) , association of american railroads ( aar ) , and the united transportation union ( utu ) to determine what portability means and how retirement program features can help to achieve it . we then reviewed rrb documents and provisions of the railroad retirement act , as amended . we compared program features regarding eligibility for benefits to the ways in which such features could be designed to enhance portability as determined through our literature review and discussions with experts . we confirmed our understanding of what and how railroad retirement features enhance or limit portability with officials at rrb , crs , and opm . to identify changes to fers that could enhance the portability of the railroad retirement program benefits into fers and develop information on any associated costs and the policy and management implications of the changes , we worked with retirement policy specialists at opm and crs . in collaboration with these specialists , we used feasibility and cost - neutrality as our criteria for selecting changes to fers . using these criteria , we selected a transfer of service credit approach , which was similar to transfers of service credit commonly described in the literature on multiemployer defined benefit ( db ) plans and could be cost - neutral to fers . to understand the potential increase in retirement costs from a service credit arrangement , we developed illustrative examples for three hypothetical employees , using information provided by the federal railroad administration that represented former railroad employees . to calculate what the full actuarial cost would be if those employees purchased service credits under fers , opm used different salary and service histories for each . we did not determine how or what funds might be transferred from the railroad retirement fund to the civil service retirement and disability trust fund to help fund the purchase .