work that we have done supports these assessments . although banking officials have acknowledged weaknesses in the structure of the u.s. bank oversight system , they have also found strengths . for example , some regulatory officials believe that regulatory monopolies or single regulators run the risk of being inflexible and myopic ; are slow to respond to changes in the marketplace ; and , in the long term , are averse to risktaking and innovation by banking institutions . these officials have stated that having multiple federal regulators in the u.s. system has resulted in the diversity , inventiveness , and flexibility in the banking system that is important for responding to changes in market share and in technology . these officials consider the present system to be flexible enough to allow market - driven changes and innovations . the same officials have said that the present system of multiple regulators — with the ability of banking institutions to change charters — provides checks and balances against arbitrary actions and rigid and inflexible policies that could stifle healthy growth in the banking industry . on the basis of the extensive work we have done in areas such as bank supervision , enforcement , failure resolution , and innovative financial activities — such as derivatives — we have previously identified four fundamental principles that we believe congress could use when considering the best approach for modernizing the current regulatory structure . we believe that the federal bank oversight structure should include consolidated and comprehensive oversight of companies owning federally insured banks and thrifts , with coordinated functional regulation and supervision of individual components ; independence from undue political pressure , balanced by appropriate accountability and adequate congressional oversight ; consistent rules , consistently applied for similar activities ; and enhanced efficiency and as low a regulatory burden as possible consistent with maintaining safety and soundness . aspects of bank oversight systems in canada , france , germany , japan , and the united kingdom ( u.k. ) may be useful to consider when addressing bank oversight modernization . all of the foreign systems had fewer total entities overseeing banking institutions than did the u.s. system of bank oversight — ranging from one ( u.k. ) to three ( france ) . no more than two oversight entities in the foreign countries were responsible for any single major oversight activity — chartering , regulation , supervision , or enforcement . in all five countries we studied , banking organizations typically were subject to consolidated oversight , with one oversight entity being legally responsible and accountable for the entire banking organization , including its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries . the oversight systems in the countries we reviewed generally included roles for both central banks and finance ministries . this reflects a close relationship of traditional central bank responsibilities with oversight of commercial banks as well as the national government's ultimate responsibility to maintain public confidence and stability in the financial system . at the same time , most of the foreign countries incorporated checks and balances to guard against undue political influence and to ensure sound supervisory decisionmaking . the other countries' deposit insurers had narrower roles than that of fdic and often were not government entities .