additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . such rejections can result from false alarms . also , rejections include any vehicles or containers that the system cannot effectively inspect , such as fully loaded trucks . yet , sometimes customs uses the argument that manual unloading of vehicles or containers represents fixed costs that should not be considered in any comparative analyses . however , while retaining the same staff for opening trucks and containers , customs could seize more contraband with pfna because it provides a much higher detection rate than any other technique . thus , pfna would provide a better return on cost than other inspection technologies . a pfna system can be accommodated in different size areas , depending on the site requirement . the current system , with the existing type of elecrostatic accelerator , protective shielding , and full - size truck interrogation tunnel , occupies about 4,000 to 5,000 square feet . also , the joint assessment report disqualifies pfna based on size , ignoring the space required for the alternative , namely partially or fully unloading trucks or containers . use of a pfna system , compared with the less efficient x - ray systems , results in a better utilization of the scarce real estate in ports of entry . the current throughput rate of a pfna system is similar to or exceeds that of the x - ray system selected by treasury to inspect empty trucks . the agreed - upon goal was to have a pfna inspection system that could be moved from one location to another within 14 days . however , the joint assessment report said that treasury wants a system that can be relocated within 3 to 5 days . ancore has been in discussions with barge manufacturers about mounting the pfna system on a barge , which could be towed from one port to another as a method for meeting treasury's time requirement . in response to our inquiries , ancore officials reaffirmed their disagreement with the joint assessment report's conclusions . further , ancore's officials commented that a fairly designed and conducted field test would demonstrate the operational effectiveness of a pfna system . ondcp's position is that a pfna system should be operationally field tested . ondcp officials noted that the technology has successfully passed laboratory tests , which proved the physics of neutron interrogation . in a 1996 report on inspection systems , ondcp concluded that: “the state - of - the art in pfna inspection systems is not sufficiently developed for current operational use . any field implementation of the current pfna system should be in an operational test bed environment.” ondcp recommended that a test bed at a port of entry be procured to facilitate gathering data and making a more informed , analytical decision . more recently , in its july 1998 10-year plan , ondcp characterized neutron - based inspection technology as an emerging technology ( 7 to 10 years out ) rather than an off - the - shelf technology .