appendix i lists these organizations . we also discussed agency initiatives to improve the clarity of tax forms and publications with various irs officials involved in managing these activities . another development that may improve the quality of the forms and publications is the possible reorganization of the tax forms and publications division . currently under consideration , this reorganization would result in tax law specialists' becoming responsible for preparing related forms and publications . presently , forms branch staff are not involved in the development of publications . similarly , publications branch staff do not prepare forms . according to irs officials , if implemented , the reorganization would merge staff into two new branches , one addressing individual tax issues and the other addressing business tax issues . tax law specialists would be assigned one or more forms and accompanying publications . irs is considering whether such a reorganization would make forms and publications more readable for taxpayers by improving staff expertise and achieving greater consistency in language between the forms and publications among other things . according to irs officials , the decision on this reorganization has been postponed pending completion of irs' broader internal review of its processes . while irs gets information on the clarity of forms and publications for individual taxpayers from several sources , irs officials acknowledge that there is not a systematic way for obtaining input from the many individual taxpayers not represented by particular interest groups or associations . these officials told us that irs has not met with the same success in obtaining the views of individual taxpayers as it has attained among the business community and organizations of tax professionals , but the agency has several efforts underway that may help to improve this situation . to obtain the views of individual taxpayers on such matters as the clarity of forms and publications , irs solicits written comments from taxpayers , holds periodic town meetings where taxpayers can discuss their concerns , distributes customer satisfaction surveys , and conducts focus group sessions on selected forms revisions . however , irs officials said that these sources generally do not yield many substantive insights as to what specifically confuses individual taxpayers . irs officials have told us that the concerns expressed by individuals in these forums have not presented a precise view as to what individuals find wrong with the forms . according to these officials , they also do not generally result in useful suggestions for revising the forms . however , the officials said that while focus groups generally provide better results , the groups are costly to conduct . because of this cost factor , only a limited number of focus groups are held . also , focus groups do not cover a broad base of taxpayers and only address one or two forms each year . nonetheless , officials told us that irs hopes to find new ways of identifying the concerns of individuals . in an effort to better capture these concerns , the publications branch will resume its annual interviews with the agency's telephone assistors , who respond to questions from taxpayers on the toll - free telephone system .