( see fig . according to data provided by irs , the percent of time applied to tax gap investigations for fiscal years 1993 through 1996 increased 13 percentage points . under title 26 u.s.c. , irs has authority to investigate alleged criminal tax violations , such as tax evasion and filing a false tax return . under title 18 u.s.c. , irs has authority to investigate a broad range of fraudulent activities , such as false claims against the government and money laundering . under title 31 u.s.c. , irs is responsible for enforcing certain recordkeeping and reporting requirements of large currency transactions , such as cash bank deposits of more than $10,000 . in carrying out its responsibilities , cid coordinates as necessary with irs' district counsel , the tax division within the department of justice ( justice ) , and local u.s . attorneys to prosecute violators of these statutes . combating money laundering and other financial crimes is considered a high priority by both justice and the department of the treasury ( treasury ) . according to justice officials , because of cid's expertise in conducting detailed financial investigations , u. s. attorneys and law enforcement agencies routinely rely on cid's assistance in investigating financial crimes , particularly those involving money laundering related to narcotics trafficking . in addition , cid agents have access to tax information , which they can use to develop financial investigations more fully . cid is also involved in ongoing efforts to identify and investigate emerging financial crimes , such as health care and bankruptcy fraud . according to cid officials , although such assistance places competing demands on cid's time , it also aids in establishing the cooperative environment conducive to getting cid's tax cases prosecuted and in obtaining information that can lead to criminal tax investigations . historically , cid's total staffing and budget have represented about 5 percent of irs' overall resources . as of the end of fiscal year 1996 , cid had the full - time equivalent of 4,504 staff , including 3,065 special agents , and a budget of $366 million . cid is also reimbursed for some of the assistance it provides to other law enforcement agencies , particularly justice's organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) program . to determine the actions cid has taken since the early 1990s to increase the time spent on tax investigations relative to nontax investigations , we interviewed senior cid officials in irs' national office , officials from both the tax and criminal divisions in justice , and officials from the office of the under secretary for enforcement in treasury . we interviewed the cid officials because of their responsibilities in managing cid operations and setting division policies . justice and treasury officials were interviewed to obtain their opinions regarding cid's ( 1 ) assistance in narcotics and money laundering investigations and ( 2 ) increased emphasis on tax investigations . we also reviewed cid's annual goals and objectives and annual performance reports for fiscal years 1990 through 1996 , as well as relevant documentation on the reorganization of its administrative functions and operations . to determine the types of investigations initiated and the results of referrals to u.s .