we agree . the building and construction trades department stated that it found nothing in the draft report that is incorrect concerning the information that it provided but had three further significant comments . first , the department expressed concern that the draft report did not fully or fairly reflect the benefits offered by plas or the extent of their use . the department cited several benefits it believes plas provide . although our report noted most of these perceived benefits , it did not include all of the ones cited by the department , such as ( 1 ) joint labor - management safety training programs and ( 2 ) joint labor - management dispute resolution procedures for all labor and employment disputes affecting craft personnel . as the report states , our listing of perceived benefits and perceived disadvantages was intended to be illustrative , not exhaustive . we did not make any changes to the report to reflect a higher extent of pla use because it already reflected all the uses the department and others provided , and the department did not provide any additional data on pla usage . the department also noted its disagreement with opponents' views that plas increase costs and decrease competition ; however , these matters were beyond the scope of our review and are not discussed in the report . second , the department stated that our description of the associated builders and contractors of america should show that the organization is a leading opponent of plas . we agree and revised the report accordingly . third , the department stated that the report provides a misleading picture of pla case law in new york state . it refers to at least two of the reported court decisions where plas were overturned , saying that one was later reversed by a higher court and suggesting that the other decision was rendered moot by a later decision on another case . although we confirmed that the decision for one of these cases was reversed by a higher court and noted this in our report , we did not change our report to address the second case because the department did not provide any specific information on the case . in general , we identified the reported state cases from available literature and did not determine the ultimate disposition of the state cases beyond the information that was available in the literature we reviewed . we clarified our report to provide additional emphasis to this aspect of our methodology . the associated general contractors of america made three main points . first , it emphasized its opposition to the mandated use of plas on public projects and cited certain disadvantages of plas that were not included in our report .