most of the policies we reviewed varied in their coverage . of the 21 policies we reviewed , 14 applied to personnel either within ( 1 ) headquarters , ( 2 ) a specific federal region , ( 3 ) more than one federal region , or ( 4 ) specific dod locations . in headquarters , for example , dol's policy covered only selected local union 12 bargaining unit employees , within a flexiplace pilot , who worked in the washington , d.c. , area . also , only epa employees working in offices within federal regions 8 and 9 were covered by the epa's federal region 8 and 9 policies , respectively . in contrast to epa's regional policies , the dot office of motor carriers' policy covered employees in offices within all federal regions . in addition , the naval air weapons center's policy that we reviewed applied only to employees working at the point mugu , california , location . these 14 policies are described in tables iii.2 , iii.3 , iii.4 , and iii.5 . although none of the policies were departmentwide in coverage , five agencies within three departments and two independent agencies had agencywide policies that covered all their employees in all geographic locations . these agencies were the federal aviation , federal highway , and federal railroad administrations within dot ; the natural resources conservation service within usda ; the defense finance and accounting service within dod ; gsa ; and ssa . these seven policies are described in table iii.1 . although about 47,000 ( 47 percent ) of the nearly 99,100 employees at the 26 locations we visited were covered by formal flexiplace policies , about 28,000 of these employees were in effect excluded from participation because of limitations within policies . for example , two of the policies we reviewed limited flexiplace participants mainly to medically disabled employees , which in effect excluded most employees covered by the policy from actually participating at any given point in time . to illustrate , of the estimated 4,000 employees in denver who were covered by the defense finance and accounting service's policy , 3 individuals who were disabled were allowed to temporarily work at home for periods during 1994 to 1996 . similarly , according to agency records , fewer than 25 of the 13,305 ssa headquarters employees participated under the flexiplace policy that limited participation to those with certain medical conditions . in addition , one policy that we reviewed limited participation to employees in a specific occupation . the memorandum of understanding between the national treasury employees union ( nteu ) and ssa management limited participation to attorney advisors in ssa's office of hearings and appeals . in the five locations we visited that had no formal flexiplace policies , the majority of the employees nevertheless had the potential ability to participate in flexiplace arrangements . for example , approximately 6,000 epa headquarters employees were not covered by a formal policy because their unions had not yet approved management's draft policy . agency officials told us , however , that they generally allowed flexiplace participation and that about 50 headquarters employees occasionally worked at home under guidelines from a previous pilot .