each standard has one or more key elements . ( see table i.1 in app . i for a list of these standards and their associated key elements. ) workpapers provide documentation on the scope of the audit and the diligence with which it was completed . according to the irm , audit workpapers ( 1 ) assist in planning the audit ; ( 2 ) record the procedures applied , tests performed , and evidence gathered ; ( 3 ) provide support for technical conclusions ; and ( 4 ) provide the basis for review by management . audit workpapers also provide the principal support for the auditor's report , which is to be provided to the audited taxpayer , on findings and conclusions about the taxpayer's correct tax liability . the primary tool used by irs to control quality under the nine standards is the review of ongoing audit work . this review is the responsibility of irs' first - line supervisors , called group managers , who are responsible for the quality of audits done by the auditors they manage . by reviewing audit workpapers during the audit , group managers attempt to identify problems with audit quality and ensure that the problems are corrected . after an audit closes , irs uses its examination quality measurement system ( eqms ) to collect information about the audit process , changes to the process , level of audit quality , and success of any efforts to improve the process and quality . eqms staff are to review audit workpapers and assess the degree to which the auditor complied with the audit standards . to pass a standard , the audit must pass all of the key elements . in analyzing the sampled audits , we recorded whether the workpapers contained documentation that a supervisor had reviewed the workpapers during the audit . documentation of the auditor's methodology and support for the recommended tax adjustments are especially important when the taxpayer does not agree with the recommendations . in these cases , the workpapers are to be used to make decisions about how much additional tax is owed by the taxpayer . inadequate workpapers may result in having the auditor do more work or even in having the recommended adjustment overturned . irs' primary quality control mechanism is supervisory review of the audit workpapers to ensure adherence to the audit standards . however , our review of the workpapers in the sampled audits uncovered limited documentation of supervisory review . as a result , the files lacked documentation that irs group managers reviewed workpapers during the audits to help ensure that the recommended tax adjustments were supported and verified , and that the audits did not unnecessarily burden the audited taxpayers . for example , we found instances of missing or incomplete activity records and missing workpaper summaries . however , the irm does not require that documentation of this review be maintained in the audit files . we found little documentation in the workpapers that group managers reviewed workpapers before sharing the audit results with the taxpayer .