iii ) . aguirre's report indicated that it had performed numerous data analyses , reviewed written policies and practices , validated a service database , visited 10 postal sites , and conducted a survey and interviews . such an approach allowed the issues presented in the report to be discussed from several perspectives , which in our opinion and based on our standards for performing studies and evaluations , was an acceptable methodological approach . for example , aguirre made what we believe were appropriate adjustments to the 1990 census clf data to arrive at compatible postal districts for comparisons . we did not include employees in pces positions in our analyses for this report . according to the service , one of its corporate goals is a commitment to employees , which includes an effort to provide equal employment opportunities to all employees , take advantage of its diverse workforce , and compete effectively in the communications marketplace . to that end , the service created its diversity development department in headquarters in 1992 , which was to foster an all - inclusive business environment . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . identified best practices used by other organizations in the private sector reported to have successful diversity programs identified promising practices used in service's diversity program identified certain organizations' diversity programs / objectives as models against which the service can compare its strategies , etc . william r. chatlos , senior social science analyst douglas sloane , senior social science analyst hazel bailey , evaluator ( communications analyst ) . sherrill h. johnson , assistant director billy w. scott , evaluator - in - charge the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . we do not believe that it is appropriate to compare the eeo group representation in specific eas positions or levels in the service with the clf because clf data are not , nor were they intended to be , broken down into an appropriate pool of employees for such a comparison ( i.e. , similar positions or levels , as well as individuals with appropriate qualifications for those positions ) . further , aguirre officials told us that aguirre based its finding of the glass ceiling primarily on its analyses of fiscal year 1996 data and comparisons of that data with the clf and secondarily on discussions it had with service employees .