viewpoint , inc . viewpoint , inc. , provides family / community prevention workshops to the target areas . provides a staff member at no cost to administer the weed and seed program . doubled size of bike patrol — now has a two - person bike patrol team in all four weed and seed target areas . atlanta's weed and seed program officials stated that an important goal for their program is to leverage additional resources from non - executive office for weed and seed ( eows ) sources to become self - sustaining . during the course of our site visit , we identified several partnerships established by the atlanta weed and seed program to leverage additional resources . these cooperative arrangements involved partners such as the united states navy and the georgia bureau of investigation . table iii.3 illustrates examples of leveraging efforts that were identified through our survey and site visit . table iii.3: examples of atlanta weed and seed site's leveraging efforts type of partnership / cooperative arrangementfederal government name of partner / cooperative arrangement usn georgia bureau of investigation ( gbi ) fulton county sheriff's department viewpoint , inc. pyramid communications systems , inc . description usn is to host the defy summer camp — a youth outreach program intended to promote positive life choices in 9-12 year olds through use of role models and education . hud / oig agents work with the weed task force to investigate crimes occurring in and around public housing developments and assist in the prosecution of individuals involved in criminal activity . agents assist with the execution of warrants involving residents of public housing . gbi provides drug awareness and resistance education ( dare ) instructor training to atlanta police officers and other law enforcement officers who are dedicated to the atlanta weed and seed project . in addition , it provides manpower support to the atlanta weed task force and share intelligence relating to criminal activities in or affecting the weed and seed neighborhoods . deputy sheriffs provide junior deputy training in weed and seed neighborhoods as well as at the safe haven summer program . in addition , fulton county deputies conduct team building camp during public school spring break . viewpoint conducts community / family education and prevention workshops for the three weed and seed communities . in addition , viewpoint is to provide a maximum of 20 slots for weed and seed residents identified as needing residential treatment at their residential care facilities . pyramid communication systems ( in partnership with atlanta university's economic development center ) assists in the development and implementation of business plans for the cookie collaborative in mechanicsville , the concession store for capitol homes , and the employment placement firm in thomasville heights . site's performance measures to date , atlanta has not developed site - specific indicators to measure the results of its program . however , officials said that under the leadership of the mayor's office , they have developed a detailed weeding strategy that sets forth overall goals and roles of the community , law enforcement , and prosecution and have detailed innovative ideas for consideration . specific measures of success to be linked to these goals are under consideration .