were you the driver ? yes no – skip to item 37 4 . how many police officers were present during ( this / the most recent ) incident ? one – skip to item 6 more than one ( record actual number. ) form ppcs - 1 ( 5-14-99 ) motor vehicle stops – continued 5 . were the police officers white , black , or some other race ? all white all black all of some other race mostly white mostly black mostly some other race equally mixed don't know race of any / some 6 . was the police officer white , black , or some other race ? white black some other race don't know 7 . were you arrested ? yes – skip to item 9 no don't know 8 . did the police officer ( s ) threaten to arrest you ? yes no don't know 9 . did the police officer ( s ) search the vehicle ? yes – ask item 10 no don't know 10 . at any time during ( this / the most recent ) incident did the police officer ( s ) ask permission to search the vehicle ? yes – ask item 11 no don't know 11 . did you give the police officer ( s ) permission to search the vehicle ? yes no don't know 12 . did the police officer ( s ) find any of the following items in the vehicle ? ( read answer categories. ) mark ( x ) all that apply . other evidence of a crime – please specify 13 . do you think the police officer ( s ) had a legitimate reason to search the vehicle ? yes no don't know 14 . at any time during ( this / the most recent ) incident , did the police officer ( s ) search you , frisk you , or pat you down ? yes – ask item 15 no don't know 15 . at any time during ( this / the most recent ) incident , did the police officer ( s ) ask permission to search you , frisk you , or pat you down ? yes – ask item 16 no don't know 16 . at any time during ( this / the most recent ) incident , did you give the police officer ( s ) permission to search you , frisk you , or pat you down ? yes no don't know 17 . did the police officer ( s ) find any of the following items on or near you ? ( read answer categories. ) mark ( x ) all that apply . other evidence of a crime – please specify 18 . do you think the police officer ( s ) had a legitimate reason to search you , frisk you , or pat you down ? form ppcs - 1 ( 5-14-99 ) page 3 19 . did the police officer ( s ) give a reason for stopping the vehicle ? yes – ask item 20 no don't know 20 . what was the reason or reasons ? anything else ? mark ( x ) all that apply .