branching is not permitted . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . if so , will these large banks have the necessary flexibility to meet all small business needs ? others , such as bankers from large banks , however , responded to these concerns by noting that large banks were becoming much more active in the small business market . as in california , our first step in collecting information on whether unrestricted branching had affected small business lending in washington was to ascertain which category of bank was the more common provider of small business loans — large banks with extensive branch networks or smaller banks . the most complete sources of information available on small business lending in washington were call reports and sba data . neither of these sources , however , gave a complete picture of small business lending . call reports were limited because the data included all commercial lending , until june 1993 , when outstanding small business loans were separately categorized . sba data were limited because the data only pertained to one type of small business lending , loans backed by an sba guaranty . although analyzing these two information sources neither reflected the total amount of small business lending nor established conclusively which categories of banks were the most common providers of small business loans , the information provided us with an insight into commercial lending . our analysis of call report data from 1985 through 1992 indicated that large banks made more loans ( both consumer and commercial ) , as a percentage of assets , than did smaller banks . for example , in 1992 large banks invested 74 percent of their assets in loans , compared to 57 percent for smaller banks . figure iii.2 shows that depending upon the year , large banks had invested about 35 percent to 39 percent of their assets in commercial loans , and smaller banks had invested about 31 percent to 33 percent . regarding the type of commercial bank lending , figure iii.3 shows that large banks usually made more c&i and commercial real estate loans than did smaller banks . the only exception was 1992 , when both made a similar amount of commercial real estate loans , about 17.5 and 18 percent respectively . the figure also shows that both large and smaller banks decreased their c&i lending and increased their commercial real estate lending over the period , with smaller banks having the greater changes . our analysis of the quarterly june 1993 call report data on small business lending showed that large banks devoted a greater dollar amount than smaller banks to small business lending ( i.e. , c&i and commercial real estate loans ) during the 3 months , but that smaller banks devoted a greater portion of their assets to small business lending than large banks .