ed . burr ridge , ill.: irwin , 1992 . sandford , cedric . cash flow or income ? the choice of base for company taxation . the world bank , working paper series no . 177 , apr . new york state department of taxation and finance . improving sales tax compliance: recommendations for a compliance improvement program , jan. 1993 . survey of state sales tax compliance problems and programs , jan. 1993 . organization for economic cooperation and development . consumption tax trends . paris: oecd , 1995 . the personal income tax base: a comparative survey . paris: oecd , 1990 . peat , marwick , mitchell & co. report to the american retail federation on costs to retailers of sales and use tax compliance , nov. 16 , 1982 . pearlman , ronald a . “transition issues in moving to a consumption tax: a tax lawyer's perspective.” in economic effects of fundamental tax reform , eds . henry j. aaron and william g. gale . washington , d.c.: brookings institution press , 1996 . is withholding generally required ? self - employed ( sole proprietors ) informal suppliers ( self - employed individuals operating on a cash basis ) variations in compliance patterns also existed in the corporate sector . small corporations , whose compliance level for 2.3 million firms was 61 percent for tax year 1987 ( down from 81 percent for a smaller number of tax year 1980 firms ) , tended to mirror the compliance patterns of sole proprietors . underreported income was the biggest compliance problem and enough documentation was often a difficulty . large corporations , in contrast , tended to have issues associated with the ambiguity and complexity of the tax code . table ii.10 shows , as of late 1995 , the largest open examination issues in the examination program covering various tax years for the nation's largest corporations . in 1988 , irs estimated a “tax gap” of as much as $127 billion between tax year 1992 income taxes owed on income from legal sources and income taxes voluntarily remitted . this gap did not include taxes that go uncollected from illegal activities , such as drug dealing and prostitution . thus , the gap reflected part of the underground economy — the legal transactions that occurred without being reported to the tax agency — but not the other part — the illegal transactions . as shown in table ii.11 , irs attributed about three - fourths of the tax gap to individuals and about one - fourth to corporations . tax gap distribution ( percent ) in 1996 , irs presented new estimates of the individual income tax gap , this time using compliance data for tax years 1985 and 1988 , as opposed to 1982 . the gap consisted of a nonfiling gap , or tax liability owed by those not filing required returns voluntarily and in a timely manner ; an underreporting gap , or liability not voluntarily reported by filers ; and an underpayment gap , or liability reported but not paid voluntarily and in a timely manner .