however , an official with the u.s . fish and wildlife service and various academic experts contended that canadian authorities should undertake a risk assessment appropriate to the unique circumstances in the pacific northwest . they argued that canadian sanitary measures should also take into consideration such factors as geography , ecosystems , and the effectiveness of sanitary controls in washington state . their comments are discussed at the end of this letter . we conducted our work from june 1994 to february 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since 1985 , dfo , in coordination with the british columbian ministry of environment , lands and parks , has required extended quarantine for imports of fertilized atlantic salmon eggs . further , dfo has banned all imports of atlantic salmon smolts . this policy was established to protect the province's valuable wild and cultured salmonid stocks from inadvertent contamination by pathogens that might be introduced with imported fish eggs or live fish . the policy was officially adopted in writing in 1987 . the following were some major elements of the 1987 policy: imports had to comply with the canadian national fish health protection regulations . imports were permitted only from facilities that had been approved or certified by a canadian fish health officer appointed by dfo . only fertilized eggs that had been surface disinfected in an iodine solution could be imported . no live fish ( smolts ) or unfertilized eggs were allowed . all atlantic salmon eggs and resultant stock had to be held under strict quarantine for a minimum of 12 months . shipments were limited to 300,000 eggs per year per import license . eggs were allowed only from broodstock or parent fish that had been held at the source facility ( hatchery ) , separate from other stocks , for one full generation . dfo , however , did not lift its ban on imports of atlantic salmon smolts . in explaining their rationale for establishing the current policy on imports of fertilized atlantic salmon eggs and smolts into british columbia , dfo officials cited examples of fish pathogens that had been transferred with shipments of live fish in other parts of the world . specifically , they referred to two pathogens introduced into norway during the mid - 1980s.dfo officials noted that there are numerous reports in the scientific literature of pathogens identified in various parts of the world , including areas of the united states , that have not been found in salmonid populations in british columbia . they maintained that the current policy was justified in order to prevent the introduction of such pathogens into the province , particularly since atlantic salmon is a species that is not native to british columbia . they argued that the policy was not intended to be a nontariff barrier to imports ; they pointed out that the policy was applied impartially to imports of atlantic salmon eggs and smolts from any source outside british columbia , including other canadian provinces . spokespersons for associations representing producers in both washington state and british columbia challenged the need for the costly , prolonged quarantine requirement for fertilized eggs , given dfo's strict rules for certifying hatchery facilities that can export to canada .