( see app . i for more information on the methodology we used to identify banks actively involved in offshore private banking. ) for the most part , examinations reviewed were conducted during 1996 and 1997 . we interviewed frbny and occ examiners to determine the extent to which general private banking deficiencies identified during examinations applied to the banks' offshore private banking activities or to obtain their perspectives on the adequacy of corrective actions taken by banks . in total , we identified 25 banks for our review . it should be noted that these banks do not represent all banks that may be involved in offshore private banking activities , only a subset of banks with a significant level of offshore assets in certain jurisdictions identified to be particularly susceptible to money laundering . ( please check one box in each row .

 ) ” change the way you do business ( eg , ask clients to sign confidentiality waivers up - front ) lose business to other banks and / or financial institutions ( e.g . brokerage houses ) that do not have this requirement lose business primarily of foreign clients who value their confidentiality transfer accounts of foreign clients to offshore affiliates change your approach to the private banking business ( e.g , reduce the size or eliminate the bank's private banking business in the united states ) other changes: trust company in offshore location would have to counsel its clients to direct their assets elsewhere ( i.e. , outside of the united states ) other changes: increase in civil litigation against clients because information will be readily available . kane a. wong , assistant director evelyn e. aquino , evaluator - in - charge josé r. peña , senior evaluator gerhard brostrom , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . we applied the following steps to identify banks actively involved in offshore private banking activities . step 1: identified offshore jurisdictions that represent areas particularly susceptible to money laundering . we identified 17 offshore jurisdictions that were viewed as financial secrecy havens and particularly susceptible to money laundering . we identified these jurisdictions using information from the internal revenue service , the department of state , and the economist intelligence unit of the united kingdom . u.s. general accounting office p.o . step 2: identified which of the 17 offshore jurisdictions had a “significant” amount of assets managed or controlled by banks operating in the united states . we identified nine jurisdictions — the bahamas , bahrain , the cayman islands , the channel islands , hong kong , luxembourg , panama , singapore , and switzerland — that had a significant amount of assets managed or controlled by banks operating in the united states . we identified these jurisdictions on the basis of a minimum threshold of $1 billion in total u.s. bank branch or subsidiary assets . our source of asset information was a report generated by the federal reserve on foreign branches and subsidiaries of u.s. banks . step 3: identified banks with a significant amount of assets in one or more of the nine offshore jurisdictions identified in step 2 .