requests to change the software . requests to change an existing ad hoc report or add a new ad hoc report . requests to change an existing standard report or add a new standard report . any question that is being asked to gather information . calls specifically related to questions about reports . requests for maintenance for unexpected problems . issues regarding the monthly maintenance and operation schedule . questions concerning policies and procedures . requests regarding a rent bill or the rent billing process . requests on any security issue coming through the help desk . request to change information in a table that supports the system for tracking and administering real property ( star ) . requests that can be solved or partially solved by additional training . calls about any part of the system the user may be having problems with , except reports , including bugs and essential nonfunctioning software . calls about any problems the user may be having regarding reports . establish national policies , answer questions , and resolve disputes in a timely manner . change the central office culture of “information is power so i won't share it.” ensure that changed business practices and new tools are adopted at the working level . prepare employees for the business practices and system changes and emphasize the importance of needed training . take a proactive position regarding data integrity and commit the resources needed to get the job done . resolve issues quickly , so employees do not disengage completely from the issue , making it even worse . instill in all employees a big picture perspective to avoid the “that's not my job attitude.” become familiar with the systems the employees must use on a daily basis in order to appreciate the effort needed to learn the system . the users should be able to look up what to do . a report is under development that would be similar to the combined space report , which provided such information as building address , square footage , and lease - specific information . renewed emphasis has been placed on examining a preview of the bill in star before actual bills are sent . establish accountability for business decisions . managers must see the advantages of acting proactively — this must become a core value in pbs . improves corporate competitiveness . in the future , pbs hopes to expand star's capabilities by adding more features , such as direct access by an agency to view the information that star maintains concerning the agency's assigned space . the 128 users we interviewed identified problems they had experienced using star as well as several benefits they saw being derived from the use of star . of the problems identified by users , 17 were mentioned by at least 10 of the users . one problem was mentioned by only one user but was included in this report because it involves accounting for rent revenues . according to the star project manager , each type of problem that was reported to us had been reported to the star project team through the star help desk and logged into 16 categories .