assessment . this phase entails assessing the year 2000 impact on the agency , identifying core business areas , inventorying and analyzing the systems supporting the core business areas , and prioritizing the conversion or replacement of these systems . it is also during this phase that the agency is to initiate contingency planning and identify and secure the necessary resources . renovation . this phase deals with converting , replacing , or eliminating selected systems and applications . in so doing , it is important that the agency consider the complex interdependencies among the systems and applications . validation . this phase deals with testing , verifying , and validating all converted or replaced systems and applications and ensuring that they perform as expected . this entails the agency testing in an operational environment the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced systems , applications , and databases . implementation . this phase entails deploying and implementing year 2000-compliant systems and components . it is also during this phase that the agency's data exchange contingency plans are implemented , if necessary . this appendix contains additional information on the status of irs' infrastructure areas that were in the initial steps of irs' 14-step conversion process at the time of our review . these initial steps are comparable to either our assessment or renovation phase of our year 2000 conversion model . according to the office of management and budget's guidelines , agencies were to have completed the assessment phase by june 1997 . irs placed a priority on assessing its mainframe computers first because these computers encompass most of irs' tax processing systems . irs is still assessing its telecommunications networks , external data exchanges , and the systems software and hardware for minicomputers / file servers and personal computers . irs has completed its assessment of its mainframe computers and has scheduled their conversion . all existing mainframe hardware and systems software are currently scheduled to be converted between january 1998 and january 1999 . irs' mainframe computer systems constitute the core of irs' data processing activities , including the processing of tax return and remittance data and the storage of taxpayer account and collection activity data . according to the commissioner's executive steering committee documents , the telecommunications networks conversion is significantly behind schedule for meeting the january 1999 milestone . although irs has established conversion schedules for the mission - critical areas of its telecommunications networks and is integrating these schedules into an overall plan , many of the individual components that make up these mission - critical areas have not been fully assessed . generally , these components have not been fully assessed because irs' inventory of telecommunications resources has not been sufficiently detailed to allow irs to ( 1 ) confirm the year 2000-compliant status of all telecommunications components , ( 2 ) develop detailed conversion schedules , and ( 3 ) track conversion progress against those schedules . in part , the inventory has been difficult to compile because irs' telecommunications networks include both irs - owned and multiple vendor - maintained networks and equipment , such as the treasury - supported network , that cannot be easily combined to serve as a comprehensive source of information .