additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . presort mail is not labeled correctly . when verifying mailings , if the acceptance clerk determines that more than 5 percent of a mailing is not prepared correctly , then the mailing is failed . the mailer then has two options: ( 1 ) rework the mail so that it meets postal specifications and qualifies for the bulk postage rate applied for or ( 2 ) pay the additional single - piece postage rate for that percentage of the entire mailing estimated to be in error . for every in - depth inspection completed , mail acceptance clerks are required to prepare a written verification report ( form 2866 ) . this report is used to ( 1 ) document the results of the verification , ( 2 ) notify mailers of the types of errors found , and ( 3 ) aid supervisors in performing quality presort verifications ( qpv ) . barcodes do not meet technical specifications . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the contrast between paper and ink is insufficient . there are less than three lines used for the address block . the spacing between city , state , and zip code is improper . the barcode / address can shift out of the viewing area in window envelopes . a qpv entails a supervisor rechecking an in - depth verification performed by a clerk . postal facilities that receive 100 or more bulk mailings during a 4-week accounting period are to prepare a consolidated bulk mail acceptance report ( form 2867 ) documenting the results of their in - depth verifications . at postal service headquarters , management responsibility for the bulk business mail program resides with the vice president of marketing systems , who reports to the chief marketing officer and senior vice president . area vice presidents and district managers are responsible for ensuring that bulk mail acceptance activities conform to prescribed standards within their geographic span of control . during the late 1980s and early 1990s , the postal inspection service reported to postal management , on several occasions , that existing bulk mail acceptance controls were inadequate for preventing revenue losses . in 1986 , following a national audit of the postal service's revenue protection program , the inspection service reported that procedures for mail acceptance , verification , and classification were not being effectively administered .