( see app . i for a description of secret service offices responsible for locations abroad. ) secret service offices outside the united states typically are staffed by one to six agents . agents working abroad are involved in the same issues as their domestic counterparts , such as detecting counterfeits , investigating financial crimes , and protecting dignitaries . however , the majority of a typical agent's time abroad is spent on counterfeiting deterrence efforts . in pursuing these efforts , agents must rely on the cooperation of foreign law enforcement agencies and sometimes are allowed to provide only investigative support . this situation is different from that in the united states , where agents have direct investigative authority . the secret service also provides other staff to support international counterfeiting deterrence activities . for example , the secret service has assigned two counterfeit division staff to work with the four nations group and three agents to work with interpol — the international criminal police organization . to obtain information on the nature and extent of counterfeiting of u.s. currency abroad , as well as u.s. efforts to combat this activity , we obtained views and material from ( 1 ) u.s. government agencies in the united states and abroad ; ( 2 ) foreign law enforcement and financial organization officials in seven european countries , as referred to us by u.s. embassy officials ; ( 3 ) interpol officials in the united states and abroad ; and ( 4 ) individuals researching the superdollar case , including the author of the house republican task force on terrorism and unconventional warfare reports on the superdollar . we performed our review in the united states , england , france , italy , germany , hungary , poland , and switzerland . interpol , state department , and secret service officials recommended these countries for our review on the basis of their knowledge of counterfeiting abroad . to obtain u.s. government perspectives on the nature and extent of counterfeiting as well as on efforts to deter this activity , we interviewed and obtained documentation from senior treasury officials in washington , d.c. ; secret service officials in washington , d.c. ; new york , new york ; san francisco , california ; england ; france ; italy ; and germany ; and bureau of engraving and printing officials in washington , d.c. we also interviewed federal reserve board officials in washington , d.c. ; federal reserve bank officials in san francisco and new york ; and state department officials in washington , d.c. , and abroad . to secure information on the extent of the problem of counterfeit u.s. currency abroad , we obtained secret service data on domestic and international counterfeit detections . we then reviewed the secret service's counterfeit - detection data for fiscal year 1987 through fiscal year 1994 . we also reviewed interpol's 1991 to 1993 annual reports on international counterfeiting activity . we did not independently verify the accuracy of the data that the secret service and interpol provided . to gain perspective on both counterfeiting and deterrence efforts abroad , we obtained input from foreign law enforcement and financial organization officials in the countries we visited . ( see app .