this can occur after ins has granted the alien benefits . if the results of the fingerprint checks warrant , ins may rescind the previously granted benefit . the examiners said that the fingerprint checks are important and noted that about half of the time the information provided by the fbi criminal history report is the only information they have about an alien's criminal activity . examiners do not have any means to determine the status of an fbi fingerprint check because , at ins' request , the fbi does not return the results of all fingerprint checks . ins receives results only if an arrest record is found . at the time of the alien's hearing , if ins examiners do not find a criminal history report in an alien's file and it is 60 days after the application date , the examiners assume that a fingerprint check has been completed and that the alien does not have a criminal history record . according to an ins official , they do not receive negative responses from the fbi because the district offices do not have enough staff to file fbi responses for all aliens . according to the fbi , they could provide ins with the results of all records checks in other formats ( eg , electronically ) , including those for whom it did not find criminal history records . during fiscal year 1993 , the fbi rejected and returned to ins 91,827 fingerprint cards , or 11 percent of all ins submissions , because one or more of the prints were illegible . the oig determined that ins district offices frequently did not submit new fingerprint cards for those aliens whose fingerprint cards were rejected . since ins failed to submit new fingerprint cards , in a number of cases applications were adjudicated on the basis of criminal history name checks but without the results of the fbi fingerprint checks . in april 1994 , ins headquarters instructed district directors to ensure that new fingerprint cards are submitted if the initial card is rejected . however , according to ins officials at the three districts we visited , these district offices rarely submitted new fingerprint cards if the initial card was rejected . ins' decision to implement a certification program for fingerprint providers with the proposed procedures for ensuring fingerprint integrity , if properly implemented , should address the oig's first recommendation . the program should help ensure that the fingerprints aliens submit with applications are their own . further , ins plans to periodically monitor the providers , which should help to maintain the integrity of the fingerprint process . ins considered other alternatives to the certification program . the working group rejected the option of having the district offices do the fingerprinting because of resource shortages and the potential for overcrowding in the district offices . other options included using contractors , police departments , and voluntary groups . the use of contractors was rejected because of potential difficulty in managing nationwide or regional contracts . using police departments for fingerprinting was not considered feasible because many police departments do not provide fingerprinting services to the public , including aliens .