, as described before . the entire set of variables used in building the models is reviewed below . on - site medical services included a nurse , available 5 days a week , and a doctor , available 1 day a week . youth were given a physical 7 days after admittance to the facility . the most common health problems were headaches . ( continued ) individual and group counseling were not regularly provided unless the youth displayed suicidal tendencies or requested the services . the facility had one counselor on staff to meet these requests . youth attended the on - site school , which had six classrooms and six teachers provided by the county . daily classes followed a basic curriculum . the center also provided independent - living skills instruction and remedial education . classes could be canceled when the center was overcrowded . on - site medical services included a nurse , available 7 days a week , and a doctor , available 3 days a week . youth were given a physical 7 days after admittance to the facility . the most common health problems involved sexually transmitted diseases . youth received approximately 3 hours of individual counseling and 4 hours to 5 hours of group counseling each week . family counseling was provided on a voluntary basis . the counselor - to - resident ratio was 1 to 10 . the shelter did not have an on - site school . the males commonly needed treatment for colds or dental problems . the variables for sources of referral included the law - enforcement agency , school , family , and other sources . we varied the reference category by state . age at referral: we used the age of the status offender at the time that the case was referred . race of the offender: we used two dummy variables to indicate whether a status offender ( 1 ) was black or ( 2 ) belonged to another race or ethnic group . metropolitan status of the court of venue: except in california , we measured the metropolitan status of the court by a dummy variable to indicate whether a court was located in a county belonging to a metropolitan statistical area or a primary metropolitan statistical area . we also measured the population density per square mile of the county containing the court . detention status: for the adjudication and placement decisions , we used a dummy variable to indicate whether a case was detained securely . we fit the models to the data on a state - by - state and outcome - by - outcome basis . we developed models containing a set of independent variables that fit the data better than other combinations of independent variables in a state's data set . across states , our models did not necessarily contain the same subset of variables . as a result , we were not able to directly compare the size of the effects of different variables across states ; although we did attempt to identify which variables in each state's models had the biggest effects and to make general comparisons about the effects of variables .