fmcs . we received written comments from the postal service , the four major labor unions , and one of the three management associations — the league of postmasters . customerperfect ! in february 1995 , the service implemented customerperfect ! , which has been described by the vice president for quality as a “management system being constructed and operated by the postal service as a vehicle for constructive change.” he told us that customerperfect ! is designed to assess and , where necessary , improve all aspects of service operations so that it can better provide postal products and services to its customers in a competitive environment . postal officials told us that in fiscal year 1995 , two customerperfect ! pilots were established in washington , d.c. , and nashville , tn . later , in february 1996 , eight additional pilot sites were added . a postal official mentioned that these pilots consisted primarily of implementing what the service called process management , which was described as a systematic approach to continuously assessing , evaluating , and improving the design and management of core work processes , including those that facilitate the processing and delivery of mail products and services to postal customers . a key aspect of this approach involves the collection and use of various service and financial performance data , such as exfc ; eva ; and data on safety in the workplace , including postal vehicle accidents . a postal official mentioned that the service plans to expand the process management aspect of customerperfect ! to all 85 postal performance clusters in fiscal year 1997 . according to postal officials , customerperfect ! was not specifically designed to address labor - management relations problems . however , they believe it provides an opportunity for management and craft employees to work together on problem - solving teams to improve how the service accomplishes its overall mission . postal officials told us that they believed they had good representation from craft employees on several problem - solving teams that have been established . they further stated that all improvement initiatives should be aligned with customerperfect ! according to a postal official , in 1995 , the service offered to provide a briefing on the goals of customerperfect ! to the four unions and the three management associations . according to a postal official , representatives from two of the four unions — apwu and rural carriers — attended the briefing . the postal official told us that mail handlers and nalc representatives declined to attend the briefing . mail handlers' officials told us that they had no interest in the briefing , mainly because the service had already made the decision to implement customerperfect ! and did not solicit the union's input into the development of customerperfect ! nalc officials did not identify a specific reason for not attending the customerperfect ! briefing . however , they told us that the service unilaterally terminated the joint service - nalc improvement initiative called employee involvement ( ei ) and is now emphasizing customerperfect ! representatives from both mail handlers and nalc also told us that customerperfect ! was forced on the unions with no attempt by the service to solicit their input into the development of customerperfect !