we disagree . our draft report said that of approximately 1.2 million inmates , about 1,400 in bop and 19 state prison systems had access to personal information through correctional industry work programs . we noted that less than one - hundredth of 1 percent of bop's and no more than 22 percent of any state's fiscal year 1998 gross correctional industry income was generated from contracts that resulted in inmates having access to personal information . further , we pointed out that about a quarter of the contracts that resulted in inmates having access to personal information had been in place from 10 to 19 years . second , the association said that a benchmark is needed against which the success or failure of correctional industries to control access issues can be measured . we did not judge whether the correctional industries have succeeded or failed in their attempt to prevent the misuse of personal information to which inmates had access as the result of work programs because we are not aware of criteria by which to make such a judgment . however , given that the inmates with access to personal information are individuals who have been incarcerated for crimes , and given that the institutional settings permit work program officials to exercise close scrutiny over the inmates and work places , breaches of security and misuses of personal information are a cause for concern . ( see app . xi. ) as agreed , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the honorable janet reno , attorney general ; the honorable kathleen hawk sawyer , director , bop ; ms. gwyn smith ingley , executive director , correctional industries association , inc. ; the states that responded to our survey ; and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . the major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix xii . if you or your staff have any questions about the information in this report , please contact me or brenda bridges on ( 202 ) 512-8777 . the objectives of our study were to determine the extent to which inmates in the bop and state prison systems had access to personal information through correctional industry work programs ; identify prison safeguards and procedures , statutes and regulations , and proposed legislation that addressed correctional industry work programs involving personal information ; determine the extent to which contracts that provided inmates access to personal information contributed to bop's and states' correctional industry income ; determine the extent to which inmates in the bop and state prison systems had access to only names and addresses or telephone numbers through correctional industry work programs ; and identify incidents of inmates misusing information obtained through a correctional industry work program , including how safeguards failed and what , if any , changes were made as a result of the incidents . for our study , we defined correctional industry work programs as programs that produced products and services for sale to government agencies and / or to the private sector .