irs has now overcome this problem . in 1994 , irs began to address the data access problem by piloting a new system to give five call sites access to taxpayer accounts at three different service centers . for the week it was about 14 minutes . at the baltimore call site , on - hold time for one gate reached 21 minutes for 1 of the days we reviewed . for the week it was about 11 minutes . the other sites we visited did not have this information available . in november 1993 , irs issued guidelines for on - hold time standards for call sites with new equipment , but in september 1994 it began trying to redefine the standards . in january 1995 , these guidelines were still being redefined . many taxpayers who do get into the system never have their questions answered . due to the lengthy on - hold times , many taxpayers abandon their calls before reaching an assistor . the number of abandoned calls has increased from fiscal year 1989 to 1994 , rising from 2.8 million to 6 million calls . in addition , some taxpayers who reach an assistor may be told to call back if assistors are too busy to research their questions . the cornerstone of good telephone service is providing customers easy access to telephone representatives . while ssa has had its own difficulties in improving its telephone assistance , ssa and private sector companies we contacted have implemented management practices and acquired modern information technology specifically aimed at increasing their customers' ability to reach them and providing their representatives with access to customer account information more easily and quickly . ssa and private sector company officials told us that these management practices and technology improvements have contributed to their ability to provide quality telephone assistance to their customers , including allowing their customers to reach them beyond normal working hours . although irs has been able to answer about 36 million calls over the last several years with declining resources , it has not used the management practices and has not yet acquired information technology commonly used by the organizations we contacted to make it easier for taxpayers to reach assistors . irs has made recent improvements in using its existing technology , but it has not always used its existing technology to its full potential . we contacted ssa and four private sector companies that rely heavily on the telephone as a means of providing service to their customers . to maximize the number of calls answered , their toll - free programs commonly established challenging program goals for answering as many calls as possible based on customers' needs ; standards for the number of hours employees were expected to be on the telephones and the number of calls to be answered ; standard hours of operation , often extending beyond a 9-hour work day ; nationwide standards and uniform ways to measure operations and nationwide call routing and easy access to customer information . ssa and three of the four companies we contacted set goals to answer every call on the caller's first attempt .