this process is being evaluated to establish its effectiveness . according to laredo officials , the prefile process was designed to expedite processing cargo through the port . customs officials said it facilitates processing by identifying , before the cargo reaches the port , low - risk shipments that can be released at the primary inspection gate and shipments that should be held at the dock for intensive examinations . compared with other low - risk cargo entry programs ( eg , line release and the three tier targeting program ) , which rely on initial research of applicants before they are approved or designated as “low risk,” the prefile process involves reviewing the most current — “real - time” — information available on companies and their potential for drug smuggling before the shipments reach the port . although the databases may not include information on foreign manufacturers , the data accessed is the most current information available . when a broker uses the prefile process , the port is to receive the hard - copy entry paperwork — the entry summary , for example — at least 4 hours before the shipment arrives at the port . under customs' standard entry - filing process , drivers park their trucks at the dock and give a hard copy of the entry paperwork to customs for processing . while the drivers wait , customs compares the hard copy with entry information that was filed electronically in advance by the broker . no narcotic seizures have resulted from three tier targeting . .” customs headquarters officials told us that they did not know if any seizures had been made from tier iii , high - risk shipments . further , they said they did not know whether any of the 61 narcotics seizures in commercial cargo in fiscal year 1997 were made from tier iii shipments . the officials also told us that there is no headquarters oversight of the three tier targeting program , and consequently no evaluations of the program or measures of success . “prefile” is a cargo entry process used at the port of laredo to expedite low - risk shipments . laredo had provided supporting documentation for 65 of the 66 files we reviewed . according to the comptroller general's standards for internal controls in the federal government , qualified and continuous supervision is to be provided to ensure that internal control objectives are achieved . the prefile process is complemented by the automated targeting system , which evaluates and scores arriving shipments through the use of approximately 400 “rules” designed to identify or profile high - risk shipments . the higher the score , the more the shipment warrants attention . any comparison of the hard copy and the electronic filing for consistency must be conducted while the trucks are parked at the dock . under the prefile process , customs inspectors are to perform the same reviews of the electronic and hard - copy entry documents that they would do under the standard entry - filing process , including additional research ; but receiving the hard - copy entry paperwork in advance allows the port to perform these reviews , and any necessary additional research , before the shipment arrives at the port .