, it will not float up . after receiving the required documentation , mde's water management administration issued an authorization to proceed ( no . 97-nt - 0711 / 199766248 ) on september 11 , 1997 , which permitted gsa to begin constructing the building foundation and to relocate existing utility lines . citing the great public benefit from the project and the site constraints that prohibited a taller or wider building , mde agreed to a variance permitting a basement below the 100-year flood elevation . fema has not designated a floodplain on this site . the project director for the firm that did the floodplain study for gsa told us that the county is more conservative in its floodplain designations than fema . he said that the county's designations take into account the existing built environment and anticipated future developments — new construction — in the area when calculating the floodplain area , but fema takes into account only the existing built environment and open areas . figure 1 shows the existing 100-year floodplain , as designated by prince george's county . the floodplain study contained the state of maryland's and the county's requirements that would have to be met for construction on the floodplain . state and county regulations prohibit a project from increasing the 100- year flood elevations outside the project site . they also require that the lowest floor of any structure be at least 1 foot above the 100-year flood elevation , unless it is in the overall public interest for it to be otherwise . if a variance is granted and a basement is authorized , it must be waterproofed . the state and prince george's county required specific documentation before gsa could obtain approval to construct the foundation for the building . this documentation had to include the floodplain hydraulic calculations 100-year floodplain evaluations of the impact of the construction on adjacent properties . the required documentation also had to show that the first floor will be at least 1 foot above the 100-year flood elevation ; how the basement will be waterproofed ; how sump pumps and other drainage systems were to be used ; and that the building will be able to withstand the force of the water in event of a flood , i.e. however , mde required that the basement be waterproofed to comply with mde and fema regulations . the elevations for the two conditions were compared to determine the effects of the project . this comparison shows that the proposed fda development would not have any adverse impact on the flood elevations upstream of the site . the computations do indicate that a slight increase ( 0.1 foot ) in the 2-year flood elevation will occur at the downstream end of the site . however , the computations indicate the increase would be dissipated before the upstream end of the site . the 10- and 100-year flood elevations will be lower slightly in some areas for proposed conditions , because the new building will be further away from the stream than the existing building . with the building further away from the stream , the area available to move the flow will increase , causing the flood elevations to decrease .