ii. ) • doi's efforts to improve information dissemination at the u.s. geological survey began in 1986 when it attempted to establish a more efficient and responsive order entry , inventory control , and distribution system . ( see app . x. ) officials from 14 of the labs we surveyed said that they sought lab designations for existing management improvement efforts because the officials thought such designations would give them more latitude to make changes and provide greater visibility for their efforts . for example , one of the survey respondents said that reinvention lab designation provided the lab team with the momentum needed to overcome common barriers to change . during one of the site visits , an official from hud's lab on reinventing the field operations of the office of public and indian housing said that before its lab designation “we could not get in the door at headquarters.” however , he said that after the lab's designation “the waters parted” and that headquarters officials became interested in the new oversight approach . ( see app . viii for a discussion of this lab. ) other respondents said that being designated as a reinvention lab provided the mechanism by which they could seek waivers from cumbersome rules and regulations that had been an impediment to previous management reform efforts . the 1993 npr report called for a new customer service contract with the american people — a new guarantee of effective , efficient , and responsive government . the report also stated that federal agencies were to provide customer service equal to the best in business . in his april 1993 letter calling for the creation of reinvention labs , the vice president said the labs were to measure their success by customer satisfaction . consistent with this goal , 99 percent of our survey respondents said that customer service improvement was a primary goal of their labs to at least “some extent” ; 93 percent of the respondents said this was true to a “great” or “very great” extent . ( see ch . 4 for information on the labs' collection of performance data. ) the survey respondents frequently indicated that the changes that were occurring in their reinvention labs represented a substantially different mode of operation , not simply a minor change in procedures . over 65 percent of the respondents said that their reinvention labs involved changing the way staff in their agencies did their work to a “great” or “very great” extent . over 20 percent said that changes in work processes occurred to a “moderate” or “some” extent . lab officials reported the following examples: • the defense logistics agency's ( dla ) lab on inventory management made significant changes in its work processes and staff roles . dla officials said they shifted from acting as a wholesaler who buys , stores , and sells inventory to acting as a broker who obtains the most efficient and effective military support for its customers through any appropriate mechanism — including the use of private - sector vendors to store and distribute inventories . ( see app . iv. )