contracting out . the group considered the circumstances under which irs should use private sector contractors or other government agencies to manage and sell assets . one option was for the specialists to determine , on a case - by - case basis , whether it would be better for the specialist to manage or sell the assets , assign the functions somewhere else in irs , or contract out the functions . as of the end of october 1999 , irs' collection division management was continuing to review options for structuring the specialist position . in our current review of irs' seized asset management and sales processes , we found little improvement from 1992 conditions in the 1997 seizures we reviewed . as in 1992 , we found ( 1 ) little accountability over seized assets , ( 2 ) little or no security for some assets , ( 3 ) little assurance that irs' sales produced maximum proceeds , and ( 4 ) little useful management information for monitoring seized assets . the following summarizes the problems found . our overall report on weaknesses in irs' seizure processes contains additional details . with respect to establishing accountability over seized assets , little had changed from our review in 1992 . as detailed in our overall report on weaknesses in irs' seizure processes , asset control information documented by revenue officers in their seizure case files was not as comprehensive as the control information specified by federal financial management guidelines . among other details , the guidelines explain that information should be sufficiently specific to allow the independent verification that each asset exists and that the recorded physical condition , geographic location , and asset value are accurate . we estimate , based on our review of sampled seizure cases , that revenue officers in preparing inventory documents omitted some information on the identity of assets seized in about 25 percent of seizure cases ( i.e. , asset descriptions used by revenue officers were not detailed enough , such as by identifying make , model , or serial number , to differentiate the items seized from other like items ) ; quantity of assets seized in about 15 percent of seizure cases ; condition of assets seized in about 74 percent of seizure cases ; value of assets seized in about 12 percent of seizure cases ; location of assets seized in about 10 percent of seizure cases ; and custodian of assets seized in about 47 percent of seizure cases . moreover , we estimate that revenue officers did not obtain receipts in 51 percent of the cases when the revenue officer file indicated that the seized assets were stored at contractor locations . also , irs did not make periodic physical inventories of assets in the possession of revenue officers or contractors . the omission of detailed information on assets ( such as asset identity , quantity , or condition ) reduces accountability . even if irs made physical inventories , without such information , there would be little basis for determining that all assets seized were still under irs or third - party custody or appropriately protected against loss or deterioration . regarding asset protection , little has changed from our review in 1992 .