apps . iii through ix also discuss context for each of the 38 esi recommendations ; the appendixes are based on our categories of the 38 recommendations. ) the federal agencies responsible for implementing the esi recommendations made plans to implement most of them . the agencies requested more than $95 million and received about $50 million , slightly more than one - half of the funding they requested , to carry out their plans . for example , census officials said that census planned to increase coverage of the service sector by beginning a new annual survey of communication services ; census requested about $7 million and received more than $1 million for its plan to address this recommendation . for a few recommendations , the agencies did not make plans because the agencies said they were already carrying out efforts they believed satisfied the intent of the recommendations . for example , bls officials told us that bls did not make a plan specifically intended to respond to an esi recommendation — to reconcile and reduce discrepancies in estimates of employment from two different surveys — because this effort was integral to its overall efforts to improve the two surveys . total family income is the sum of the income amounts received by all individuals in the family . bls received $35 million ( 71 percent of the funds appropriated for esi ) for one systemwide , two - price measurement , and four labor market statistics recommendations . as defined in the 1987 census of agriculture , a farm is an operation that would normally have had $1,000 or more in total value of sales of agricultural products during the reference year . a mailing list of names and addresses of agricultural operations that is compiled before census or survey questionnaires are mailed . ( see farm. ) commercial bank , savings and loan , mutual savings bank , credit union , or other institutions , such as a mutual fund or a life insurance company that balances out the flow of funds between savings - surplus units with those of savings - deficit units . these institutions redistribute savings into productive uses and at the same time provide diversification of risk and liquidity to the individual saver . also referred to as the capital finance accounts of the united states , accounts that show the role of financial institutions and instruments in transforming saving into investment and the changes in assets and liabilities , which result from this transformation . the flow - of - funds accounts detail how the current investment in tangible and financial assets contribute to a buildup of a stock of assets for each sector of the economy and to the creation of national wealth . the flow - of - funds accounts can be viewed as combining data on the flows of saving and tangible investment published in nipa with additional details on borrowing and lending for specific economic sectors . ( apps . income principally derives from direct and indirect taxes , and also sales of goods and services . iii through ix describe the agencies' plans to carry out each recommendation and the funding requested and received to carry out each recommendation from fiscal year 1990 to 1994. )