air service was in operation . air hub was in service . a breakdown in the review and approval process for this real estate purchase caused procurement safeguards to be circumvented and many failures to occur . final delivery under the contract was scheduled for 1996 . the most notable was that the postal service paid a real estate development firm $12.5 million for a building that the firm had acquired earlier the same day for $4 million . v. bruce goddard , senior attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . the building temporarily housed the data processing center . the service planned to rent or sell the building . ( continued ) contrary to the advice of the postal service's legal department , the contracting officer failed to resolve a conflict of interest on the part of an individual who helped evaluate the contract proposals and at the same time had a job offer pending from the successful offeror . as a result of the conflict of interest , the award was set aside by the courts and a replacement contract was awarded to one of the unsuccessful offerors . the service paid $10 million to the original winning offeror to settle its claim under the contract , which was then set aside . also , the new contract cost $8 million more annually than the old contract ( both were for 10 years ) . the contracting officer failed to correct an apparent conflict - of - interest situation involving an individual who was a technical consultant on this equipment to both the service and the winning offeror . the dispute was submitted to an arbitration panel , which awarded $22.2 million in damages to the unsuccessful offeror . postal service: decisions to purchase two properties in queens , new york ( gao / ggd - 92-107br , july 17 , 1992 ) . all areas of the program were found to require improvement . the office recommended that the service ensure that written procedures for administering the public and private financial disclosure systems are prepared as required by the ethics in government act of 1978 , disclosure reports are filed in a timely manner , late filing fees are collected or that late filers request waivers from the office , ethics orientation for new employees be improved to comply with the office's governmentwide ethics regulations , ethics officials improve their coordination with the postal inspection service about the resolution of conflict - of - interest situations , and the office is notified about conflict - of - interest violations that are referred to the department of justice . in an october 3 , 1995 , letter to the office of government ethics , the postal service's general counsel expressed overall agreement with the recommendations and outlined actions taken or planned to address each of the office's recommendations to improve the service's ethics programs . according to the general counsel , the preparation of written procedures for financial disclosure was a top priority and would be finished in early 1996 .