this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . total ( fees + special accounts ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we discussed this difference with park service officials . we found that the discrepancies were due to differing interpretations among park service concessions officials — both at headquarters and at the individual parks units — as to what should be counted as concessioners' special accounts . however , park service officials acknowledged that the headquarter's data were not complete because the park service did not have a system in place to routinely collect information on these accounts . the agency has been developing a system to track these accounts , and expects it to be implemented by august 1996 . we plan to follow - up on this issue after the park service's tracking system is implemented . mr. chairman , in recent years , an understanding has emerged that the federal government needs to be run in a more business like manner than in the past . it is clear that agencies such as the park service and the forest service can learn some lessons about competition and incentives from nonland management agencies . another factor affecting the return to the government from concessioners is the existence of preferential rights of renewal . these rights primarily affect concessioners in the park service . under the concessions policy act of 1965 , park service concessioners that have performed satisfactorily have a preferential right of renewal when their concession agreements expire . this preference has generally meant that when a concession agreement expires , an incumbent concessioner has the right to match or better the best competing offer to win the award of the next concession agreement . this preference tends to put a chilling effect on competition because qualified business are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely going to the incumbent concessioners . with fewer bidders , there is less competitive pressure to increase the return to the government .