this option . makes good business sense as tax payments and tax returns are sent to the appropriate place best prepared to handle them.” as a way to lower costs , the assistant secretary suggested that irs explore the possibility of not having the banks sort the returns and have the sorting done by the service centers . we discussed this option with officials in irs' national office and at one service center . we were told that it would be difficult for service centers to sort the returns once they had been separated from the payments because the service center would not know if the taxpayer had fully paid his or her tax liability . irs was able to process individual income tax returns and refunds without any apparent problem , with its aging computer systems having made it through another filing season . from the taxpayer's perspective , the filing season was also successful in many key respects . for example , relatively few refunds were delayed in 1996 , unlike 1995 when millions of taxpayers were angered by irs' decision to delay their refunds while it checked dependent and eic claims ; more taxpayers were given the opportunity to file by telephone and to have their refunds directly deposited into their bank accounts ; and irs' world wide web site on the internet provided a convenient source of information for taxpayers with access to a computer . however , there were some problems in 1996 . although the accessibility of irs' toll - free telephone assistance improved , taxpayers continued to have problems reaching irs by telephone , and some taxpayers may have been inconvenienced by the reduction in irs' walk - in services . irs has several efforts under way to modernize the systems and procedures it has used for many years to process returns , remittances , and refunds . these efforts are essential if irs is to successfully meet the demands of future filing seasons . to date , the results of those efforts have been mixed . irs has taken steps to enhance its efforts . for example , irs is ( 1 ) expanding eligibility for telefile and taking other steps in an effort to increase the use of that filing alternative , ( 2 ) working to make electronic filing paperless by broadening its test of digitized signatures , ( 3 ) making it easier for taxpayers to request direct deposits of their refunds , and ( 4 ) reassessing its strategy for processing paper tax returns . even if irs is successful in increasing the telefile participation rate to 25 percent in 1997 , that would still leave a large number of eligible users who choose not to use telefile . we believe that irs' efforts to expand the use of telefile could be enhanced if it had more specific information on why eligible users prefer to file on paper . more specifics might help irs identify barriers to telefile use and develop mitigating strategies . we also question whether irs' decision to have taxpayers send both their tax returns and their tax payments to lockboxes and to have banks sort those returns adequately considered both the costs to the government and taxpayer burden .