iv ) . we obtained oral comments from sec's division of market regulation and office of compliance inspections and examinations in a meeting on july 23 , 1996 . nasd regulation was pleased that our review showed a high degree of user satisfaction with the telephone hotline . it generally agreed with our findings and conclusions and said it had already begun , or plans to begin , actions that would result in implementation of our recommendations . nasd regulation staff corrected these errors during our review . for the other 30 discrepancies , including the 26 arbitration cases , nasd regulation officials could not explain why the information had not been included in the nirf database . however , nasd regulation staff corrected these discrepancies by adding the information to the nirf database . the discrepancies we found that nasd regulation corrected show that independent review and testing of the information derived from crd could help reduce errors and help ensure that all disclosable information is provided to callers . if nasd regulation proceeds as planned to change its disclosure policy so that most of the disciplinary related information in crd is considered disclosable , the chances for judgment errors by nasd regulation staff in determining whether information is disclosable would diminish . also , after the currently planned redesign of crd is implemented , nasd regulation officials expect that reports of disciplinary information will be prepared directly by querying crd for disclosable information , rather than relying on staff judgments of whether crd information is disclosable or nondisclosable . nasd regulation's ability to provide hotline callers with timely and complete information on brokers depends on how and when the information is reported to crd . nasd regulation officials said that in the absence of a systematic means in the current crd to monitor timeliness of filings , they are concerned that it is possible that disclosures by brokers are not as timely as they should be . nasd said that we should emphasize the extent to which users reported high levels of satisfaction with the service they receive when they use the hotline . text was modified to include the percentage range of those who responded very satisfied . text was added to note the 1988 establishment of the nasd public disclosure program . caption and text were modified to state that the methods used to publicize the hotline may not reach all investors . nasd noted variations on the handling of formal complaints and customer complaints and suggested that were clarify what is meant by dismissed customer complaints . to eliminate the confusion about the definition of dismissed customer complaints , we have changed the example to pending customer complaints . we found nondisclosable information in 46 files . this information primarily involved pending arbitration cases , customer complaints , settled or withdrawn arbitration cases , or nasd regulation fines of $1,000 or less . this is the same type of information that our survey respondents indicated would be useful . unlike individual hotline callers , nasd member broker - dealers have access to all of this information for use in screening potential employees .