( app . iv shows the disposition of inmates released from bop and four state prison facilities in greater detail. ) similar to our 1995 analysis , our current analysis of the 12,495 potentially deportable cases for which ins had records showed that ins was able to quickly remove those deportable aliens who had completed the ihp with final deportation orders before they were released from prison — 75 percent were removed from the united states within 1 week of their prison release in both 1995 and 1997 . during both time periods , at least 92 percent of such cases were removed in less than 1 month . we analyzed these locations because they were included in our previous 1997 testimony regarding ins' ihp efforts and they were of specific interest to the requester . to determine whether ins had improved its ihp performance , we gathered and analyzed data for inmates released from january to june , 1997 , as a comparison to our past ihp analysis for inmates released from april to september , 1995 . we concentrated on ins — as opposed to the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) , which makes adjudicative decisions regarding deportability — because ins has the lead role in identifying incarcerated criminal aliens , determining their deportability , and initiating removal proceedings . we sought to determine the extent to which ihp - eligible inmates were placed into removal proceedings , completed the ihp process , and were removed from the united states upon release from prison . to answer these questions , we obtained data from bop and correctional departments in four states on all foreign - born inmates released from january through june , 1997 . the data from the january to june , 1997 , period are considered to be representative of the entire year . we did not determine the completeness or accuracy of the lists of foreign - born inmates provided to us . we asked ins to conduct a computer match of the records with identifying alien numbers ( a - number ) against information in its deportable alien control system ( dacs ) to identify those released foreign - born inmates who were taken into ins custody upon their release from prison , were detained , or were removed from the united states . for this review , we did not independently assess the reliability of dacs data , although we did ask ins about what , if any , quality controls and procedures were used to ensure the reliability of those data elements that we used in this review . the data elements included whether the alien ( 1 ) was taken into custody or detained , ( 2 ) was issued a final deportation order , and ( 3 ) was removed . ins personnel who operate and manage the dacs database responded that both the accuracy and completeness of these data elements in dacs are good . they stated that supervisors perform random checks on dacs data each time an officer submits a case for review .