evaluation practice . “past , present , future assessments of the field of evaluation.” entire issue . smith , ed. , vol . martin , margaret e. , and miron l. straf ( eds. ) principles and practices for a federal statistical agency . washington , d.c.: national academy press , 1992 . the combination of these initiatives raises a question: in an environment of limited federal resources and responsibility , how can agencies meet the additional needs for program results information ? to identify the roles and resources available for federal program evaluation , in 1996 , we conducted a mail survey of offices identified by federal agency officials that were conducting studies of program results or effectiveness in 13 cabinet - level departments and 10 independent executive agencies . detailed information on program evaluation studies refers to those conducted during fiscal year 1995 ( regardless of when they began or ended ) . to identify how recent reforms were expected to affect federal evaluation activities and what strategies were available for responding to those changes , we interviewed external evaluation experts and evaluation and other officials at selected federal and state agencies . in this report , we use the term “agency” to include both cabinet - level departments and independent agencies . we distributed surveys in 1996 regarding federal evaluation activities within 13 cabinet level departments and 10 independent executive agencies in the federal government . we excluded the department of defense from our survey of evaluation offices because of the prohibitively large number of offices it identified as conducting assessments of effectiveness . although we asked agency officials to be inclusive in their initial nominations of offices that conducted evaluations of program results , some offices that conducted evaluations may have been overlooked and excluded from our survey . however , many offices that were initially identified as having conducted evaluations later reported that they had not done so . in our survey , we asked each office about the range of its analytic and evaluation activities and about the length , cost , purpose , and other characteristics of the program evaluation studies they conducted during fiscal year 1995 . the government performance and results act: 1997 governmentwide implementation will be uneven ( gao / ggd - 97-109 , june 2 , 1997 ) . managing for results: analytic challenges in measuring performance ( gao / hehs / ggd - 97-138 , may 30 , 1997 ) . block grants: issues in designing accountability provisions ( gao / aimd - 95-226 , sept. 1995 ) . the results act: an evaluator's guide to assessing agency annual performance plans ( gao / ggd - 10.1.19 , mar . balancing flexibility and accountability: grant program design in education and other areas ( gao / t - ggd / hehs - 98-94 , feb. 11 , 1998 ) . program evaluation: improving the flow of information to the congress ( gao / pemd - 95-1 , jan. 30 , 1995 ) . management reform: implementation of the national performance review's recommendations ( gao / ogc - 95-1 , dec. 5 , 1994 ) . new directions for program evaluation . “evaluation in the federal government: changes , trends , and opportunities.” entire issue . wye and r. sonnichsen , eds .