( app . v lists the various income types and whether they were jointly or separately held. ) for separate returns , irs would not be able to readily match jointly held income to determine whether all the income was reported unless it cross - referenced the return to the spouse's return . irs would not have this problem with the modified joint return because both spouses' income on the joint return could be totaled by computer and matched to information returns . appendix i describes how we developed this estimate . irs did not accumulate data on the number of cases requesting innocent spouse relief or the number of cases for which it grants such relief . although irs did not systematically collect data on innocent spouse cases , we found that some irs operating units we visited maintained some information on the innocent spouse cases they handled . the limited information found on innocent spouse claims indicated that few requests were received , and of these , most were denied . for example , records at the fresno service center indicate it received 90 offer in compromise cases requesting innocent spouse relief during the 3 years between march 1993 and february 1996 . the service center denied 48 of these requests because either ( 1 ) they dealt with taxes reported as owed on the original return but not paid rather than with subsequent assessments ; or ( 2 ) the issues causing the assessment had already been resolved by irs' appeals division or the tax court , and the claimant had agreed to the decisions . the remaining 42 cases were referred to district offices for processing . as of september 1996 , 26 of these 42 cases had been resolved , with 7 being allowed and 19 being denied . we found that most of the cases handled by irs' problem resolution office were also denied . in fiscal year 1996 , the problem resolution office requested information from five offices on innocent spouse cases . we reviewed 31 problem resolution office cases from 4 district offices and 1 service center where taxpayers raised the innocent spouse issue between january and june 1996 . for the 21 cases where a decision had been reached , irs granted relief in 10 cases . appendix ii shows our analysis of the problem resolution cases we reviewed and summaries of some of the cases . furthermore , according to irs officials , the tax court denied relief in one - third of the innocent spouse cases decided in 1996 . although innocent spouse relief is clearly established in law and regulation , we observed that little information about the criteria for granting it or how to apply for it was available from irs sources . the innocent spouse relief provisions are described in several irs publications , including your federal income tax ( publication 17 ) , divorced or separated individuals ( publication 504 ) , and exemptions , standard deduction , and filing information ( publication 501 ) . however , these publications do not provide any guidance on how to request relief .