we agree . due to the wide range of financial activities undertaken by the institutions and the unique nature of the associated potential liabilities , identifying a set of indicators that would be most appropriate for measuring the government's exposure for all 22 of the institutions would require analyses beyond the agreed - upon scope of this report . for example , the unique purposes of each institution and various economic and other circumstances that might affect its condition would have to be considered . however , we believe that the information contained in this report can be useful for congress and the executive branch in identifying specific institutions for more focused and in - depth analysis . omb also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report . at that time , we will send copies of the report to the ranking minority member of your subcommittee ; the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit and the subcommittee on capital markets , securities and government sponsored enterprises , house banking committee ; the financial services institutions and federal regulators covered in this report ; the department of the treasury , and the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . this report was prepared under the direction of m. kay harris , assistant director , financial institutions and markets issues . other major contributors are listed in appendix vii . please contact me or ms. harris on ( 202 ) 512-8678 if you have any questions on this report . receives annual appropriations from congress and operates under a revolving fund from which repayments are used to fund other projects . stabilize , support , and protect farm income and prices ; assist in maintaining balanced and adequate suppliers of agricultural commodities and their products ; and facilitate the orderly distribution of commodities . it also carries out assigned foreign assistance activities , such as guaranteeing the credit sale of u.s. agricultural products abroad . corporation has capital stock of $100 million held by the u.s. treasury and has authority to borrow up to $30 billion collectively from the u.s. treasury , private lending agencies , and other sources . the corporation receives annual appropriations for its past losses . in addition , the corporation receives appropriations for the subsidy portion of its export credit activities as required by the federal credit reform act . provide financial assistance through equity investments , deposits , grants , loans , and technical assistance to new and existing community development financial institutions , such as community development banks , credit unions , loan funds , venture capital funds , and micro - loan funds . its aim is to expand the availability of credit , investment capital , financial , and other services in distressed urban , rural , and native american communities . funding is provided through congressional appropriations . funds could be generated from returns on equity investments in community development financial institutions .