each of these phases is described in appendix i . the final deadline for becoming ready for 2000 is immovable . furthermore , since the phases of preparation are sequential , it is important to establish intermediate milestones to help ensure that a company will be able to complete all year 2000 preparations in time . a schedule for measuring progress toward year 2000 readiness could allow regulators a degree of comfort concerning the status of their regulated companies . as shown in table 1 , the assessment guide provides a schedule of suggested completion dates for each of the key phases of year 2000 conversion . other parties have developed alternative sets of phases and milestones . subsequent to the issuance of our assessment guide , the office of management and budget ( omb ) provided standards that federal agencies are expected to follow . independent sources , such as consulting firms and rating companies , have not identified any major or systemic problems relative to the year 2000 readiness of the insurance industry . although their observations are based almost exclusively on information self - reported by insurers , these sources , like the state regulators , are generally confident in the ability of the insurance industry to be year 2000 ready . the gartner group , for example , has stated that the financial services industries , including the insurance industry , lead all other industries in efforts to become year 2000 ready . it explained that the insurance industry began having data failures over 10 years ago when , for example , it was required to calculate future payments on 10- or 15-year annuities . omb's milestones begin with the assessment phase , which was to be completed by june 30 , 1997 , followed by renovation , validation ( internal testing ) , and implementation . all entities are to have completed the implementation phase by march 31 , 1999 . after that date , entities are to be engaged in testing of business processes and planning for contingencies . throughout the remainder of this report , actions by insurance regulators are compared to the guidance found in our assessment guide . year 2000-related system malfunctions in an insurance company can have serious business interruptions and even solvency implications . specifically , year 2000 problems could result in disruptions to processing policyholder payments and investments , insurance claims and payments , annuity payments , and data queries to verify insurance coverage . this means that some policyholders may be unable to obtain policy service , or worse , may be unable to collect on their policies at a time of need . it is also possible that the delivery of health care services could be affected if health insurers cannot readily process claims information . pursuant to the mccarran - ferguson act of 1945 , states exercise primary regulatory jurisdiction over the insurance business . each state has a department of insurance that , among other things , is responsible for monitoring insurance companies' solvency . solvency , in turn , can be affected by operational issues , such as the failure to be ready for 2000 . companies that operate and write insurance policies in multiple states comprise much of the nation's insurance industry .