some are good . some are not.” ( a community group member. ) “some residents have an unrealistic expectation of what community policing can do and what it cannot do . the majority of calls for service involve social problems . some residents expect the police to solve all their social problems , such as unemployment and mediating family and neighbor disputes.” ( a local government official. ) janet fong , senior evaluator lisa shibata , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . people are outside . children are playing . this is due to efforts of community policing officers to get drug buyers and sellers off of the properties.” ( a community group representative. ) “there have been big - time changes here as a result of community policing . residents will work with the police now and provide them with information . in this public housing complex , the sense of safety and security has increased . before the community policing officers were on patrol , residents did not want to walk past the basketball courts into the community center . that is not a problem any longer . the police worked with the department of parks and recreation to improve lighting and redesign a center entrance . we are now offering a well - attended course on computers at the center . people are enjoying the parks . they are even on the tennis courts . our community policing officer has been successful in working with problem families and the housing authority staff . we provide referrals , counseling , and other resources . we have either helped families address their problems or had them evicted from our units . there are many individual success stories of young people developing better self - esteem and hygiene as a result of interacting with the community policing officer.” ( a housing authority director. ) “community policing has changed how we practice law enforcement in a substantial way . we applied community policing strategies to a distressed neighborhood plagued by crime . the area had prostitution and drug dealing , and service calls to the police were high .