( app . i lists the 1993 national sales center initiatives and identifies those we reviewed. ) we also reviewed an auction — the pride of texas — planned by the dallas field office . we selected this initiative because it provided an example of a field office initiative involving land assets located in a local area with national advertising . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . rtc acknowledged that although information regarding the amount of gross sales proceeds from past multiasset sales transactions was readily available , the amount of corresponding sales expenses can only be determined after substantial research . until the summer of 1991 , rtc did not place a high priority on the disposition of land assets . instead , priority was given to other asset categories that could be disposed of quickly , such as securities and residential mortgages — of which rtc had a large inventory — and commercial and residential real estate that had greater holding costs . in its may 1992 directive on land sales strategies , rtc underscored the importance of sales initiative evaluations in satisfying its mandate to maximize net recoveries on the sale of assets under its control . it required that the results of land sales initiatives be evaluated at the completion of each initiative to identify the most effective sales methods . nevertheless , a standard methodology to evaluate initiative results was not developed by either the land task force , which was to do the required evaluations , or other units within rtc . a standard methodology is necessary to ensure that rtc collects and considers similar data for each initiative to consistently assess the results of the initiatives to identify the most cost - effective sales techniques and best practices . the size of the initiatives ranged from 35 to 410 assets . for each of the seven land sales initiatives we selected for review , we interviewed the rtc asset marketing specialists in washington , d.c. , and one in dallas who planned and executed the selected initiatives . these individuals provided documents relating to each initiative , including case approvals and listings of assets reserved for the initiatives . in these interviews , we also discussed the availability and sources of sales expense data for the initiatives we reviewed and obtained copies of all expense data that these asset marketing specialists had in their files . we focused on direct costs associated with the initiatives and not on other costs incurred by rtc , such as indirect overhead and asset management and disposition fees , because rtc would have incurred these costs even if the bulk sales had not been implemented . the costs we attempted to determine are listed in appendix ii . we also attempted to obtain cost data that rtc could not provide from the contractors it had hired to carry out the initiatives we reviewed .