management's response to the findings . a measurement of the program's effectiveness is a prompt and effective management response to the auditor's recommendations . according to the examination manual , head office management of the fbo should require that fbo branch management respond formally to audit findings and take appropriate corrective action . management is expected to respond to all internal and external audits and supervisory examinations . management responses should be timely and address all findings in the reports , unless specifically noted in the audit report that a response is not necessary . responses should include concrete solutions that have already been put in place or that will be implemented in a timely manner . management is to immediately respond to repeat problems noted in the audit report . according to the examination manual , external audits enhance the probability that financial statements and reports to regulatory authorities and other financial statement users will be accurate and help detect conditions that could adversely affect banking organizations or the public . the independent audit process also subjects the internal controls and the accounting policies , procedures , and records of each banking organization to periodic review . the objective of an external financial audit is different from the objectives of an internal audit or an fbo branch examination . therefore , the supervisor is interested in the work performed by external auditors for three principal reasons . first , supervisors may find that internal audit work is not being performed or that such work is deemed to be of limited or no value to the supervisor . second , the work performed by external auditors may affect the amount of testing that the supervisor must perform . third , audits and other reports rendered by external auditors may provide the supervisor with information that is pertinent to the examination of the fbo branch . according to the examination manual , the major factors that should be considered in evaluating the work of external auditors are similar to those factors that are applicable to internal auditors , that is , the competence and independence of the auditors and the adequacy of the audit program . federal reserve officials we interviewed said internal auditors can play an important role in the external audit . that is , if an fbo branch has a good internal audit , the external auditor can limit the amount of testing it has to do , thereby decreasing its volume of work and allowing it to concentrate on other areas . the examination manual states that an fbo branch's internal control program for supervisory reports is to ensure that all required reports are submitted on time and are accurate . u.s. supervisors rely on the timely and accurate filing of supervisory reports by domestic and foreign financial institutions . data collected from supervisory reports are to ( 1 ) facilitate early identification of problem situations that can threaten the safety and soundness of reporting institutions , ( 2 ) ensure timely implementation of the prompt corrective action provisions of banking legislation , and ( 3 ) serve other legitimate supervisory purposes . in addition , accurate regulatory reports allow supervisors to better target examination resources .