postal service . at each of the six agencies , we met with officials who were responsible for negotiating structured settlement claims . we discussed their policies and procedures for selecting structured settlement brokers and asked them what factors they considered during the selection process . in addition , we obtained and reviewed a copy of the army's standard operating procedures pertaining to structured settlements . also , we asked the six agencies to supply information pertaining to the number of structured settlements since may 1997 . the only liability - related question is causation — did the vaccine cause the injury for which compensation is sought ? the industry standard of practice requires the use of a licensed broker or insurance agent to obtain a settlement annuity . doj's civil divisionestimated that structured settlements constitute between 1 and 2 percent of all settlements in litigated tort cases . brokers receive no direct compensation from the government ; rather , they are compensated by the insurance company from whom the annuity is purchased . the insurance company typically pays the brokers' commissions , which amount to 3 or 4 percent of the annuity premium . the government attorney negotiating the case is responsible for selecting the broker . structured settlements for the federal government are negotiated by the civil division's torts attorneys , assistant united states attorneys ( ausas ) , or agency attorneys . ausas are authorized to settle certain cases . an agency may not settle a tort claim for more than $25,000 without the prior written approval of the attorney general or her designee , unless the attorney general has delegated to the head of the agency the authority to do so . to ascertain doj's policies and guidance for the selection of settlement brokers , we reviewed the torts branch handbook , damages under the federal tort claim act ( section v: settlements ) , and other relevant documents pertaining to broker selection policies . in addition , to obtain information about the procedures used to select brokers , we interviewed attorneys in doj's civil division and representatives from the executive office for united states attorneys ( eousa ) . to obtain information on broker selection policies and guidance used by federal agencies , we asked doj to identify other federal agencies that handled structured settlement claims . doj identified six agencies — hhs and va ; the air force , army , and navy ; and the u.s . to provide the list of doj's structured settlement annuities between may 1 , 1997 , and may 1 , 1999 , we used data doj collected from the civil division and the united states attorneys offices . the civil division's data came from the torts branch , which routinely handles structured settlements . the united states attorneys' data were collected by eousa and include all the data received by eousa as of august 12 , 1999 . as of that date , 34 of the 94 united states attorneys offices had reported annuity settlements during the relevant time period . we did not verify the accuracy of the information collected from the torts branch or eousa .