pool certificates . in addition to the full faith and credit of the u. s. government , the 7 ( a ) pool certificates also carry sba's timely payment guarantee , which ensures that investors will be paid on scheduled dates when collections from borrowers are not timely . sba 7 ( a ) loans are heterogeneous in that they differ in many respects , such as interest rates ; repayment schedules ; maturity ; loan collateral type , quality , and marketability ; and type of business to which the loans are made . sba 7 ( a ) loans are made to a diverse range of small businesses with widely differing financial profiles and credit needs , such as restaurants , consumer services , professional services , and retail outlets . the dollar volume of 7 ( a ) loans that sba can guarantee each year is based on congressional appropriations that subsidize the 7 ( a ) guarantee program . for the fiscal year that ended september 30 , 1997 , sba approved nearly $9.5 billion in loans - - the highest amount to date , and an increase of over 20 percent from the previous fiscal year . as of december 31 , 1997 , there was $21.5 billion in outstanding 7 ( a ) loans . according to sba , about 8,000 lenders are authorized to participate in the 7 ( a ) loan program . they range from institutions that make a few 7 ( a ) loans annually to more active institutions that originate hundreds of 7 ( a ) loans annually . most are insured depository institutions , such as banks and savings and loan associations . nondepository lenders include business and industrial development companies , chartered under state statutes ; insurance companies ; and sblcs licensed and regulated by sba . at the end of 1997 , sblcs accounted for about 19 percent of outstanding 7 ( a ) loans . sba has established three classifications of lenders within the 7 ( a ) program - - regular , certified , and preferred - - each having different levels of authority in processing loans . sba completely analyzes regular lenders' loans and decides on their guarantee . the agency authorizes certified lenders to perform their own credit analyses and preferred lenders to make eligibility and creditworthiness determinations as well as approve their own loans without sba review . sba 7 ( a ) loans differ from other small business loans in some respects . our 1996 report indicated that 7 ( a ) loans tend to be larger , have longer maturities , and have higher interest rates than small business loans in general . typically , loans with features such as longer terms and no prepayment penalties warrant higher interest rates . sba figures showed the average maturity of 7 ( a ) loans sold in the secondary market in 1997 was three times longer than for conventional commercial and industrial loans under $1 million . also , average interest rates for sba loans were 67 basis points higher for fixed - rate loans , and 178 basis points higher for variable rate loans , than for respective categories of conventional commercial and industrial loans under $1 million .