the nmf has no such limitation . immediate assessments: these are accounts that must be assessed more quickly than the master file process allows . generally , these assessments involve situations where irs has determined that the assessment or collection of a deficiency will be jeopardized by delay . in such cases , irs is authorized to immediately assess such deficiency . these accounts are processed on the nmf because , according to irs , the nmf can process assessments in 24 to 36 hours , while the master file takes several weeks . reversal of erroneous abatements: these are accounts in which an assessment is needed to correct some clerical action that had erroneously reduced ( abated ) a taxpayer's tax liability , and the statute of limitations for assessments had expired . as configured , the master file prevents the reversal of abatements after expiration of the statute of limitations . as indicated by the information in the previous section , most of the accounts on the nmf are there because of limitations in the master file's configuration ( eg , the master file's inability to handle split assessments , large accounts , and employee plan numbers ) . other accounts ( eg , those involving new legislation and immediate assessments ) are on the nmf because they have to be processed more quickly than is possible on the master file . there are two basic reasons why accounts can be processed more quickly on the nmf than on the master file . first , the nmf is much smaller than the master file and , thus , easier to work with . the nmf had 122,000 accounts as of september 8 , 1998 , and those accounts were spread among stand - alone systems in each of irs' 10 service centers . by comparison , the master file is one large system , housed in martinsburg , wv , that has an account for every taxpayer that files a return — about 200 million in 1998 . second , the process irs follows to enter account data into the master file and make the updated information available for researching taxpayer accounts is much more time - consuming than the nmf process . for master file purposes , account data flow from the service centers , where the data are initially received and validated , to irs' computing center in martinsburg , where the data are posted to the master file . data coming into martinsburg from the individual service centers are not posted to the master file upon receipt . instead , data are accumulated during the week for posting on weekends . martinsburg sends output from the posting process back to the service centers for their use in updating the integrated data retrieval system ( idrs ) . idrs is the primary system that irs employees use to research and update accounts . for example , irs' customer service representatives use idrs to access accounts in responding to taxpayer inquiries . according to irs , the process from the time data are sent to martinsburg until updated account information is available on idrs can take from 4 to 6 weeks . the nmf process is more streamlined and thus quicker .