yes . yes , but president may not be compensated at an annual rate of pay that exceeds the rate of basic pay in effect from time to time for level i of the executive schedule under sec . do you serve on any other boards ? if so , how many and which ones ? do you believe there should be a limit on the number of boards on which members can serve ? should service on the postal service board of governors be changed from part time to full time ? explain . do you believe that the board has sufficient staff resources ? if not , what additional staff are needed ( numbers , qualifications , etc .

 ) private , nonprofit corporation organized under d.c. law “parent crown corporation” ( fully owned by the crown ) federal government business enterprise ( fully owned by the commonwealth government of australia ) 49 u.s.c . 240101 et seq . australia postal corporation act of 1989 and amendments [cpca 1980-81-82-83 , c.54 and amendments] ( continued ) to provide postal services to bind the nation through the personal , educational , literary , and business correspondence of the people ; and to provide prompt , reliable , and efficient service to patrons in all areas and to render postal services to all communities . to provide stability in the secondary market for residential mortgages ; respond appropriately to the private capital market ; provide ongoing assistance to the secondary market for residential mortgages ( including activities relating to mortgages on housing for low - and moderate - income families involving a reasonable economic return that may be less than the return earned on other activities ) by increasing the liquidity of mortgage investments and improving the distribution of investment capital available for residential mortgage financing ; and promote access to mortgage credit throughout the nation ( including central cities , rural areas , and underserved areas ) by increasing the liquidity of mortgage investments and improving the distribution of investment capital available for residential mortgage financing . to provide stability in the secondary market for residential mortgages ; respond appropriately to the private capital market ; provide ongoing assistance to the secondary market for residential mortgages ( including activities relating to mortgages on housing for low - and moderate - income families involving a reasonable economic return that may be less than the return earned on other activities ) by increasing the liquidity of mortgage investments and improving the distribution of investment capital available for residential mortgage financing ; and promote access to mortgage credit throughout the nation ( including central cities , rural areas , and underserved areas ) by increasing the liquidity of mortgage investments and improving the distribution of investment capital available for residential mortgage financing . to improve the navigability of the tennessee river ; provide for flood control , reforestation , the proper use of marginal lands , and the agricultural and industrial development of the tennessee valley ; provide for the national defense ; and provide an ample supply of electric power to seven - state region in the southeastern united states . to insure deposits of banks and savings associations . to provide intercity and commuter rail passenger transportation in the united states .