there are to be several exceptions to this procedure . first , all housing units in blocks that have been selected for the integrated coverage measurement survey are to be contacted ( 100-percent nonresponse follow - up ) . second , nonresponse follow - up is not to be conducted in rural households that are listed by enumerators . furthermore , the debate about apportionment methods was not over . should the size of the house be fixed first and then apportioned , or should an apportionment fix the size of the house ? without federal census data , state and local governments would have to undertake their own censuses , a costly alternative given the federal government's experience and economies of scale . businesses use the aggregated census data available to them to plan for and provide their services and goods . census data about population trends help businesses succeed — and provide jobs in the process — by alerting them to opportunities to provide new services and products and to tailor existing ones to demographic changes . census data also help businesses efficiently target their advertising dollars . a free sample , for example , of a magazine focused on the interests of hispanic readers can be distributed based on information at the census block level . companies also use population data to locate new stores where they expect likely consumers to be , as well as to locate production facilities where they can expect to find a suitable labor force . “the actual enumeration shall be made,” according to the constitution , under article 1 , section 2 , “... in such manner as they shall by law direct.” in effect , this has enabled congress to adjust decennial census procedures allowing for changes in american society unforeseen in 1787 . congress responded by delegating the census - taking to executive branch agencies while maintaining overall responsibility and periodically enacting legislation affecting census - taking methodology . while changes to census - taking methodologies have occurred , one constant — the focus on identifying households and enumerating people within them — has stayed the same . since the 1790 census , american society has constantly changed , thereby necessitating changes in the methodology of enumeration in the decennial census . among the most significant societal changes have been: 1 . increased population mobility: although westward - bound frontier pioneers were difficult to count in the late - eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , the number of mobile americans today is much greater , increasing problems for census - taking . short - term renters , “snowbird” retirees , students splitting their residence between home and college , and young urbanites rotating temporary residences are a few of the modern phenomena that have created a population mobility unimagined in 1787 . during the period 1990 to 1994 , 17 percent of the american population on average changed residences each year.2 . varied domestic arrangements: households have always been the major focus of census enumeration . in eighteenth century america , nearly all citizens identified themselves with a household whose members were almost always related by blood , marriage , or through regular employment , and therefore included servants , slaves , apprentices , and resident farmworkers .