additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . examples from occ's plan illustrate this . one of occ's strategic goals is to “improve the efficiency of bank supervision and reduc burden by streamlining supervisory processes.” this strategic goal has three performance goals , and each has a single indicator or measure . to what extent does the agency's performance plan provide confidence that its performance information will be credible ? these questions are contained in our february 1998 congressional guide and our april 1998 evaluators' guide for assessing performance plans , which we used to do our review . these guides integrated criteria from the results act , its legislative history , the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance for developing performance plans ( omb circular a - 11 , part 2 ) , a december 1997 letter to omb from several congressional leaders , and our other guidance on implementation of the results act . we used the criteria and questions contained in the guides to help us determine whether treasury's plan met the requirements of the act , to identify strengths and weaknesses in the plan , and to assess the plan's usefulness for executive branch and congressional decisionmakers . as requested , we reviewed the department of the treasury's annual performance plan for fiscal year 1999 that was submitted to congress in february 1998 . treasury's annual performance plan and budget request for fiscal year 1999 has separate sections for each of the department's bureaus and offices . we conducted a more in - depth analysis of sections relating to the internal revenue service ( irs ) ; united states customs service ; financial management service ( fms ) ; bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ( atf ) ; office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) ; and office of thrift supervision ( ots ) . these components , except for occ and ots , which do not receive appropriated funds , represent about 88 percent of treasury's total budget request for fiscal year 1999 . we sent a draft of this letter to treasury's office of strategic planning for review and comment . on may 28 , 1998 , treasury officials provided oral comments on that draft , which are discussed at the end of this letter . we did our work from february 1998 through june 1998 , according to generally accepted government auditing standards . the results act is designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of federal programs by establishing a system to set goals for program performance and to measure results . specifically , the act requires executive agencies to prepare multiyear strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports . the strategic plan serves as the starting point and basic underpinning of the performance - based management system and includes the agency's mission statement and its long - term goals and objectives for implementing the mission . treasury submitted its first strategic plan under the results act to congress and the director of omb , as required , by september 30 , 1997 .