ii ) . ii. ) she also noted that existence of the arbitration program redirected some court cases to trw's dispute resolution forum . she explained that five employees had bypassed trw's arbitration process and filed lawsuits . after trw informed the plaintiffs' attorneys about the arbitration program , four of the five plaintiffs withdrew their suits to first seek resolution through arbitration . what lessons did the selected agencies and companies report that they learned in planning , implementing , and evaluating their adr processes ? because of the chairman's interest in reforming the federal employee redress system , we primarily focused on adr use in the types of disputes that federal employees can appeal to the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) or the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) , and not those generally grieved under collective bargaining procedures . for the private sector , we developed information about adr processes for employees not covered under collective bargaining agreements . to develop information about federal agencies' and private sector companies' reasons for using adr , the types of adr they have made available other than those under collective bargaining agreements , the extent to which they have put these processes in place , and results derived from using adr , we reviewed available literature and spoke to experts in the field . among the experts with whom we spoke were officials from mspb , eeoc , the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the administrative conference of the united states ( acus ) , the national academy of public administration , the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) , the american arbitration association ( aaa ) , the cpr center for dispute resolution , and the equal employment advisory council ( eeac ) . to develop information about the types of adr processes offered by federal employers and the extent to which these processes are offered , we used the results of eeoc surveys of federal agencies that were reported in february 1994 and october 1996 . to develop information about the types of adr processes offered by private sector employers and the extent to which these processes are offered , we used the results from one of our surveys . in identifying the predominant adr methods used in the private and federal sectors , we applied definitions based on materials developed by opm and acus . because adr is an evolving field , there is some inconsistency among practitioners in the terms they use to describe their adr approaches . for this reason , we occasionally grouped different organizations' adr approaches under the same names , although the organizations themselves called these approaches by different names . we discussed this practice with each of the affected organizations and obtained their concurrence . to illustrate private and federal sector organizations' experiences in planning and implementing adr processes , the extent to which they evaluated their adr processes and the extent to which they reported that these processes have been successful in resolving workplace disputes and lessening costs , and the lessons they reported having learned , we judgmentally selected for study five private sector companies and five federal agencies that had had some experience with adr .