this was to be done separately for open and closed cases . based on 1998 case statistics that grantees submitted to lsc between january and march 1999 , several programs would have based their certification determinations on reviews of a relatively small number of cases . seven grantees had fewer than 300 closed cases , and 43 grantees had fewer than 300 open cases . three programs had fewer than 300 cases combined . the smallest program would have based its self - inspection on 3 closed cases and 1 open case . we believe that , in general , samples of 30 or fewer cases are too small to provide reliable estimates of the total number of case data errors . because these were smaller grantees , this limitation would have had little effect on lsc's estimate of total closed caseload . however , it could have affected — by either overstating or understating — lsc's count of the number of certified programs . lsc does not know how well grantees conducted the self - inspection process , nor how accurate the results are . we spoke with several executive directors who did not correctly follow lsc's reporting requirements . in one case , the executive director sought clarification from lsc headquarters about the use of a csr closure code and was given incorrect verbal guidance . the situation concerned whether applicant files could be closed as “client withdrew” cases when individuals who were accepted for service and assigned to staff attorneys did not subsequently appear for a meeting with the attorney . according to both the executive director and an lsc official , the executive director was told that if the program attempted to contact these individuals , by telephone or letter , to determine whether they were still interested in obtaining legal assistance , they could be counted as cases . the executive director told us that she would review her entire database for this type of error and make corrections . this program was included on lsc's certified list , but we do not know whether the program would stay on that list if all the errors were identified . another executive director told us that he was concerned that lsc did not want grantees to count assistance over the telephone as a case . this is not an entirely correct interpretation of lsc guidance since , under certain conditions , lsc permits legal assistance over the telephone to be counted as a case . although this program was included on lsc's certified list , any valid telephone cases that were not counted would have erroneously increased its error rate . a third executive director told us that the timely closing rule required him to close new cases in december . all such documentation is to be maintained in the client file . we do not know how many of the respondents to our survey were familiar with lsc's july 14 guidance when we interviewed them in late july and early august . single recording of cases: the 1999 csr handbook requires that programs ensure that cases involving the same client and specific legal problem are not recorded and reported to lsc more than once .