in total we surveyed 120 federal organizations . these organizations employed about 1.9 million civilian employees , representing 96 percent of the federal civilian workforce as of september 1995 . we received responses from 119 of the 120 organizations . most of the 119 federal organizations that reported information on the numbers of relocations did so using one of two different categories: relocations authorized , that is , the number of civilian employees who were reported as approved to relocate ; and relocations made , that is , the number of civilian employees who were reported as actually relocated . similarly , most of the 119 federal organizations that reported on the costs of relocations did so using one of two different categories: relocation obligations , that is , the total funds obligated , for each fiscal year , at the time the relocation was approved and against which expenditures were to later be posted ; and relocation expenditures , that is , the actual disbursements during each fiscal year for the costs incurred to relocate civilian employees . these different reporting categories for numbers and costs of relocations are not directly comparable . accordingly , we report separately the information from the federal organizations that responded using each category . one organization , the department of the navy , reported its relocation information using all four reporting categories ( relocations authorized and made and relocation obligations and expenditures ) . when navy's components reported to navy headquarters their number of civilian employees relocated , some components reported relocations authorized and others reported relocations made . also , when reporting the cost of civilian employee relocations , some navy components reported obligations and others reported expenditures . for this reason , we provide different segments of the navy's relocation information in whichever of the categories navy's components reported them for the number and costs to relocate civilian employees . as a result , in aggregating the data across all of the organizations in our survey , part of the department of the navy is included in each category . in total , we report relocations authorized for 97 organizations and relocations made for 23 organizations . similarly , we report relocation obligations for 97 organizations and relocation expenditures for 23 organizations . the data provided in this report are based on the best information the federal organizations could provide and are not complete for each of the years for which we requested data . several organizations did not provide information for all years during the 1991 through 1995 period . a few other organizations did not provide information for all of their components for all of the years during this period . in addition , some organizations did not provide certain types of relocation costs in their reported obligations or expenditures . as a result , the information in this report probably understates the actual numbers and costs of civilian employee relocations . federal organizations relocate their civilian employees to help them accomplish their many varied and unique missions . organizations carry out their missions through a civilian workforce of nearly 2 million employees assigned to offices in locations throughout the united states , its territories and possessions , and various foreign countries .