their comments and our responses are summarized below . ondcp concurred with the report and provided technical clarifications , which we have incorporated in the report where appropriate . in its comments on the budget certification process and the pme system , ondcp noted that: the budget authorities we reviewed have been renewed as part of the office of national drug control policy reauthorization act of 1998 . is the budget consistent with the goals and objectives outlined in the national strategy ? does the budget address specific drug control initiatives outlined in ondcp's annual guidance ? are funding levels consistent with overall budget trends and at amounts sufficient to carry out individual programs ? determination of adequacy , according to ondcp internal memorandums , is not meant to be a technical analysis of the budget , but rather a collective opinion — of budget analysts , program analysts , and ultimately ondcp managers — that agencies are asking for sufficient funding to carry out existing programs and new initiatives to support the national strategy . during july and august 1997 , ondcp began notifying drug control agencies of the results of its summer budget proposed certification decisions . ondcp prepared precertification letters , which it provided to agencies , identifying specific areas in the budget that must be addressed in order for the budget to be certified . ondcp officials have stated that these letters allow the agencies time to revise their budgets prior to submitting them in the fall to omb . it also allows ondcp to concentrate its certification efforts earlier in the budget process , when there is more time for review and comment prior to the involvement of omb . these letters are typically provided at the department level , except for independent agencies . for the fiscal year 1999 budget cycle , the ondcp director personally met with cabinet officers or their designees to discuss funding priorities . according to ondcp officials , the precertification letters were sent just prior to or brought to these meetings and served as informal agendas for the discussions . ondcp requested that fall budgets be submitted prior to the time they were provided to omb ( typically during september ) . the fall budget review and certification process was similar to the summer process , with the reviewers looking specifically at existing programs and new initiatives that ondcp had identified during the summer reviews ( and documented in a precertification letter ) as needing additional funding . following this review , ondcp notified each department or agency of its final certification decision . most of the certification letters were issued in late november 1997 , with two others provided in early december 1997 and one in early november 1997 . ondcp officials noted that , in making the final certification decision for each individual drug control agency , there can be a range of overall funding levels that are considered adequate to achieve the goals and objectives of the national strategy . therefore , although an agency's overall drug budget may decrease from summer to fall , if the core drug control program initiatives remain adequately funded , the overall drug budget can still be certified .