crosswalking performance plans with budget structures . for example , acf devised a crosswalk to identify the contribution of its over 60 program activities to its 10 strategic objectives ( see figure 4 for an excerpt from this crosswalk ) . the crosswalk identifies funding for accounts or program activities and — using consolidation and aggregation — relates an account or program activity to a strategic objective , and consequently , to the objective's set of discrete performance goals . account or program activity funding levels are summed to provide a proposed funding level for each strategic objective . as executive agencies developed these approaches and presented their fiscal year 1999 budget submissions , the congress also indicated an increasing interest in credible performance information to inform the resource allocation process . we reviewed fiscal year 1999 appropriations hearings and reports for the agencies in our review that allocated program activity funding to performance goals and observed that members of the congress often made specific reference to the performance information contained in the agency's justification and / or performance plan . some notable examples include the following . acf officials were questioned as to whether a 4 percent increase in children exiting foster care through reunification justified the appropriation being sought for these activities . u.s. customs service officials were asked how the appropriations committee should evaluate performance and resource requirements for customs' marine mission , given an apparent lack of measures for its marine enforcement program . nrc officials were asked what performance measures would be used to justify u.s. participation and funding in international nuclear safety programs and how requested budget increases were related to nrc's mission . food and nutrition service officials presented data on the number of meals being served in the school lunch and breakfast programs and were asked how much additional budgetary resources would be needed to serve all eligible children . this complexity was evident for agencies included in this review . for example , the number of budget accounts associated with a given agency's performance plan ranged from a low of 1 to a high of 118 for the agencies we reviewed , while the number of program activities to be covered by the plan ranged from 6 to 465 . the median number of accounts for agencies that we reviewed was 9 , and the median number of program activities was 32 . typically , program activity structures were unique not only to each of the agencies in our review , but also to each of the budget accounts within an agency . the intent of our statistical analyses was to quantitatively identify and explore associations of various plan characteristics with plans that did or did not allocate funding to a discrete set of goals and / or measures . however , the following qualifications apply to our analysis . although the results of our analyses apply to the plans we reviewed , our plan selection procedures preclude generalizing the results to agency plans not included in our population . for those characteristics we identified as having a significant association with characteristic 12 , it is possible that this result occurred because of the close association of that characteristic with one or more of the other characteristics that were related to characteristic 12 .