al. , v. irs and nara ) that was pending at the time of our review . the lawsuit explicitly sought the court's resolution of the inconsistency between irs' and nara's responsibilities . accordingly , we have deleted the discussion of the options from this report . we provided drafts of this report to the heads of nara and irs for their comments . both agencies provided written comments , which are discussed in the following sections , and technical corrections , which we incorporated in this report where appropriate . nara's comments centered on two major points . first , while the archivist has the statutory responsibility to approve the disposition of records and to select records for permanent retention , nara believes that it is currently unable to fulfill this responsibility for all irs records because it lacks access to the records . nara notes , as we do in this report , that the process by which it appraises and approves the disposition of agency records is , by law , the official procedure . in line with nara's comments on this point , we sought to emphasize in this report the statutory basis for nara's oversight of federal records management . at the same time , we continued to highlight the conflict between nara's statutory responsibilities and the disclosure provisions of section 6103 . second , nara discussed the legal interpretation of section 6103 and the policy questions it raises for both agencies . nara stressed that although nara employees in the frcs are involved in the retrieval , refiling , and eventual destruction of individual tax returns on an ongoing basis , they do not have similar access to records containing tax returns or return information for appraisal and disposition purposes . irs' comments , which we discuss in more detail below , noted that tax returns may be stored at frcs for retrieval and use by the agency pursuant to section 6103 . however , irs does not believe that section 6103 would allow nara access to tax returns or return information for appraisal purposes . irs has interpreted section 6103 as allowing the disclosure of tax returns and return information for purposes of tax administration to the extent necessary in connection with the processing , storage , transmission , and reproduction of such information ; the programming , maintenance , repair , testing , and procurement of equipment ; and the providing of other services . the one court that has specifically examined this issue agreed with irs' interpretation . irs explained that congress has put very tight restrictions on access to tax returns and return information and that its interpretation of section 6103 precludes any access that has not been expressly granted by legislation . as previously mentioned , h.r . 2292 and s. 1096 , introduced july 30 and 31 , 1997 , respectively , each include a section that would provide a statutory mechanism for nara access to irs records . irs also commented that its relationship with nara , except for the section 6103 issue , has been satisfactory over the years .