( see fig . 6 for an artist's illustration of the sandia study's proposed three - fence barrier system. ) according to the sandia study , multiple barriers in urban areas would provide the border patrol a greater ability to ( 1 ) discourage a significant number of illegal border crossers , ( 2 ) detect intruders early and delay them as long as possible , and ( 3 ) channel a significantly reduced level of traffic to places where border patrol agents can adequately deal with it . the sandia study recommended multiple barriers along approximately 90 miles , or less than 6 percent of the southwest border . these increased opportunities for confrontation led to allegations of abuse against agents . under the sector's apprehension strategy , el paso's chief patrol agent told us that the border area was in “complete chaos.” the chief estimated there were up to 8,000 to 10,000 illegal border crossings daily , and only 1 out of 8 aliens was apprehended . the apprehension strategy also created several problems in the community . el paso citizens and others complained about this approach in meetings with the sector's chief patrol agent . they believed that the border patrol did not try to prevent entry but , in fact , used the increased numbers of apprehensions as a primary factor in justifying its budget . some local residents felt their civil rights were being violated by the border patrol . for example , students and teachers at a local high school filed a federal lawsuit to stop harassment after el paso sector agents confronted a coach believing he was an alien smuggler.illegal aliens also had a significant impact on the city's crime rates . el paso police officials estimated that undocumented aliens committed 75 to 80 percent of all auto thefts , as well as many burglaries . the mayor of el paso told us that illegal immigration costs the city about $30 to $50 million per year . in light of these problems , el paso's chief patrol agent began an initiative in september 1993 to change the sector's border control strategy to one of preventing illegal entry . the sector stationed all available agents immediately at a 20-mile stretch of the border in highly visible border patrol vehicles . the primary goal of the new strategy — operation hold - the - line — was preventing significant numbers of aliens from entering the el paso metropolitan area . those who still tried to cross the border illegally were routed to less populated areas where they could be more easily apprehended . the el paso sector's goal of preventing illegal entry is similar to the one recommended by the sandia study , although the tactics are different . sandia recommended multiple physical barriers to prevent entry ; the sector employs agents as a human barrier . however , the sector eventually plans to construct additional lighted fencing , which is generally consistent with the sandia study recommendations . preliminary results in san diego and el paso suggest that the prevention strategy has reduced illegal entry in these sectors . other benefits include less border crime , less confrontation between border patrol agents and illegal aliens , and strong public support .