on that line . only lines on which the taxpayer has made an entry are included on the 1040pc . irs received about 4.8 million 1040pc returns in 1993 , but only about 4.2 million in 1994 . irs attributes the decline to a delay by a major return preparer in submitting its 1040pc software for irs approval . the decline might also be attributed to problems with the 1040pc that were discussed during a september 1993 meeting of the internal revenue commissioner's advisory group . as reported in the september 3 , 1993 , issue of the daily tax report , those problems involved taxpayers' inability to interpret the 1040pc and use it as an aid in doing such things as ( 1 ) preparing state tax returns and ( 2 ) completing financial aid forms for children . irs officials told us that steps have been taken to address these problems . in the future , 1040pc software packages will be required to provide the taxpayer with a legend explaining the lines on the 1040pc or a printed copy of the full return . irs' computer systems generally performed well during the 1994 filing season . however , some systems problems occurred that had operational impacts , such as downtime for irs employees and short delays in refunds for taxpayers . systems problems caused the computer systems at various locations to be unavailable to irs personnel for generally short periods of time ( less than 12 hours ) . according to irs problem assessments , this limited downtime usually had a minimal impact on irs' overall operations . however , in 1 instance , a problem with the automated underreporter system at 1 service center caused irs to lay off 270 temporary employees for about 1 week . irs officials attributed this event to systemic problems in the software provided by the vendor . irs had some intermittent systems problems that affected taxpayers . for example , one problem caused tax returns that were electronically filed at one service center on february 1 , 1994 , to not be processed on time . irs estimated that the problem caused about a 1-week delay in processing those refunds . two of irs' goals are to issue individual income tax refunds within an average of 40 days and with at least a 98-percent accuracy rate . irs reports show that each of the 10 service centers met the timeliness goal , and the average issuance time for all 10 centers was 36 days . also according to irs data , 8 of the 10 centers met or exceeded the accuracy goal ; the other 2 centers' accuracy rates were within 1 percent of the goal . the average accuracy rate for all service centers was 98.6 percent . irs measures refund accuracy by reviewing samples of nonelectronically filed returns with a refund due to the taxpayer . it compares the taxpayer's name , address , and refund amount on the tax return with the same information on irs' master file , which is used to generate the refund check . by comparing this information , irs can determine if an error was made and who made the error . irs uses the same sample to measure refund timeliness .