fully implemented . note 1: we did not assess the panel's recommendation for “expeditiously.” note 2: we did not attempt to determine which specific recommendations discussed elsewhere in the panel's report the panel was referring to regarding the implementation of this recommendation . therefore , we did not assess the portion of the recommendation stating that “implementing this recommendation requires that the customs service adopt the recommended restructuring of internal affairs discussed elsewhere in this report.” updated response: customs' special assistant commissioner , office of internal affairs ( ia ) , told us that when allegations come into ia they are logged into ia's automated case management system . from the log , an agent opens a case for a preliminary investigation . he said all allegations that ia receives are to be logged onto the system and assigned a case number . ia has 60 days to determine whether the case should proceed from a preliminary investigation to a formal one . one way in which the length of formal cases is tracked in ia's case management system is that cases 60 , 90 , and 120 days old are highlighted — the computer screen flashes when the cases reach these intervals . the special assistant commissioner , ia , said that the agent revisits the case with his / her supervisor on at least these 30-day intervals . he said that if a case is close to approaching 6 months old , ia sends a memorandum to the ia special agent in charge ( sac ) . if the case is over 6 months old , and no activity has been conducted on it for the past 2 weeks , ia supervisors will determine why there has been no activity . desk officers can also review the computer screens , according to the special assistant commissioner , ia . they should know when a case exceeds the 180 days . integrity recommendation 2: the customs service must immediately remove , both from their positions and from their geographical location , customs personnel found responsible for corruption and / or contributing to the perception of corruption . written response: evidence of actual corruption is treated as criminal conduct and employees face removal from their positions and the service . where perceptions of corruption exist , employees have been transferred due to “loss of effectiveness.” however , it should be noted that customs reviews cases involving perceptions of corruption on a case by case basis and determines disciplinary action based on the facts surrounding the individual case as well as mitigating and aggravating factors . substantially implemented . updated response: customs officials further stated that the office of chief counsel was very involved in determining the actions to implement regarding employees contributing to the perception of corruption . they also mentioned that there are considerations of fairness to the individual because these cases were allegations of corruption and not actual acts of corruption . other issues involved the employee's right to have the office of special counsel intervene , which they said could prevent automatic removal based on perceptions of corruption .