attorneys . we then analyzed summary information provided by atf on the prosecuted cases . the summary information covered the nature of the charges , the individuals' past criminal histories , and any resulting convictions and sentences . for example , we were interested in whether the defendants were charged only with lying on the brady form , or whether form falsification was an ancillary charge added in with other charges . similarly , we were interested in whether the defendants had criminal histories showing convictions for violent felonies . • what were the effects of the various legal challenges to brady ? for instance , we were particularly interested in whether background checks of handgun purchasers were being conducted in those jurisdictions represented by cleos who had filed lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of brady . if no background checks were being conducted in certain jurisdictions , we wanted to determine why and what alternative arrangements were permissible or practical . ( see ch . to obtain a broad understanding of these phase i implementation issues , we contacted a number of relevant governmental and private organizations . for example , we interviewed atf headquarters and district officials responsible for promulgating brady regulations and providing training and guidance to cleos and federally licensed gun dealers . we obtained additional national perspectives by contacting the following industry and special interest organizations: americans for effective law enforcement ; the citizens committee for the right to keep and bear arms ; the coalition to stop gun violence ; gun owners of america ; handgun control , inc. ; the international association of chiefs of police ; the law enforcement alliance of america ; the national rifle association ; and the national sheriffs' association . to obtain information on how frequently the 5-day waiting period and background checks were resulting in denials , we contacted local law enforcement agencies in several brady states . our results are not projectable to the universe of denials nationwide . we did not use a nationally projectable sample because ( 1 ) it would have involved contacting hundreds of law enforcement agencies nationwide , ( 2 ) brady was less than 1 year old when we began our data gathering , and ( 3 ) brady did not impose any record - keeping requirements on cleos . we judgmentally selected 20 state and local law enforcement agencies in 12 ( 46 percent ) of the 26 brady states . selection factors — which are discussed in more detail below — included data availability , jurisdictional variety , denial rate variety , and geographic dispersion . in seven of the brady states we contacted , a state agency conducted background checks for all jurisdictions within the state . in the other five brady states ( 13 jurisdictions ) , local agencies were responsible for the background checks . also , as noted in table 1.1 , 14 of the 20 agencies we contacted were surveyed earlier by atf for treasury's interim report on brady's impact . brady does not require any reports from cleos or gun dealers .