attorneys . the clinic interview was pretested with two abortion clinic representatives , and the local law enforcement interview was pretested with two police departments . we kept in mind that the national abortion rights groups hold a position on the issue of abortion , and their input did not cause us to make any substantive changes to our instrument . however , the groups were in a position to offer useful advice on words and phrases that would be best understood by the abortion clinics . the groups also encouraged the participation of the abortion clinic representatives in the study , which reduced nonresponse bias . we took steps to minimize nonresponse bias by following up with potential respondents to encourage them to participate . we obtained a 100 percent response rate from the police department interviews and u.s. attorney surveys and a 98 percent response rate from the clinic interviews . all data were double - keyed and verified after data entry , and computer analyses were double - checked against hand - tallies of key information . all computer programs were also checked by a second independent programmer . this appendix contains summaries of reported and unreported or pending cases brought under the freedom of access to clinic entrances act of 1994 ( face ) . the summaries of reported cases are based on the text of written decisions and additional information from the department of justice ( doj ) that updated the status of these cases . we based our summaries of unreported or pending cases on information provided by doj . we were not able to identify cases relating to actions brought by private parties in unreported or pending status because no central databases exist for identifying this information . united states v. bird , 124 f.3d 667 ( 5th cir . it also upheld the permanent injunction , with some modifications , ruling that portions of the injunction were inconsistent with the first amendment , such as the prohibition of certain types of nonthreatening speech and other forms of expression . however , it said a permanent injunction that is more limited in scope would be constitutional . the supreme court of the united states denied a petition to review the court of appeals' decision . woodall v. reno , 47 f.3d 656 ( 4th cir . 1995 ) , cert . denied , 115 s. ct. 2577 ( 1995 ) . the plaintiffs , a demonstrator and an anti - abortion women's organization , alleged that they pray peacefully in front of abortion clinic entrances and nonviolently discourage access to the entrances . the plaintiffs raised a challenge on constitutional grounds to face . the district court dismissed their complaint and the plaintiffs appealed . the court of appeals rejected the plaintiffs' claim that face violated the first amendment or was vague and overbroad and affirmed on the reasoning of the opinion in american life league , a decision the court handed down on the same day as woodall . the plaintiffs also argued that face was unconstitutional because it allowed the attorney general to seek injunctive relief if he / she had reasonable cause to believe that a person might be injured by conduct violating face , and thus it constituted prior restraint .