costs for each strategy vary . the primary cost of the buyouts is the financial incentive . the primary costs of rifs are severance pay for those who are not eligible for retirement , unemployment , outplacement , and relocation costs . any governmentwide analysis of the costs and savings of buyouts and rifs must , of necessity , be based on average demographics . actual demographics and separation experiences at individual agencies may vary from this analysis ; thus , actual costs and savings may also vary . we had neither the time nor resources to complete an in - depth economic analysis at individual agencies that would capture these experiences . consequently , our analysis is based on demographic data from opm showing average salaries , ages , and years of service for separated employees . if an agency has a downsizing goal that requires personnel reductions in excess of normal attrition , should the agency conduct a rif or , if legislatively authorized , offer buyouts ? this decision involves not only the economics of each strategy but also how effectively the agency can use buyouts and rifs to eliminate specific positions , and the potentially adverse effect the strategy might have on agency operations and employee morale . because first - year savings are dependent to a great extent on when the separation occurs , we have computed net savings on the basis of two different separation dates during the fiscal year . varying assumptions have been used in past economic studies of buyouts and rifs . we analyzed these studies to obtain the factors that should be included in an economic analysis of costs and savings associated with buyouts and rifs . the studies we reviewed included our 1985 study of rifs,a 1994 dod study of buyouts and rifs , a 1993 congressional budget office study of buyouts and rifs , and a 1995 office of personnel management ( opm ) analysis of buyout and rif costs . the analysis assumes a standard yearly inflation rate but does not take into account such factors as life - cycle costing or discounting techniques . we compared the costs and savings of buyouts given to regular retirement - eligible employees , early retirement - eligible employees , and resignees with the estimated costs and savings that would result if the positions these employees filled were subjected to elimination under a rif . costs and savings for each buyout and rif scenario are based on the weighted average cpdf data for buyout and rif separations from fiscal year 1993 through the first half of fiscal year 1995 . although a detailed analysis of agency buyout and rif costs was beyond the scope of our current review , we contacted some agencies that have experienced buyouts and rifs in the past 2 fiscal years to obtain cost data . we found that little , if any , data had been tracked or collected . we asked general questions on how rifs and buyouts were administered to get a better understanding of the factors to include in our economic analysis .