iv through viii ) . on the other hand , in va's may 22 , 1998 , letter , the assistant secretary for policy and planning said that the draft report fell short in depicting the scope , magnitude , and complexity of va's primary human resource restructuring initiative — the “hr link$” project . he also stated that this initiative is a model for the federal government . we believe that we have accurately described va's personnel restructuring efforts . the four departments we reviewed had all developed restructuring plans . one of the primary goals of those plans was to reduce administrative staff , including the number of employees working in personnel offices . in reducing their administrative staffs , the departments were responding to a number of factors . one major impetus was the 1993 npr recommendation to reduce administrative staff . other major factors were the governmentwide reality of operating with reduced budgets , exemplified by a succession of budget agreements between congress and the administration , as well as the requirement in the federal workforce restructuring act to reduce governmentwide full - time equivalent positions . usda was also responding to 1994 legislation that directed it to reorganize and to reduce its workforce . there were also cases , such as va , where the departments or their agencies started their restructuring efforts to improve customer service before governmentwide efforts began in the 1990s . in deciding how to restructure , each department had to confront its own particular set of circumstances and challenges . as of late 1997 , officials in each of the four departments characterized the status of their personnel office restructuring as generally nearing the end of its initial stages of implementation . a brief summary of those restructuring efforts is presented next . between september 1993 and september 1997 , usda reduced its personnel staff departmentwide from 2,463 to 2,035 employees , a decrease of about 17 percent . in addressing our first objective further , we interviewed personnel officials of the four departments and the selected component agencies to obtain information on ( 1 ) when restructuring began , ( 2 ) the rationale for restructuring , ( 3 ) the plans developed for restructuring , ( 4 ) the activities undertaken to restructure , and ( 5 ) the status of implementation . the personnel officials we interviewed were from the central offices of the departments and agencies , and regional and other field offices . specifically , at the field level , we interviewed personnel officials of the bureau of reclamation in denver , colorado ; the bureau of land management , forest service , natural resources conservation service , bureau of indian affairs , and indian health service in albuquerque , new mexico ; the bureau of land management's state office in santa fe , new mexico ; and the veterans health administration in bath , new york . in addition , we reviewed the restructuring plans and other documentation on restructuring provided by the four departments and their agencies . for example , we examined the “reengineering blueprint” that details the restructuring plans of the natural resources conservation service at usda . we also attended planning conferences held by va for its human resource managers .