( see app . existing irs operations have drawn their workloads from geographically defined service areas ; until 1995 , employees had limited access to taxpayer data outside their service areas . scheduling for increment four has not yet been determined . the system is to be modified for use with a planned new comprehensive database of taxpayer information . irs has been hampered to some extent in implementing its customer service plans by a lack of clarity in management responsibilities . this is reflected both at the senior management level for achieving the customer service vision and at lower management levels for specific tsm projects crucial to the vision . the lack of clarity at both management levels can be traced to irs' current organizational structure , which does not fully conform to the plans for the customer service vision , but uncertainty about how to implement irs' new core business systems management approach has also contributed to the confusion . irs' officials have a plan that , if timely and thoroughly implemented , should clearly identify responsibilities at the senior management level . an integral part of irs' core business system approach is its requirement for designation of “owners” of each core business system and the underlying subsystems and processes . irs has defined an owner as an individual assigned to be responsible and accountable for all the activities associated with a core business system , subsystem , or process . this responsibility often includes establishing business requirements , setting quality measures , and overseeing the development of new products and services intended to enhance the performance of the core business system in meeting taxpayers' needs . irs has designated owners for the six core business systems and for most of the subsystems and processes that comprise the majority of irs' activities . two of these core business systems , managing accounts and ensuring compliance , include the subsystems and processes that are to be transferred to customer service . thus , the subsystems and processes that are to make up customer service are divided between two current irs core business systems . ( as the boundaries of the two functional organizations involved , taxpayer services and compliance , are identical to the core business system boundaries , customer service responsibilities are split between the functional organizations also. ) because irs' current organizational structure does not match the structure planned for customer service , no owner for the emerging customer service organization has yet been designated . the result is that responsibility for carrying out the many projects and tasks necessary to work toward the goals of the customer service vision is divided between two irs organizations , which are headed by two different senior managers called chiefs , who are also responsible for directing current returns processing , taxpayer services , examination , and collection activities . the divided ownership of the components of the customer service vision also raises the question of how the new customer service organization that will emerge as more sites are rolled out will be managed . traditionally , irs offices that carried out the service activities being combined at customer service sites have been part of a district and / or regional office , with the national office providing policy guidance and oversight .