some shift in workload has occurred . taxpayer service and service center staffs originated about 82 percent of all agreements in fiscal year 1994 , up from 43 percent in fiscal year 1991 . most of the increase was due to these two staffs granting streamlined agreements . acs call sites granted fewer agreements in fiscal year 1994 ( about 381,000 or 15 percent of agreements ) than in fiscal year 1991 ( about 579,000 or 53 percent of agreements ) . in shifting the installment agreement workload to service center and taxpayer service staff , irs hoped to increase acs collections by freeing up acs staff to work on higher dollar cases . however , the expectation of increased collections had not materialized since acs collections per staff year dropped between fiscal years 1992 and 1994 from $1.71 million to $1.44 million in current year dollars . overall , the amount collected at acs sites decreased from $4.88 billion to $3.30 billion during the same period . irs collection officials said that the lower acs collections are due , in part , to their decision during this same period to increase the deferral level — the amount under which delinquent accounts are not pursued beyond the notice stage , except to offset refunds . according to irs officials , this increase reduced acs workloads more than expected and contributed to reduced acs collections . irs subsequently lowered its deferral level in april 1994 , a move irs officials expect will increase acs workloads and the resulting collections . another indication of the greater impact the installment agreement program is having on collections was the increased number of balance due accounts that are being resolved earlier in the collection process . irs data show that more balance due accounts are being favorably resolved by taxpayers paying or arranging to pay the amounts owed without irs resorting to collection notices and subsequent collection actions . between fiscal years 1991 and 1994 , accounts favorably resolved before a collection notice rose from 41 percent to 52 percent , with installment agreements accounting for a growing share of the favorable early resolutions . in fiscal year 1994 , installment agreements accounted for 41 percent of the favorable early resolutions , up from 14 percent in fiscal year 1991 . irs' internal audit raised several questions regarding the installment agreement program since irs implemented the april 1992 changes . in september 1994 , irs' internal auditors raised concerns about whether ( 1 ) the new procedures for granting installment agreements were encouraging taxpayers to choose installments when they could be paying their taxes in full and ( 2 ) the program was leading some taxpayers to accumulate debt they may not be able to pay . the installment agreement program was established to provide taxpayers who cannot pay their taxes in full , when they are due , an opportunity to pay in installments . before the program was revised in april 1992 , taxpayers whose agreements were for tax debts above $5,000 were required to provide financial data to substantiate their inability to pay in full and on time .