marshals service . in comparison , the rate of deficiency for background investigation reports from dea , which dea and two contractors prepared over several years ( 1996 to 1999 ) , was 98 percent . opm computed these percentages by dividing the total number of reports it reviewed into the number it found deficient . rather than raising a question regarding dea's independence and objectivity in choosing to review background investigations performed by dea and its contractors , the evidence raises the question of why opm did not act to rescind dea's delegated authority . according to opm , the administration announced in late 1994 that opm's investigative unit was to be privatized . did the frequency of opm's reviews seem reasonable given the state of dea's background investigations and program ? was the frequency of opm's oversight activities at other agencies with delegated authority similar or dissimilar to the frequency of opm's oversight at dea ? for this second objective , we reviewed executive order 10450 , “security requirements for government employment,” which among other things specified opm's responsibilities for reviewing federal agencies' personnel security programs . we also identified all agencies , in addition to dea , that had received delegated authority from opm to perform background investigations . we compared opm's oversight activities — the frequency of reviews and the results — to opm's oversight activities at dea . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the attorney general of the united states on behalf of doj and dea . we also requested comments from the director , opm . opm's comments are discussed near the end of this letter and are reprinted in appendix i. doj orally provided technical and clarifying comments , which we incorporated into this report . we did our work in washington , d.c. , from may through july 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as of july 1999 , dea was considering whether to relinquish its personnel - security background investigation authority to opm . it had been brought to this point by the deficiencies found by opm over much of the decade and because of an assessment doj made in 1997 . doj initiated discussions with dea in late 1998 about relinquishing its authority . partially in response to this initiative , dea conducted an assessment and concluded that it lacked the expertise and resources to capably perform or oversee all of its background investigations . through a memorandum of understanding and agreement with opm , dea was required to forward all background investigation reports to opm when they were completed . opm was required to review samples of reports to determine whether investigative requirements called for by the agreement were met . in addition to reviewing completed investigation reports , opm was required to assess dea's overall personnel security program under which background investigations were conducted . opm's reviews of background investigation reports submitted by dea continually found the investigations deficient . between 1996 and 1998 , opm reviewed a total of 265 background investigations conducted by dea and its contractors . opm found all but one investigation deficient ( i. e. , all but one failed to fully comply with opm investigative requirements , which dea agreed to follow ) .