vi ) . these comments are contained in a letter signed by the chairman of ftc , by the direction of the commission , and in a dissenting statement by one of ftc's commissioners . according to the chairman's letter , the commission voted 3 to 1 to issue this response . the dissenting statement reflected the views of the one commissioner who voted against submitting the response . a bureau of funeral directing official stated that a continuing education bill passed the state legislature and is currently awaiting the governor's signature . if enacted , this bill would require 12 hours of continuing education every 2 years . bureau officials stated that about 300 of the state's approximately 2,000 funeral homes are inspected each year . these officials further stated that inspections and investigations are largely complaint driven . the bureau has produced separate consumer brochures for preneed and at - need funeral arrangements ; however , there is no requirement that funeral directors make these brochures available to consumers . a bureau of funeral directing official stated that the bureau's contact information is required to be included on the itemized statement that funeral directors give to consumers . the texas funeral service commission regulates funeral homes in texas.the commission is made up of nine commissioners , including four licensed embalmers or funeral directors and five consumer representatives . an executive director administers the daily business of the commission . table iv.5 provides information on the regulation and oversight of texas funeral homes and shows state requirements regarding consumer information . a texas funeral service commission official stated that funeral directors and embalmers licenses must be renewed every 2 years and funeral establishment licenses must be renewed annually . licensees renewing in 1999 are required to complete 14 hours of continuing education . licensees renewing in 2000 are required to complete 16 hours of continuing education . although texas law requires that funeral establishments be inspected every 2 years , a commission official stated that all texas funeral establishments are inspected on an annual basis . texas law requires that the commission produce and make available to funeral establishments a consumer brochure for funeral purchases . funeral establishments are required to provide each prospective customer with a copy of the brochure when funeral services are discussed . cfp also regulates the cemetery industry in california . cfp has jurisdiction over private cemeteries but does not regulate others , such as religious and municipal cemeteries and fraternal burial parks . as mentioned earlier , cfp has jurisdiction over both the funeral and cemetery industries in california . table iv.6 provides selected information on the regulation and oversight of cemeteries in california and shows state requirements regarding consumer information . religious and public cemeteries , and certain private and fraternal burial parks less than 10 acres in size and established before september 19 , 1939 , are exempted from state regulation . cfp officials stated that about 200 of the approximately 2,000 cemeteries , representing about 40% of the burials in the state , are under cfp's jurisdiction . comments separate cemetery brokers and salespersons licenses must be obtained from cfp and must be renewed on an annual basis .