we do not know how representative these offices are . sba's district offices are not required to report on their lender oversight activities , and the resulting lack of information regarding on - site reviews makes it difiicult to determine whether the districts we visited were representative or not . sba commented that , although it has placed a high priority on improving oversight , on - site lender reviews have a limited role . sba stated that , other than on - site reviews , it performs oversight in a number of other ways , which it states provide a systematic means of mitigating risk imposed as a result of lenders' decisions . that is , it verifies eligibility in all loan decisions , considers lender performance in decisions to relicense certified and preferred lenders , and reviews loans when a lender requests an sba purchase . sba said that it is also modernizing its loan system as part of its efforts to improve its monitoring of individual loans and individual lenders . we agree that these activities , including off - site monitoring , provide a measure of oversight ; however , they do not provide the type of systematic assessment of a lender's practices that periodic on - site reviews provide . our experience in evaluating financial institution regulators indicates that off - site monitoring is helpful when it is used to perform risk assessments to target on - site reviews , but that it is not an effective substitute for such reviews . in addition , we are reporting on sba's noncompliance with its own requirement for lender oversight reviews . sba's operating procedures state that on - site lender reviews are necessary to maintain the integrity of its loan programs and are a critical component of its oversight requirement . sba said it was also working with banking regulatory agencies , which examine the vast majority of its lenders , to explore opportunities for partnership in regulation and oversight and for them to play an important role in examining its lenders' overall performance in making creditworthy loans . as the report states , although financial institution regulators help ensure lenders' safe and sound operations , their oversight does not necessarily ensure that 7 ( a ) portfolios are managed prudently . in addition , it should be noted that sba currently has no access to the findings of examinations conducted by bank regulators . with regard to sblcs , which are not subject to supervision and examination by a state or federal financial regulatory authority , sba said that , in addition to specific audits by its inspector general , oversight is provided in a number of ways , including a requirement that sblcs submit annual audited financial statements . we agree that audited financial statements can help examiners focus on specific aspects of a financial institution in its on - site examinations . sblcs are nondepository lending institutions that are licensed by sba . to satisfy sba's supervision and examination requirement , sblcs are subject to direct supervision and examination by sba .