they can currently receive from va . priority group 7 veterans — the only ones eligible for subvention — can now get all services in va's broad uniform benefits package . veterans who are eligible for medicare can also get care from non - va providers — either under fee - for - service or through a managed care plan . if it needed to make subvention benefits more attractive , va could either reduce copayments or increase benefits . however , va officials tell us that , due to resource constraints , va may not serve priority group 7 veterans in the future . if this happens , these veterans could only get va services through a subvention demonstration and hence would probably be more likely to enroll . ( to make this exception possible , legislation would be required , as eligibility for va enrollment is uniform nationally. ) some va officials have suggested to us that , to give priority group 7 veterans a reason to enroll , it may be necessary to exclude them from va services — except through the demonstration . the greatest risk in a va subvention program is that subvention enrollees could consume so many services that va patients in higher priority groups would be “crowded out.” however , va , according to its policy , cannot deny care to an enrolled veteran ( that is , one who is registered with va ) , even if it does not have sufficient capacity . in the short term , waiting times for appointments would probably increase , or care could be limited to certain facilities , which might be inconvenient for some veterans . va could also reduce its benefits package , although that would require a change in regulations . in the longer term , some veterans could be denied all va care if va excludes one or more priority groups . this would be particularly serious for veterans who lack other insurance . current proposals for a va subvention demonstration permit both managed care and fee - for - service sites . the availability of military care varies . several sites emphasized in their marketing that retirees who did not enroll could not count on receiving space - available care . this information might spur retirees who prefer military care to enroll in senior prime . at other sites , space - available care was less of an issue . at these sites , prospective enrollees who believe that they can continue to receive space - available care may not see an advantage in enrollment but rather a disadvantage — especially because enrolling in senior prime locks them out of other medicare - paid care . several key operational issues remain . these include development of more understandable payment rules , viable for the longer term , and development of data to manage the demonstration and support its evaluation . most important , the demonstration's final results , in terms of access to health care , quality of patient care , and costs to dod , medicare , and retirees , will not be known until the evaluation is completed , several months after the end of the demonstration in december 2000 .