additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we also determined the operational status of rscs . we interviewed sec and nasdaq officials and reviewed applicable documents regarding these matters . scores for each alert item associated with a company are totaled . the companies with the highest scores are those that may require more diligent monitoring by nlq analysts . nasdaq officials said that they are obtaining most of the data required for rscs from databases available within nasd . they said the exact items included in the final rscs depend , in part , on the availability of external data . sec and nasdaq promptly responded to both of our february 1998 recommendations . in addition , ocie and nasdaq have worked closely to implement and resolve any differences concerning ocie's inspection recommendations . as a result , ocie has stated that it is satisfied that nasdaq has addressed all of its recommendations . ocie's plans to follow up on three recommendations should help ensure that nasdaq has appropriately responded to those recommendations . it is too early to tell whether rscs can provide effective early warning of companies that may be falling out of compliance with nasdaq listing requirements . if effective , rscs could help analysts identify troubled companies that need additional scrutiny . sec and nasdaq generally agreed with and had no substantive comments on this report . they orally provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . their written comments are shown in appendixes i and ii , respectively . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to representative tom bliley , chairman , committee on commerce ; the honorable arthur levitt , chairman , sec ; mr. frank zarb , chairman , nasd ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 if you or your staff have any questions . michael a. burnett , assistant director edwin j . lane , evaluator david p. tarosky , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .