ii ) . the information contained in this report is limited to the data provided by the states and jurisdictions that responded to our survey . to the extent practical , we attempted to verify the completeness and accuracy of the responses . where a response to a question was inconsistent with other answers elsewhere in the survey or where a respondent failed to answer a question , we contacted them to clarify or determine the response . on cost questions , we requested that respondents only provide actual costs for which they had supporting documentation , not cost estimates . in a number of cases jurisdictions provided us documentation supporting their costs ; additional details are provided in appendix i ( see page 34 ) . because the jurisdictions that reported costs were geographically dispersed , it was not practical to further verify the costs reported . for both objectives , the survey was affected by variables which limit the responses' generalizability . for example , the covered jurisdictions varied in ( 1 ) the number of polling locations where bilingual voting assistance was provided , ( 2 ) the size of the populations in need of assistance , and ( 3 ) the number of minority groups for whom assistance was required . accordingly , comparisons across jurisdictions are not meaningful and the responses of states and covered jurisdictions cannot be projected or generalized to nonresponding jurisdictions . on april 9 , 1997 , we requested comments from the attorney general or her designee on a draft of this report . on april 18 , 1997 , the chief of the voting section , civil rights division , on behalf of the attorney general , provided technical information , which we incorporated where appropriate . we did our work in washington , d.c. , from july 1996 through april 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 1975 , congress amended the voting rights act and extended its coverage to protect the voting rights of citizens of certain ethnic groups whose language is other than english . the act's language minority provisions require states and covered jurisdictions — political subdivisions — that meet the act's coverage criteria to conduct elections in the language of certain “minority language groups” in addition to english . the act defined these language minorities as persons of spanish heritage , american indians , asian americans , and alaskan natives . where the applicable minority groups have a commonly used written language , the act requires covered jurisdictions to provide written election materials in the languages of the groups . for american indians and alaskan natives whose languages are unwritten , only oral assistance and publicity , eg , public information spots on the radio , are required . all covered jurisdictions must provide oral assistance when needed in the minority language . both written and oral assistance must be available throughout the election process from registration to election day activities and are required for all federal , state , and local elections .