vi. ) from our review of the various documents that were related to the appointments ( such as vacancy announcements , resumes , and official notifications of personnel actions ) and our discussions with pertinent agency officials , we determined that the agencies met the requirements of the 7 appointment authorities and that they used the authorities properly in making the 36 appointments . these appointments can be made noncompetitively . limited emergency ses appointments are also nonrenewable . they are for time - limited positions for up to 18 months that are required to meet an urgent program need . limited emergency ses appointments also can be made noncompetitively , and the appointees serve at the pleasure of the agency head . since such appointments are often tied to the administration in power and , with the exception of the ramspeck act appointments , are not permanent , such individuals sometimes seek a permanent , career appointment in the government . career appointments in government are usually made through competitive procedures , consistent with the government's merit system selection principles , in which the selection is determined on the basis of relative knowledge , skills , and ability , after fair and open competition that ensures that all applicants receive equal opportunity.when a political appointee seeks a career appointment , concerns can arise as to whether these merit principles will be followed . these concerns may occur because the appointee competing for the career appointment is often well known or “connected” in the agency or department , sometimes having worked for the political appointee who should nominate the best qualified candidate to the selecting official or for the official who will do the selecting . the career appointment was effected on january 21 , 1996 . on march 31 , 1996 , approximately 2 months after being appointed , the former political appointee was reassigned to another career ses position in another agency of the department of commerce . in march 1996 , the opm chief of staff — who was holding a noncareer ses appointment to that position — obtained a career ses appointment to the position of director , partnership center . we have written a number of reports on the issue of former political appointees and former legislative branch employees receiving career appointments in the executive branch . as in this report , we generally found that agencies usually followed appropriate procedures in making these career appointments . however , we also found a few cases in which the circumstances appeared to have provided the appointee with an advantage . our examination of the case indicated that aid appeared to have followed proper procedures in the competitive selection process . even so , certain factors about the vacancy announcement may have enhanced the individual's prospects of being found to be among the best qualified and eligible for selection . the vacancy announcement for the competitive service position indicated that both status and nonstatus applicants could apply . therefore , the individual — who did not have status — was eligible to apply for the position . according to an aid personnel official , many of aid's positions are highly technical in nature and therefore potentially qualified applicants are limited .