vi ) . the director noted that the draft report contained a detailed and comprehensive discussion of the process that fincen used to develop and issue regulations and the status of those regulations . irs stated that the comprehensive nature of the bsa would provide additional safeguards to the tribes , while providing law enforcement the paper trail necessary to conduct financial investigations.” “n recent years treasury found that an increasing number of persons are using gambling casinos for money laundering and tax evasion purposes . in a number of instances , narcotics traffickers have used gambling casinos as substitutes for other financial institutions in order to avoid the reporting and recordkeeping requirements of the bsa.” also , in december 1996 , under the authority of mlsa section 409 , fincen issued a proposed rule that would expand the range of gaming establishments to which the bsa applies to include “card clubs.” as proposed , this term would , in general , include any establishment referred to as “card room,” “gaming club,” or “gaming room” or any similar gaming establishment that is duly licensed or authorized to do business either under state law ; under laws of a particular political subdivision within a state ; under the indian gaming regulatory act ; or under other federal , state , or tribal law or arrangement affecting indian lands . what is the current status of fincen's efforts to develop and issue bsa regulations ? more specifically , what regulations has fincen developed thus far , and what regulations has the agency been authorized or required to develop but has not done so ? to identify the regulatory or rulemaking process that fincen followed , we interviewed fincen officials who are responsible for preparing bsa regulations and reviewed related agency documents . we also interviewed treasury and office of management and budget ( omb ) officials about their procedures for reviewing drafts of fincen's regulations before publication . we examined relevant sections of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) and executive order 12866 prescribing procedures that federal agencies are to follow when developing and issuing regulations . however , the scope of our work did not constitute a review of fincen's compliance with applicable statutory and executive order guidance . to determine the status of fincen's efforts to develop and issue regulations , as agreed with your offices , we focused on eight regulatory initiatives that are authorized or required by mlsa amendments to the bsa: designate a single recipient for suspicious activity reports ( sar ) to help law enforcement agencies make more effective use of these reports ( by statute , to be completed by mar .