( see app . ii for an example that illustrates this process. ) according to ojjdp , 49 of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and 4 of 6 u.s. territories applied for and received title v incentive grant funds administered by ojjdp . one state , wyoming , opted out of the program.according to the comptroller , office of justice programs within justice , as of march 29 , 1996 , ojjdp had awarded $29.6 million in title v funds to the jurisdictions in fiscal years 1994 and 1995 . we incorporated their comments where appropriate . title v of the 1992 reauthorization of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act of 1974 authorizes ojjdp to award incentive grant funds to the states , which in turn are to award subgrants to units of general local government to support local juvenile delinquency prevention projects . congress appropriated $13 million in fiscal year 1994 and $20 million in fiscal year 1995 for these purposes . title v grant funds are to serve as stimuli for local governments to mobilize support from community leaders , develop multiyear prevention plans , and pool public and private resources in implementing programs designed to reduce the future incidence of delinquent behavior and youth crime through adoption of effective strategies that address risk factors for delinquency . to be eligible for title v funds , the grantees are to provide a 50-percent match of the grant amount , including in - kind contributions ( eg , lease of office space or equipment paid by local government or private sources ) to fund the activity . ojjdp also administers other programs such as the title ii formula grant program . title ii of the 1974 act provides grants - in - aid to states and local governments to improve juvenile justice systems and to prevent and control delinquency . to receive and remain eligible for funds under title v , jurisdictions must be in compliance with title ii formula grant program core requirements . the four key core requirements are ( 1 ) not detaining status offenders or nonoffenders ( eg , neglected children ) in secure detention or correctional facilities , ( 2 ) not detaining or confining juveniles in any institution where they have contact with adult detainees , ( 3 ) not detaining or confining juveniles in adult jails or lockups , and ( 4 ) demonstration of efforts to reduce the disproportionate confinement of minority youth where it exists . according to the department of justice delinquency prevention program guidelines , approximately 70 percent of the jurisdictions at one time or another have devoted 100 percent of available title ii formula grant funds toward meeting the four core requirements . as a result , many jurisdictions have been limited in the amounts of ojjdp title ii funds that they could devote to delinquency prevention . since the title v program started , ojjdp has issued two annual reports to congress . its 1994 report ( 1 ) highlighted activities and accomplishments during the first year of title v implementation , ( 2 ) described efforts to foster interagency coordination of delinquency prevention activities , and ( 3 ) contained recommendations for future title v activities .