( see app . the authors discussed each of the report's five areas of concern that , together , led to our conclusion that additional research and clarification would be needed to confirm the accuracy of the center's report's conclusions regarding the proportion of debtors who may have the ability to repay at least a portion of their nonpriority , nonhousing debts and the amount of debt such debtors could repay . moreover , there are usually expenses associated with liquidating a debtor's nonexempt assets , such as statutory bankruptcy trustees' commissions and appraiser or auctioneer fees . such expenses would reduce the amount paid to creditors because these costs would be paid before any remaining proceeds were distributed to creditors . the data in the new tables are subject to the same limitations as other estimates of debtors' ability to pay included in the report . the tables are based on the assumptions , used throughout the report , that debtors' income and expenses would remain unchanged over a 5-year period and that 100 percent of a debtor's discretionary net income will be used for debt repayment . as previously discussed , both logic and available evidence would suggest that these are not realistic assumptions . for example , the center provided us data , not included in its report , which showed that the majority of nonhousing secured debt was vehicle debt . the data in the new tables 2 and 4 provided with the center's comments assumed that the debtor's automobile would be sold , and no replacement obtained . the absence of an automobile could very well affect a debtor's employment and , thus , a debtor's future stream of income . the center's comments noted that it would be difficult to estimate with precision debtors' ability to pay their nonhousing debts in any location other than the 13 locations included in the center report . on the other hand , the center concluded that debtors' data in all 13 locations showed a substantial repayment capacity , despite the great diversity in the characteristics of the 13 locations , such as unemployment rates and the percent of total personal bankruptcy cases that were chapter 7 cases . the center stated that this showed that substantial repayment capacity is a widespread phenomenon , whether or not the report's findings are applicable to other locations . we agree that the center's data show that some debtors who file for bankruptcy under chapter 7 may have some capacity to repay their debts . but , from a policymaking standpoint , the more relevant questions are whether the center report's findings provide a reasonable estimate of that repayment capacity and whether the center's defined universe of debtors and debts used to estimate repayment capacity was appropriate for assessing the need for a change in current bankruptcy laws . as previously discussed , we believe the center's universe of both debts and debtors may not be the appropriate ones for assessing whether current bankruptcy statutes should be changed .