this information updated what we had reported in 1993 . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we recommended that irs ( 1 ) identify those groups of taxpayers who offer the greatest opportunity to reduce irs' paper - processing workload and operating costs if they were to file electronically and ( 2 ) develop strategies that seek to eliminate impediments that inhibit those groups from filing electronically . we also recommended that irs adopt electronic filing goals that focus on reducing irs' paper - processing workload and operating costs and prepare contingency plans for the possibility that electronic filings will fall short of expectations . irs tax collection reengineering ( gao / ggd - 96-161r , sept. 24 , 1996 ) . in a letter to the chairman , senate committee on finance , we provided information on irs' efforts to reengineer its enforcement action program , which included the delinquent tax collection process . the enforcement action reengineering effort started in june 1994 and was suspended in november 1995 . when the effort was suspended , few results had been achieved in changing work processes or addressing irs' long - standing collection problems . an independent consultant's report identified several factors that hampered the reengineering effort: irs did not ( 1 ) have the organizational commitment and support needed to achieve the level of change desired , ( 2 ) fully implement the reengineering methodology needed , and ( 3 ) integrate its reengineering efforts with the existing systems modernization program . in october 1995 , irs established a separate office to coordinate all future strategic change initiatives , like reengineering . in january 1996 , irs announced plans to initiate a new reengineering project focusing on the tax settlement process , which was expected to include aspects of enforcement action and the tax collection processes . irs had also undertaken several projects to change the role of revenue officers in the collection process by modernizing their jobs . irs believed that the assessment rate was not an accurate measure of audit effectiveness since various factors outside the audit ( such as economic conditions or net operating losses ) could lower the rate . our profiles of large corporations showed that most were engaged in either manufacturing or the finance and insurance industries in 1992 . audited corporations tended to report higher average incomes , tax liabilities , and other tax amounts than nonaudited corporations . tax administration: information on irs' taxpayer compliance measurement program ( gao / ggd - 96-21 , oct. 6 , 1995 ) . in response to a request from representative joseph k. knollenberg , we provided information on irs' tcmp for tax year 1994 . irs had generally taken appropriate action on the concerns raised in our 1994 report that dealt with meeting milestones for starting tcmp audits , testing tcmp database components , developing data collection systems , and collecting and analyzing data . because of uncertainties about its fiscal year 1996 budget , irs had delayed the start of its tcmp audits from october 1 to december 1 , 1995 .