( see app . ii for more detailed information on the enterprises' compensation structures. ) fannie mae said that we should amplify “the degree to which the corporation incents and holds management accountable for meeting mission obligations.” we did not review contracts of individual managers and members of fannie mae's board . because of the proprietary nature of the information , we could not have provided concrete examples to make such an amplification . the following comments represent our response to specific comments made on a draft of this report on january 12 , 1998 , by the president and chief executive office of farmer mac . farmer mac stated that long - term investments with short - term interest rate resets are generally considered to have short - term liquidity . we have concluded from our analysis that farmer mac's longer term , variable - rate , nonagricultural - mortgage investments are subject to greater market value fluctuations with changes in interest rates than short - term investments . as a result , they are less useful in facilitating liquidity in the agricultural mortgage market than short - term investments . farmer mac suggested that a reasonable time frame for reaching the final stage of its debt issuance strategy could be 2 to 3 years following adoption of the strategy . as far as we know , this is the first time a time frame has been suggested as a reasonable period of time for the debt issuance policy to contribute to mission . farmer mac took issue with our observation that farmer mac's debt issuance strategy , which intends to lower the funding costs to purchase agricultural mortgages and issue ambs , appears to us to contradict , at least in part , our observation that farmer mac has not offered higher prices for agricultural mortgages . farmer mac states that the agricultural mortgage origination market is currently very inefficient , and therefore farmer mac is directing funds made available by the debt issuance strategy toward expanded efforts to recruit new mortgage originators . we revised our discussion ( see page 29 ) and , rather than referring to a possible contradiction , we now directly relate these observations to the uncertainty associated with the effectiveness of farmer mac's debt issuance strategy on mission achievement . farmer mac said that it agrees with our recommendation to the fca board to report on the relationship of farmer mac's debt issuance strategy to the achievement of farmer mac's mission . its letter added that fca already monitors farmer mac's investment activity . we note , as indicated in our report , that fca's monitoring of farmer mac's investment activity has focused on matters of safety and soundness . our recommendation is specific to fca's mission oversight responsibilities . farmer mac said that for the quarter ended june 30 , 1997 , farmer mac's net income from nonprogram investments represented about 38 percent of total net income . in response , we made revisions ( see pp . 5 and 31 ) and now state that nonagricultural - mortgage investments are a primary source of income rather than the principal source or majority of income .