service at cost . our study was done between march 1993 and april 1994 at fca headquarters in mclean , va ; the fca field office in bloomington , mn ; agribank in st. paul ; and fcl in minneapolis . our work was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we received written comments on a draft of this report from the farm credit system , through the presidents planning committee ( ppc ) , fca , and fcsic . in general the ppc , fca , and fcsic agreed with our conclusions and found the draft to be factually accurate . the full text of each entity's comments and our responses are provided in appendixes vi through viii . in addition , the ppc and fca provided technical comments that have been incorporated throughout the report as appropriate . fcbs involved in mergers cited cost savings as one of the goals of merging . if fcb operations can be effectively consolidated or merged , the merged fcb may be able to reduce its operating costs by eliminating duplicative functions , thereby achieving economies of scale . the four merged fcbs projected bank - level cost savings of $5.1 million to $20 million annually per merger . under certain conditions , the realization of the anticipated bank - level savings may eventually result in slightly lower interest rates for farmers and ranchers . although the projected savings per fcb may appear substantial , the amounts for each fcb represented only a small fraction of total district operating costs ( see table 2.1 .

 ) before associations may offer financially related and technical services to member - borrowers , they must seek fca and fcb approval to provide those services . fcb mergers could affect the level of services provided by associations if the merged bank authorized levels of service different from those that were available before the merger . officials of merged fcbs generally expected their associations to offer the same or a wider variety of services to borrowers . none of the merged banks expected reductions in the level of services provided to borrowers . system banks and associations are cooperatives ; they are owned by member - borrowers who must buy stock as a prerequisite for borrowing . although we found no evidence that fcb mergers would affect the system's cooperative nature , mergers could change the way certain cooperative principles are applied . finally , since the banks issue system - wide debt securities collectively through the funding corporation , fcb mergers should have little impact on the issuance of system - wide bonds . we found that newly merged banks generally expected little or no change in the level of services provided to borrowers . at least one merger resulted in a wider variety of services and loan products being offered after the fcb merger . generally , fcb mergers would affect the level of services an association provided its member - borrowers only if the fcb — which has the authority to approve or disapprove services its district associations may want to provide — forced the association to change the services offered before the merger .