( app . i contains detailed staffing and selected workload data for the border patrol. ) ins inspections and the u.s. customs service share responsibility for inspecting all applicants seeking admission at u.s. ports of entry . among other things , these inspections are to prevent the entry of inadmissible applicants by detecting fraudulent documents , including those representing false claims to u.s. citizenship or permanent residence status . ins is continuing to implement its southwest border strategy . although some of the expected interim results continue to occur , available data do not yet answer the fundamental question of how effective the strategy has been in preventing and deterring illegal entry . in fiscal year 1998 , ins' border patrol transitioned into the second phase of its four - phased approach , which called for increasing border patrol agents and resources to sectors in arizona and south texas . ins could provide us with no other information on the contractor's progress . consequently , we do not know to what extent the contractor's evaluation plan will provide the information needed to determine the extent to which the attorney general's strategy has been effective . in february 1994 , the attorney general and ins commissioner announced a five - part strategy to strengthen enforcement of the nation's immigration laws . the strategy's first priority was to strengthen enforcement along the southwest border . consistent with this planned approach , ins allocated 740 of 1,000 new agent positions authorized in fiscal year 1998 to sectors in these locations . with the traditional routes disrupted , ins expected that illegal alien traffic would either be deterred or forced over terrain less suited for crossing , where ins believed it would have the tactical advantage . to carry out the strategy , the border patrol was to concentrate personnel and resources in a four - phased approach starting with the areas of highest illegal alien activity , increase the time border patrol agents spend on border - control activities , make maximum use of physical barriers , and identify the appropriate quantity and mix of technology and personnel needed to control the border . in our 1997 report , we stated that computer problems had affected the usefulness of ident data and ins' ability to track recidivism over several years . to complement the border patrol's efforts , the strategy called for ins inspections to enhance efforts to deter illegal entry at the ports of entry and increase the use of technology to improve management of legal traffic and commerce . in april 1999 , ins officials told us that since ident began as a prototype in october 1994 , several modifications have been made to the system's hardware and software , which have resulted in improved matching and data accuracy . in addition , the proportion of apprehended aliens enrolled in ident has been increasing as more border patrol sectors have begun using ident . ins' border patrol and inspections are the two components chiefly responsible for deterring illegal entry along the southwest border . as a result , ins determined that ident data beginning in october 1997 were sufficiently complete and reliable for internal analysis .