ii ) . overall , irs agreed with the findings in the report , which it said confirmed that irs accurately tracked and reported on the results of the compliance initiatives . we continue to believe that . however , because planned ( i.e. , estimated ) revenue and staffing levels are an integral part of that formula , the end results are estimates . thus the “actual” initiative results cited in the compliance initiatives report are not actual results but are estimates of results . irs did not clearly disclose that fact in the compliance initiatives report . in tables throughout the report , for example , irs refers to “actual,” without clearly explaining the term . one important set of assumptions embedded in irs' methodology relates to the comparative productivity of new staff versus experienced employees . irs used these assumptions in computing planned revenue , which was an integral part of the methodology . the two primary irs enforcement functions , collection and examination , approached the issue of relative productivity differently . collection assumed that new staff were less productive than experienced staff , even after they were trained , while examination believed that new staff , once trained , were as productive as experienced employees . neither of these assumptions was based on empirical data . according to irs officials , to estimate the relative productivity of new collection staff , collection division officials met in a brainstorming session and decided , based primarily on their institutional knowledge , that new staff were generally 50 percent as productive as experienced employees during their first year on the job . part of that reduced productivity assumed by collection is attributable to the amount of time new staff spend in training and part to the belief that it takes time for a new employee to become as productive as an experienced one . ( collection assumed that new employees do not reach full productivity until their second or third year , depending on their position ) . we have no basis to determine whether collection's productivity assumptions are correct . we do know , however , that changes to the assumptions could significantly alter the reported results of the compliance initiatives . to demonstrate the sensitivity of the reported results to changes in collection's productivity assumptions , we arbitrarily adjusted collection's 50-percent assumption by 5 percentage points in either direction and recalculated the initiatives' results . our recalculation showed that a 5 percentage point change would either increase or decrease irs' reported initiative results of $545.2 million by $42 million ( about 8 percent ) , depending on the direction of the change . unlike collection , the examination function assumes that new staff are as productive as experienced staff after they have completed classroom training . that assumption applies to all of examination's enforcement staff — tax examiners , who audit simple issues by corresponding with taxpayers ; tax auditors , who do more complex audits generally by meeting with taxpayers at an irs office ; and revenue agents , who do the most complex audits generally by meeting taxpayers or their representatives at the taxpayer's home or place of business .