we disagree . the report discussed areas of similarity between corps and military service mentioned by corps officials during our review , but it also pointed out that civilian employees in other agencies were often subject to the same conditions of employment . moreover , many of the similarities discussed in the department's comments exist because the corps is compensated under a military - like system , not because the corps has responsibilities like the military . it should also be noted that the criteria for military compensation articulated in the dod report are based on the need for inducements and incentives to maintain a force necessary “to insure successful accomplishment of the united states national security objectives.” corps officers have not been involved in meeting national security objectives since world war ii . we also provided a draft of the report to dod . we were advised that , after reviewing the draft , dod had no comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days from the date of this report . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of commerce and defense and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you have questions concerning this report , please telephone me or associate director , timothy p. bowling , at ( 202 ) 512-8676 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objective of this report is to provide information on the operations of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) commissioned corps . we were asked to address why the noaa corps exists ; what the corps officers' duties are ; how the corps is similar to and different from the military ; and what savings , if any , might result from not using uniformed personnel to carry out current corps functions . to gather the information on the continuing need for the corps , we reviewed noaa corps historical material and interviewed and obtained documentation from officials of noaa , including the office of noaa corps operations ; the department of defense ( dod ) , including the department of the army and the navy ; woods hole oceanographic institute ; the national science foundation ; the national transportation safety board ; the federal emergency management agency ; and the environmental protection agency . to compare the costs of using uniformed personnel or civilian employees to carry out corps duties , we reviewed the findings in an august 1995 report prepared by arthur andersen llp under a contract with noaa . we examined the contractor's approach and methodology and generally found them to be similar to those we would have used . other than making an adjustment we believed was appropriate to reflect the estimated tax advantages corps officers receive through their nontaxable housing and subsistence allowances , we accepted the contractor's findings as valid estimates of the comparative costs of using corps officers and civilian employees .