he said that restoring aircraft is not needed to preserve them . the committee added that some of the deterioration is irreversible . according to smithsonian policy , museums normally establish minimum standards of physical care and regular schedules for the maintenance of collections . nasm collections management staff said that they do not conduct formal , periodic inspections of aircraft in storage . smithsonian officials said that curators are aware of the condition of aircraft when they are acquired and are responsible for reviewing the condition of those in storage . smithsonian officials said that some curators spend an average of 30 percent of their time on collections management and that one curator spent 3 years working on an engine maintenance program . nasm officials also said that over the past 5 years , no aircraft has been acquired without provision being made for its appropriate storage and care . although nasm is popular with the public and has preserved many of our nation's historic air and space artifacts , the management of the aircraft collection that is not generally seen by the public needs improvement . nasm commits relatively few resources to aircraft restoration , compared to other museum activities and another federally funded air museum . but , even if nasm were to increase its restoration efforts , the museum would have no place to properly display or store the aircraft . therefore , it is important for nasm to determine how to better preserve its collection in view of the limited financial resources available for aircraft restoration and storage , including determining what size collection can be adequately supported . since nasm was established , certain aspects of the museum's mission as a national air and space museum have been vague . for example , the legislation does not specify whether the museum should duplicate collections at other federally funded air and space museums or whether a national museum should include foreign aircraft . once nasm's mission is clarified , nasm would be better able to develop criteria for what constitutes historically and technologically significant aircraft and , in the context of such criteria , which aircraft it should have in its collection to fulfill its mission , considering available resources and the adequacy of storage facilities . if it is determined that nasm's current collection is too large in view of resources and facilities available , options to reduce the collection size so that the remaining aircraft can be stored or displayed in space with adequate environmental controls include deaccessioning aircraft and obtaining second - party restorations with temporary loans to other museums . using additional second - party restorations would help preserve nasm's collection , alleviate its storage capacity problems , and share its collection with the public . however , some curators told us that they generally do not inspect the collection unless they have a reason to do so , such as preparing an exhibit involving the artifacts . nasm has adopted a new policy that 0.5 percent of the collection be randomly inspected by 1996 and then the same amount be inspected on a biannual basis . the proposed policy was submitted to the smithsonian for approval in july 1994 , but was not approved until may 1995 .