according to the u.s . departments of the treasury and of commerce , multilateral development banks ( mdb ) , such as the world bank and others , provide approximately $45 billion annually in loan commitments that generate business opportunities for u.s. firms . the mdb procurement process is designed to provide fair and equal opportunity for prospective bidders , taking into consideration economy and efficiency . yet some u.s. businesses have been concerned about how the process is implemented and what the u.s. government is doing to promote u.s. exports through mdb - funded procurements . congress passed legislation in 1988 and 1992that mandated that the treasury and commerce departments assign a high priority to promoting the export of goods and services through mdb activities . in light of the possible business opportunities for u.s. companies at mdbs , you were interested in knowing how well u.s. firms are doing in competing for mdb business and how the u.s. government helps firms compete . specifically , you asked us to ( 1 ) identify and compare the mdb market share held by u.s. firms and their major competitors , ( 2 ) describe any obstacles u.s. businesses may face in competing for mdb projects and the services the u.s. government provides to help u.s. businesses overcome the obstacles , and ( 3 ) describe the treasury's efforts to help ensure fair and open procurement processes for projects that mdbs finance . mdbs are autonomous international institutions that partially finance development projects in developing countries using money borrowed in world capital markets or contributed by governments of more developed countries . government agencies of the borrowing countries ( i.e. , “executing agencies” ) are responsible for implementing the projects , including procuring goods and services . in accordance with mdb guidelines , mdbs are responsible for supervising how the executing agencies administer the procurement process . ( see app . i for information about the mdb project development and procurement process. ) these guidelines are generally incorporated in the loan agreement between the executing agencies and mdbs and emphasize the need for ( 1 ) considering economy and efficiency in project implementation and ( 2 ) providing all eligible bidders from mdb member countries with opportunities to compete for contracts . the guidelines also allow for the use of local preferenceswhen comparing bids , to help develop domestic contractors and manufacturing industries in the borrowing country . mdbs lend roughly $45 billion annually for projects that provide business opportunities and an entry into developing markets for u.s. firms . the united states is a member of five mdbs — the asian development bank ( adb ) , the african development bank ( afdb ) , the european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , the inter - american development bank ( idb ) , and the world bank . ( the world bank refers to the international bank for reconstruction and development ( ibrd ) and the international development association ( ida ) . the “world bank group” refers to ibrd , ida , and two affiliates: the international finance corporation and the multilateral investment guarantee agency. ) the world bank is the oldest and largest mdb and draws its membership from developing and industrialized countries around the world .