no actions taken or planned . because we did not find instances of improper contacts , irs is of the opinion that current procedures covering third - party contacts are adequate . seek ways to alleviate taxpayers' frustration in the short term by analyzing the most prevalent kinds of information - handling problems and ensuring that requirements now being developed for tax systems modernization information systems provide for long - term solutions to those problems . requested top executives to review major issues the ombudsman identified via the problem resolution program that have resulted in repeat taxpayer problems . internal security management use this system to track the status of investigations and for operational and workload management . labor relations staff use this system to track the status and results of possible disciplinary action relative to irs employee behavior . irs - problem resolution office management information system ( promis ) problem resolution office staff use this system to monitor the status of open taxpayer problems to generate statistics on the volume of problems received by major categories . irs - commissioner's mail tracking system legislative affairs staff use this system to track correspondence to the commissioner and other irs office heads / executives . legislative affairs staff use this system to track correspondence from congressional sources and from referrals by the treasury department and the white house . oig management and desk officers use the system to monitor the status of oig investigations and to monitor whether required responses to oig investigations and referrals to the treasury bureaus , such as irs , have been received . doj eousa - centralized caseload system eousa management use the system to monitor the status and results of civil and criminal prosecutions and to oversee field office caseloads . tax division management uses the system to monitor the status and results of civil and criminal cases , manage attorney caseloads , and prepare internal and external reports , such as for the office of management and budget and the congress . rachel demarcus , assistant general counsel shirley a. jones , attorney advisor the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . revised publication 334 , “tax guide for small business,” and circular e , “employer's tax guide,” to explain the potential liability for the trust fund recovery penalty if amounts withheld are not remitted to the government ; and started including notice 784 , “could you be personally liable for certain unpaid federal taxes ? ” with the first balance due notice for business taxes . provide specific guidance for irs employees on how they should handle white house contacts other than those involving tax checks of potential appointees or routine administrative matters . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .