ii ) . fourteen of these 17 units submitted one contingency plan each . the remaining three units — the retirement and insurance service , the office of contracting and administrative services , and the office of executive resources — submitted a total of 13 plans for their respective subunits . in addition , we interviewed the selected representatives from opm's business continuity work group to learn how these units prepared their contingency plans . process retirement and survivor claims . administer health benefit and life insurance programs and payments . provide examining services to agencies . provide communications to agencies and employees on critical human resources issues . in addition , opm identified two key support functions that the continuity work group would consider in its planning process: ( 1 ) provide administrative and management information systems and ( 2 ) provide information technology infrastructure . when identifying core business processes , it is important that agencies consider the critical agency systems that support these core processes . because the agency's mission - critical systems support its core processes , these critical systems should receive priority in the agency's year 2000 program . at the time of our review , opm had designated 109 of its information systems as mission - critical . included in opm's inventory of mission - critical systems are complex retirement and insurance support systems that process monthly annuity payments and collect funds withheld by federal employees for retirement , health benefits , and life insurance premiums . opm officials told us that when they assessed their systems to determine which ones to designate as mission critical , they decided to take the broad approach of including more rather than fewer systems . opm officials said that this approach would help to ensure that important systems received agencywide attention . in developing a sound continuity planning approach , agencies also need to establish key reporting requirements . within opm , business continuity and contingency planning is one of 14 components in the agency's overall year 2000 program . under opm's year 2000 program management approach , agency officials responsible for each of these 14 components are to report monthly on their progress in meeting year 2000-related goals . ( see app . iii for a list of the 14 components and the responsible opm units. ) opm initiated this program management approach in august 1998 in response to our earlier review of opm's initial year 2000 system conversion efforts . in a july 1998 briefing with opm officials , we raised concerns that opm had not developed a comprehensive year 2000 plan with scheduled tasks as specified in our year 2000 assessment guide and that the lack of such a plan could affect opm's ability to achieve year 2000 compliance . opm agreed with these observations and developed a year 2000 plan with scheduled tasks and a more structured reporting and control mechanism . opm also established a reporting format for its business units to use when preparing their year 2000 contingency plans . in june 1998 , opm's continuity work group adopted the contingency plan reporting format that the social security administration ( ssa ) had used for its contingency planning efforts .