we disagree . the service collects change - of - address information from postal customers for the limited purposes of address list correction and mail forwarding , not for the purpose of creating and maintaining new - movers lists . therefore , we continue to believe that use of ncoa - linked data to create or maintain new - movers lists by licensees of the service , who are viewed under the privacy act as if they were employees of the service , would not be consistent with the limitations imposed by the privacy act . further , we continue to believe that more specific language in the acknowledgment form that licensees' customers sign could help ensure that use of ncoa - linked data is limited to the purposes for which it was collected . through the ncoa program , the service has extended the use of address change information that its customers report for mail forwarding purposes to provide business mailers with current name and address and address - format information for customers on their mailing lists . this program helps ensure that postal customers' mail is more accurately addressed and thereby reduces service costs associated with additional handling of improperly and inaccurately addressed mail . however , by creating a postal customers' change - of - address database , the service is obligated to use and protect the data in compliance with the constraints of applicable federal privacy laws . the service has been partially responsive to our previous recommendations to strengthen oversight of the ncoa program in that it developed and implemented written procedures for ( 1 ) seeding ncoa file updates released to licensees and ( 2 ) reviewing , responding to , and documenting customers' ncoa - related inquiries and complaints and licensees' ncoa - related advertising . however , the service has not effectively implemented program procedures and requirements for ( 1 ) ensuring that it is appropriately alerted when mail is sent to seed record addresses , ( 2 ) auditing and reauditing licensees , and ( 3 ) suspending or terminating licensees that fail successive audits . although in early 1999 the service made procedural changes that it believes will help ensure that mail sent to seed record addresses is appropriately brought to its attention , it is too early to determine the effectiveness of those changes . in addition , the service reported that it had performed more licensee on - site audits than were documented in licensee audit files at the ncoa program office . however , the effectiveness of the licensee audit process as a program oversight mechanism is diminished when the service does not perform all required audits and does not document the audit results . until these program oversight and enforcement procedures are effectively implemented and documented , the service cannot be assured that ( 1 ) the process of seeding ncoa file updates provided to licensees will be effective in alerting the service to licensees' improper releases of ncoa data , ( 2 ) licensees are audited to ensure that they are in full compliance with federal privacy law and ncoa program requirements , and ( 3 ) licensees not in compliance are precluded from continuing to receive and disseminate program data .