however , there are weaknesses . irs currently has no system to track operational audit issues . not usable to update the dif score for individual returns , not useable at the dora level . possibly useable to update dif formulas , would provides some national market segment information , reduces the sample size and burden . not useable at the dora level , problems identifying no - change returns . useable to update dif formulas for selected classes of business return , provides national market segment compliance data , reduces the burden on individual taxpayers . not useable to update the dif score or identify compliance issues for nonbusiness individuals , partnerships , and s corporations not useable at the dora level . ralph t. block , assistant director louis g. roberts , evaluator - in - charge the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . we discuss these three options below . the multiyear tcmp alternative envisions annual tcmp - type audits on a smaller sample of tax returns which , over the course of several years , could be combined to obtain the required statistical precision . for example , irs could disaggregate an entity type , such as individual taxpayers , into separate market segments or audit classes and conduct the audits of each segment on a 3-year cycle . table 2 below shows an example of how such a program might operate . one benefit of such an approach to irs would be that after the initial 3-year period , new and current data would become available for one of the segments every year , making it easier to fine - tune the compliance system . such an approach , however , would require considerable effort from irs' statisticians to ensure that the sample design was statistically sound . also , it would require a long - term commitment from irs managers to ensure that returns were audited regularly . a second option is to use data from operational audits already being done . using data from operational audits would provide a large amount of compliance data . each of these uses is discussed in more detail below . since 1969 , irs has used tcmp data to update its discriminant function ( dif ) formulas , which are mathematical formulas used to select tax returns with the greatest probability of change for audit . the current formulas for individuals are based on 1988 tax returns , irs' most recent individual tcmp audits . formulas for small corporations are based on returns that were processed in 1987 . irs does not use dif scores for partnerships and s corporations because of the age of the underlying tcmp audits . tcmp data were also to be used to test new compliance strategies . irs planned to change the way it categorized returns for audit by adopting the market segment approach .