not allowed . debtors allowed business expenses as reported on schedule j — but only if debtor reported business income on schedule i . all business expenses listed on schedule j were allowed ( whether or not they were supported by a supplemental detail list ) . in addition , work uniforms listed on schedule i were allowed . ( march 1998 ) ( march 1999 ) ( march 1999 ) total outstanding mortgage debt as shown on schedule d was increased by 10 percent to include estimated interest costs ( eg , $100,000 was converted to $110,000 ) . total secured debts ( other than mortgage on principal residence ) as shown on schedule d. total increased by 10 percent to include estimated interest costs ( eg , $30,000 was converted to $33,000 ) .total of all debts as shown on schedule e ( except for student loans ) ; 10 percent added to any back taxes listed on the schedule . the total value of all student loans not entitled to priority status that were listed on schedule e were deducted and added to the total of debts listed on schedule f.total of all debts as shown on schedule f , plus the value of all student loans deducted from the total debts shown on schedule e. total outstanding home mortgage debt as shown on schedule d. total secured debts ( other than mortgage on principal residence ) as shown on schedule d. total of all debts shown on schedule e ( except for student loans ) and the nonpriority portion of debts for which only a part of the total value was listed on schedule e as entitled to priority status ( such as some tax liabilities ) . total of all debts as shown on schedule f plus the value of the debts listed on schedule e that were not entitled to priority status ( such as student loans , or a portion of some tax liabilities ) . assumed debtor would maintain monthly mortgage payments as listed on schedule j , except where mortgage would be paid off in less than 60 months or debtor's income after allowable living expenses was insufficient to make full mortgage payment . in cases where mortgage debt would be paid off in less than 60 months , determined debtor's monthly mortgage payment by dividing 110 percent of the total outstanding mortgage debt by 60 months . assumed debtor would maintain monthly mortgage payments as listed on schedule j , except where mortgage would be paid off in less than 60 months . in such cases , determined debtor's monthly mortgage payment by dividing 110 percent of the total outstanding mortgage debt by 60 months . ( march 1998 ) ( march 1999 ) assumed total debts , as adjusted for interest , would be paid over 60 months . total outstanding nonmortgage secured debts were increased by 10 percent ( equivalent to 9 percent interest for 24 months ) to include estimated interest , and the resulting total amortized over 60 months . ( march 1999 ) assumed all nonprimary residence real estate debts of less than $20,000 and all non - real estate secured debts , as adjusted for interest , would be paid over 60 months .