type of case . cases can vary by type of taxes ( such as gift or excise ) , type of taxpayers ( such as large corporation ) , and type of transactions ( such as bankruptcy ) . division function . the normal workload of the work group affects which group makes a specific abatement decision . for example , the collection division would make abatements in working cases , such as bankruptcy cases . customer service division abatements could come from responding to taxpayer inquiries , such as those involving federal tax deposits . status of taxpayer account . for example , if a taxpayer is being audited by the district office and files an amended return or claim for refund with the service center , this return or claim is forwarded to the appropriate examination group conducting the audit . summarized below are the responsibilities of each division and office , its workload , and examples of abatements . the collection division is responsible for the collection of taxes from businesses and individuals who have an outstanding balance due or who have not filed required tax returns . in fiscal year 1998 , the collection division closed about 14,300 cases , but division officials could not identify how many cases involved abatements because they were not separately tracked . abatements in the division involve issues such as offers - in - compromise , trust fund recovery cases , and bankruptcy . according to collection officials , the most common abatements come from discharged bankruptcies , in which irs makes abatements at the direction of a court . the customer service division takes taxpayers' calls and correspondence regarding inquiries about issues such as assessments . classification and research . this section processes category a claims referred from the adjustments branch as well as interest abatement cases . category a consists of claims and amended returns that are more complex , sensitive , or prone to noncompliance than other claims . selected category a claims are referred to field offices for further examination and possible abatement decisions . the abatement decisions for nonselected category a claims are made in joint compliance . during fiscal year 1998 , about 18,300 category a claims were processed , and about 2,000 were sent to field offices . the section also processed about 400 claims for interest abatement . automated substitute for return . this section processes abatements for the amounts overassessed on a substitute for return ( sfr ) . these abatements are necessary when the taxpayer files a delinquent return that reports a lower tax liability than that assessed on the substitute return prepared by irs . during fiscal year 1998 , the section chief estimated that the branch had made between 500 and 1,000 such abatements at fresno . miscellaneous balance due . this section processes offers - in - compromise for wage earners with income under $10,000 , and trust fund recovery cases . branch officials did not track how much of the workload involved abatements . the underreporter branch is to process cases involving the amount of income reported on tax returns . these cases are generated in irs' martinsburg computing center by comparing income amounts reported on information returns and on the tax return .