commerce now agrees with our position . in may 1994 , in response to our inquiries , commerce's assistant general counsel for administration sent us a letter stating that commerce's “position is that oge has authority to review records relating to travel expenses accepted under the authority of the ethics reform act , including supporting documents . any past misunderstandings concerning this issue have been resolved.” in addition , oge conducted a review of commerce's patent and trademark office this year , and oge was given access to the office's records of nonfederally reimbursed travel . commerce's denial did not adversely affect oge's reviews of other agencies' nonfederally reimbursed travel . other agencies did not refuse oge access in reviews of reimbursed travel conducted during or after commerce's denial . although commerce generally complied with the requirements for nonfederally reimbursed travel , some of its procedures can be strengthened to reduce the risk of conflict of interest and improve internal controls . specifically , commerce could better ensure that ( 1 ) employees have approved travel requests containing all of the necessary information before trips are taken ; ( 2 ) travel reports to oge accurately disclose the circumstances of each travel incident , including the nature , dates , and itemized costs of the trips ; and ( 3 ) trips are adequately documented with receipts and vouchers . ftc's procedures for accepting and reporting reimbursed travel were basically sound . however , ftc's semiannual reports sometimes could have better described the nature of the event to be attended . by including a better description , ftc could enable oge to better form an opinion as to whether the employee's attendance may appear to constitute a conflict of interest . the issue of oge's access to records relating to reimbursed travel expenses at commerce has been resolved . commerce's letter stating that oge has authority to review these records and oge's recently completed audit of such records at commerce's office of patent and trademark indicate that commerce and oge are in accord . the overall effect of commerce's temporary denial of access was minimal in that oge eventually received access to commerce records , and oge has not been denied access to such records at any other agency . we recommend that the secretary of commerce take actions to ensure that all commerce employees' travel requests containing all of the necessary information , such as the name of the payer and the amount and type of expenses to be paid , are reviewed and approved before a trip ; the office of general counsel , as part of its responsibilities for submitting semiannual reports to oge , ensure that these reports include the required information , including the dates and nature of events attended and expenses paid ; and commerce offices require ( 1 ) travel vouchers and ( 2 ) receipts for reimbursed expenses , except for meals since they are not required by federal travel regulations to be supported in this manner . also , we recommend that the chairman , federal trade commission require the office of general counsel to ensure that the agency's reports to oge more completely describe the nature of the events attended . these deficiencies are shown in table 1 .