additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this transaction would transfer capital to the bank . however , the ability of associations to pay the note and remain competitive is questionable . to repay the note , the association would need to increase its earnings — probably by raising rates on loans and reducing dividends to members . if the association proved unable to repay the note , the bank capital that was created by the association's purchase of stock would be decreased . as an alternative , the association could contribute to its bank certain association assets , such as a portion of its seasoned portfolio of loans with an established record of satisfactory performance . however , several factors might constrain the amount of association capital that could be transferred in this way . these factors include fca's minimum capital requirements for associations , the minimum amount of assets that associations must have to collateralize their regular borrowings , and the impact of the contribution on the association's future profitability . fcsic's implementation of assessments that could be paid in this way would require difficult judgments , and would be subject to these constraints . in summary , the reasons for asking for this power to transfer association capital have decreased in importance with the improvement in the financial condition of both the system and the insurance fund since 1991 . both the potential and actual exercise of this power could raise concerns about system stability . additionally , in our view , it is especially important that fca set adequate capital standards for the banks and that any problems be promptly identified and resolved to minimize threats to the insurance fund . moreover , it is essential that the associations have adequate capital and be well supervised , because the financial strength of each bank is largely dependent on the health of its member associations . fcsic premiums are established by statute and cannot be increased , regardless of any adverse condition experienced by the insurance fund . in 1991 , fca recommended that fcsic be authorized to charge supplemental premiums to the banks . such premiums could help the fund recover more rapidly if large losses were to occur . fca believed that a major bank failure might result in costs that would overwhelm the insurance fund , and that an immediate and possibly very large supplemental premium might be needed to restore fund soundness . however , in 1995 , fca officials indicated to us that they no longer supported this recommendation . fcsic officials concurred that supplemental premium authority was not necessary . we have reprinted their letters in appendixes i through iii . the comments are summarized and evaluated at the end of this report . if the insurance fund were to be depleted , the next layer of protection against losses for investors in systemwide debt and for taxpayers is represented by the capital of the eight farm credit banks . in 1991 , fca was concerned that the association capital did not also stand behind this fcsic - insured debt .