this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on the recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight not later than 60 days after the date of this letter . education and training cooperative strategy working group: carries out the oversight , development , and operation for internal and external training provided to nora and dora staff . profiling cooperative strategy working group: ( 1 ) oversees market segmentation and profiling operations and ( 2 ) formulates and recommends profiling standard procedures and the design and testing of compliance measures . communications cooperative strategy working group: oversees , develops , and maintains mechanisms and the media for communications on compliance research . compliance studies and tests cooperative strategy working group: ( 1 ) oversees compliance studies and tests and ( 2 ) recommends compliance research standards for conducting , analyzing , and reporting compliance studies and treatment tests . nora / dora research planning cooperative strategy working group: ( 1 ) develops and provides input into the compliance plan and ( 2 ) reviews other irs plans . systems development cooperative strategy working group: ( 1 ) oversees the design , development , implementation , and evaluation of the technology used in compliance research and ( 2 ) addresses issues regarding the hardware , software , and telecommunications surrounding compliance research . a written statement also must be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this letter . copies of this report are being sent to interested congressional committees , the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of the treasury , and other interested parties . irs has plans for other mechanisms to manage the research . appendix iii discusses cris . our objectives were to ( 1 ) review the many lessons that irs learned from past compliance efforts , including compliance 2000 , to identify the factors most critical to the success of the new compliance research approach and ( 2 ) analyze the current status of the new approach and its ability to incorporate these factors as well as help irs achieve the goal of 90-percent total compliance by 2001 . to accomplish each objective , we visited irs' national office and all 31 doras , interviewing responsible officials and collecting relevant data . our national office work focused on nora . we interviewed nora officials and collected data on the plans for and status of the new research approach . an irs internal audit report in december 1993 had similar findings . the report disclosed that 38 of 50 compliance 2000 projects were traditional enforcement projects that the districts had renamed as compliance 2000 projects . and irs had no database to capture results or provide an inventory of the compliance issues covered . the report concluded that the projects did not represent rigorous research , the managerial controls were weak , and a management structure was needed to provide effective oversight .