are present . the revenue agent will have good adjustments that are technically correct and will also have no - changes . that is part of the job.” “both time spent on a return and deficiencies are indicators of effectiveness and efficiency in the audit process . “statistics regarding ‘dollars per hour' are disseminated at group meetings . our group is compared to the branch and the district . ten years ago these kinds of statistics were never discussed at the group level . due to the constant referring to these numbers , it is obvious that ‘dollars per hour' is the most important concept to management . consequently , agents will always strive to get the highest yield per case . this means that you will disregard adjustments in the taxpayers favor so as not to reduce the tax yield . individual statistics have not been discussed . however , the constant reminder of the yield causes agents to do anything they can to get good yield on their cases.” “even though it is made very clear in the . region that there are no individual or group enforcement goals , statistics are kept and very well known throughout the region . specifically , our ‘mission' is very goal oriented and very driven by the goals of the chief of collections . very clearly those groups that have good statistics — specifically the number of seizures , cases closed , fraud referrals , etc. — receive special recognition . in some cases , managers receive performance rewards . the revenue officers who specifically take enforcement action to resolve cases are rewarded with promotion even though the enforcement action is not mentioned in the performance evaluation . those revenue officers who are most aggressive using enforcement are those rewarded most quickly with promotion.” “national and regional management have used dollar goals and quotas for as long as i can remember . it is common knowledge among employees and first - line managers that ‘increase voluntary compliance' equals ‘dollars per hour.' you get what you measure.” “within the last couple of years , ‘dollars collected' was being conveyed from the division to the group level . this caused group comparisons and competition . while never conveyed to an individual within my group that dollars needed to be increased , it certainly was implied . while this didn't change my case decisions , i cannot speak for everyone. table vii.1 provides the results of our review of employee evaluations in terms of whether the evaluations contained law or policy violations and case or general discussions of enforcement - related activity . benjamin douglas , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .