not determined . data do not distinguish between trips made to northern mexico in order to cross border with trips made in order to work ( in maquiladora industries , for example ) or settle . depends on reliability and generalizability of intelligence information . is indicator currently being measured ? are there plans to measure indicator on ongoing basis ? measures event , not individuals . currently collected along the entire southwest border . unclear relationship to actual flow of illegal aliens . no information on those aliens who elude capture . no systematic methodology for measuring entries and gotaways ; likely differs across sectors . yes , in some places . measures event , not individuals . limited ident implementation along southwest border . yes , but not completely implemented along southwest border . no usable data preceding ag strategy , precluding a time - series analysis of its effectiveness . not yet clear how recidivism data will be used to model the flow . several possible analytic models can be tested . household surveys conducted in mexico ( eg , the mmp ) and surveys of migrants at points of entry and exit between the u.s. and mexico ( eg , the survey of migration to the northern border ) sample different subpopulations of migrants , who may differ in their likelihood of apprehension . mmp data are only collected annually , and retrospective accounts of apprehensions may be biased . there isn't consensus on the methodology for estimating probability of apprehension . ( continued ) estimated number of illegal entry attempts at u.s. ports of entry ( poe ) . ins intex system — random checks of travelers at poes . an increase in the number of aliens attempting to enter illegally at poes . smuggling usage . smuggling costs . ins intelligence data as well as intelligence data from other federal and state agencies . tactics of smugglers . an increase in smuggling fees and sophistication of smugglers . smugglers may try other means of delivering aliens to destinations ( eg , using vans , small trucks , and tractor trailers ) . mmp data . colef data . binational study . number of people in hotels and shelters in mexican border cities . ins intelligence information . an increase in the number of people in hotels and shelters in mexican border cities . periodic surveys by interested organizations . binational study site visits . crime in u.s. border cities . local crime data . less crime in u.s. border cities . is indicator currently being measured ? are there plans to measure indicator on ongoing basis ? the causes of illegal poe entries may be difficult to disentangle . for example , increased illegal attempts may reflect more effective border patrol strategies between the ports , an increase in the flow of illegal migrants , or simply a more effective inspection strategy at the poe . intex methodology is still being tested . changes in smuggling fees and tactics may indicate that border crossing is more difficult . however it does not necessarily indicate that migrants are less successful at entering . not clear how systematically data are collected across the southwest border .