, such misconduct does occur . the data show that during calendar years 1995 to 1998: at least 92 allegations of staff sexual misconduct were sustained in the three largest u.s. correctional systems . that is , the allegations resulted in staff resignations , employment terminations , or other administrative sanctions . only bop reported having any criminal prosecutions with convictions under staff sexual misconduct laws . according to the manual , allegations of “serious” employee misconduct — which include having intimate relationships with an inmate — are to be investigated by the department's office of internal affairs . if sustained by internal affairs , these serious allegations are to be referred to ( 1 ) the applicable warden , who can impose administrative sanctions ( adverse personnel actions ) ranging from an official reprimand to employment termination and / or ( 2 ) the local district attorney's office for criminal prosecution . what are the number , nature , and outcome of allegations that have been made in recent years ? as agreed with your office , the report focuses on four jurisdictions . these are the nation's three largest correctional systems for women offenders — the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) , the california department of corrections , and the texas department of criminal justice — and the correctional system in the jurisdiction you represent , the district of columbia . at calendar year - end 1998 , the 3 largest systems collectively held over one - third of the nation's approximately 80,000 female prisoners . comparatively , female offenders held by the district of columbia department of corrections totaled about 320 at year - end 1998 . we performed our work from december 1998 to may 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i presents detailed information about our scope and methodology . generally , “sexual misconduct by correctional staff” refers to any type of improper conduct of a sexual nature directed at prisoners . given the near total control and power imbalance inherent in a prison environment , there is widespread consensus among correctional officials , advocacy groups , and others that sexual misconduct by correctional staff should not be tolerated . during the 1990s , sexual misconduct by correctional staff against female inmates became a matter of increased concern for many correctional agencies . in addition to the large increase in the female inmate population , this concern , according to a 1996 report by bop's national institute of corrections ( nic ) , was largely driven by two sources of external pressure.specifically , the 1996 report noted that , within the past 5 years: at least 23 departments of corrections had faced class action or individual damage suits related to sexual misconduct . texas state law was changed in september 1997 to provide that correctional staff who engage in sexual intercourse or in deviate sexual intercourse with an individual in custody are criminally liable . most state legislatures had passed laws either making certain types of sexual misconduct a criminal offense or increasing the penalties for the offense .