have records ? oobr - out - of - business records from this point in the tracing process , an active and / or inactive manufacturer , importer , or licensee may be involved . it should also be noted that not all traces are successfully completed . some are closed due to age of firearm , incomplete / inaccurate description of firearm , loss of licensee records , or inability to locate licensee . for fiscal years 1992 through 1995 , atf received a total of 262,984 trace requests . the number of trace requests received by atf increased about 56 percent during this 4-year period , from 51,210 in fiscal year 1992 to 80,042 in fiscal year 1995 . during this period , atf completed a total of 243,584 traces , including those that did not result in the identification of a retail firearms licensee or purchaser . as shown in figure ii.2 , the number of traces completed more than doubled , from 42,980 in fiscal year 1992 to 86,215 in fiscal year 1995 . during this 4-year period , atf identified a retail firearms licensee or a purchaser of the traced firearm , on average , in about 41 percent of the completed trace requests . in fiscal year 1995 , the number of completed trace requests resulting in the identification of retail licensees or purchasers increased to about 52 percent . contains firearms data but does not identify retail firearms purchasers . tracks firearms production and exports data that are gathered annually from licensed manufacturers and exporters for regulatory enforcement . contains firearms data but does not identify retail firearms purchasers . tracks inspectors' assignments , certain performance measures , and workflow data within atf's office of regulatory enforcement . contains firearms data collected for criminal investigative purposes that , in some cases , may identify retail firearms purchasers . automates the preparation of three atf reports: investigative case summary , report of investigation , and property taken into atf's custody for criminal enforcement . contains firearms data but does not identify retail firearms purchasers . tracks information on tax payments , including tax returns and return information , from more than 10,000 excise taxpayersfor regulatory enforcement . contains firearms data but does not identify retail firearms purchasers . used to manage sales information about firearms and ammunition manufacturers , who are required to pay federal excise taxes , to determine whether the proper amounts of tax were paid when due for regulatory enforcement . contains firearms data but does not identify retail firearms purchasers . tracks applications and permits for federal firearms and explosives licenses for regulatory and criminal enforcement . contains firearms data that identify the consignees of firearms , who , in some cases , may be retail firearms purchasers . active ? atf have licensee's records ? f purchaser ? tracks information on the importation of firearms and explosives into the united states and their release into commerce by the u.s. customs service for regulatory enforcement . contains firearms data that identify retail firearms purchasers . collects and tracks data on traces of firearms suspected of being involved in a crime to assist law enforcement agencies in identifying suspects for regulatory and criminal enforcement .