ii. ) to address this objective , we interviewed officials and reviewed documentation and our prior reports that addressed the importance of strategic planning in federal program management . we interviewed officials from tsi and the customer service task force at irs headquarters . using a standard set of questions , we also interviewed irs officials responsible for implementing 25 of irs' customer service initiatives . such efforts have resulted in improved performance . for example , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration began to measure the extent to which it could increase the advance notice it gave the public before severe weather events , instead of counting the number of forecasts it made . the emphasis is significant because having more time to prepare should lessen the loss of life and property . the coast guard's office of marine safety , security , and environmental protection improved its mission effectiveness with fewer people and at lower cost . it did so by giving field commanders greater authority and by investing in activities and processes that went most directly to the goal of reducing risks on the water . measuring performance allows agencies to track the progress they are making toward their goals and gives managers crucial information on which to base their organizational and management decisions . no picture of what government is accomplishing with the taxpayers' money can be complete without management information on benefits and costs . it provides agencies with tools to determine whether they have used public resources economically , efficiently , and effectively to achieve the purposes for which they were appropriated . viewing program performance in light of costs can be important on at least two levels . first , it can help congress make informed decisions . second , it can give taxpayers an accounting of what government is providing in return for their tax dollars . as of january 1999 , irs had established priorities , reduced the number of initiatives to a manageable level , aligned them with its strategic goals and objectives , and assigned accountability for individual initiatives . irs also improved its ability to monitor and track individual initiatives by providing on - line access to its database and by asking managers responsible for work on individual initiatives to input information on milestones and completion dates . as irs moves forward on its customer service improvements , we believe its strategy for managing the initiatives would be enhanced by having information on expected costs and benefits , milestones and completion dates , and performance measures . irs has already linked the initiatives to its strategic goals and objectives and begun to collect information pertaining to timeliness . however , it has not determined how much the initiatives are likely to cost , what benefits are expected to be achieved , and how results will be measured . we recognize that the level of detail that might be needed likely would vary from initiative to initiative . the tsi database could serve as a tool not only to monitor implementation , but also to facilitate effective management and oversight .