( see table i.1 in app . during such collaborative efforts , the army , air force , and navy may provide forensic support in areas involving , for example , fingerprints , drug chemistry , and questioned documents . this system allows states to process and analyze intelligence information . at the request of a domestic law enforcement agency , dod's joint task force six coordinates operational , technological , intelligence , and training support for counterdrug efforts within the continental united states . for fiscal years 1996 through 1998 , joint task force six officials estimated that the costs of crime technology assistance provided by this dod component to state and local law enforcement totaled $48,800 . as table 2 shows , this assistance consisted of two types — communications assessments ( $16,300 ) and intelligence architecture assessments ( $32,500 ) . according to national guard bureau officials , the two locations and the relevant courses ( with a prorated estimated funding total of about $281,000 for the 3 fiscal years ) are as follows: multijurisdictional counterdrug task force training ( st. petersburg , fl ) : at this training location , the relevant course covered the use of technical equipment to intercept secure communications . this course accounted for about $60,000 , or about 21 percent of the total $281,000 funding . regional counterdrug training academy ( meridian , ms ) : at this location , national guard bureau officials identified the following three relevant courses: ( 1 ) basic technical service / video surveillance operations , ( 2 ) counterdrug thermal imagery systems , and ( 3 ) investigative video operations . these courses accounted for about $221,000 , or the remaining 79 percent of the $281,000 funding total . the u.s. army military police school ( fort leonard wood , mo ) provided counterdrug training to state and local law enforcement agencies . eight courses were conducted that focused on drug enforcement training for non - dod students , including state and local law enforcement personnel . in response to our inquiry , dod officials indicated that two of these courses — ( 1 ) counterdrug investigations and ( 2 ) basic analytical investigative techniques — fit our definition of crime technology assistance . in providing such assistance , military personnel essentially acted as technical consultants in evaluating state or local agencies' ( 1 ) existing communications systems , including their locations and the procedures for using them , and / or ( 2 ) intelligence organizations , functions , and systems . the military branch investigative agencies generally do not unilaterally provide assistance to state and local law enforcement . however , if there is a military interest , a military investigative agency may jointly conduct an investigation with state or local authorities . the cost data presented for the military branch investigative agencies in table 2 are the costs associated with ( 1 ) forensic analyses involving joint or collaborative cases and ( 2 ) other technology - related assistance , such as technical training . during fiscal years 1996 through 1998 , dod's in - kind assistance to state and local law enforcement totaled about $95.9 million .