each of these has advantages and disadvantages . for example , an approach designed to be least disruptive to the mortgage market might leave institutions that were still perceived as too big to fail . as a result , such an approach might not fully break the government ties that cause the market to perceive an implied guarantee . alternatively , an approach that more effectively broke those ties by breaking up the privatized enterprises into smaller companies could reduce some of the potential benefits from mortgage standardization and maintenance of liquidity in the market . privatization is only one alternative to the status quo . there are other policy options , short of privatization , that would adjust the activities or responsibilities of the enterprises in such a way that the potential public benefits generated by government sponsorship could potentially increase or the size of enterprise activity or the riskiness of that activity to the government could be decreased . the latter could reduce the potential cost should the federal government ever decide to bail out a failing enterprise . for example: should the enterprises' promotion of access to mortgage credit throughout the nation provide remedies to alleviate possible imperfections in private mortgage markets such as those created by racial discrimination ? or , should the enterprises improve the distribution of investment capital using some different standards ? should hud promulgate separate subgoals for central cities and rural areas , or specify one or more geographic areas that it considers underserved ? the 1992 act directed hud to promulgate regulations setting annual goals for each enterprise for the purchase of mortgages relating to each of the following three categories: housing for low - and moderate - income families ; housing located in central cities , rural areas , and other underserved areas ; and rental and owner - occupied housing for low - income families in low - income areas and for very low - income families . under these goals , 30 percent of the total number of dwelling units financed by mortgage purchases of each enterprise during the year were to be from mortgages serving low - and moderate - income families and likewise 30 percent of dwelling units were to be for housing located in central cities designated as such by the office of management and budget ( omb ) . the amounts were essentially the same as the percentage goals ( known as the “30 / 30 goals” ) that had been previously established for fannie mae under hud's regulations . authority for the twin 30 / 30 goals was contained in the 1968 chartering legislation for fannie mae , but they were not promulgated until 1979 . these goals were not based on any analytical studies , and , as we understand , they were never monitored or enforced . in addition , the 1992 act established interim “special affordable housing goals” for each enterprise to acquire mortgages serving low - income families in low - income areas and very low - income families . under these goals , fannie mae was to purchase at least $2 billion in such mortgages during the period , while freddie mac was required to purchase a volume of at least $1.5 billion .