ii. ) at year - end 1993 , these services involved over 11 million accounts with total assets of about $10.6 trillion . the federal reserve also supervises the trust company subsidiaries of bank holding companies . federal regulation of common trust funds has been strengthened by an internal revenue code requirement that states banks must adhere to section 9.18 of occ's regulations to qualify for certain federal tax benefits . federal bank regulators allow banks to invest trust assets in securities , including those of a proprietary mutual fund , only if the purchase is permitted by erisa for employee benefit accounts , or by state law , the trust instrument , or court order for personal trust accounts . without specific federal or state legislation authorizing the use of proprietary mutual funds in trust accounts , occ officials said that such use is a breach of trust because of the unauthorized conflict of interest . labor permits the investment of trust assets in proprietary mutual funds under a set of conditions stated in prohibited transactions exemption ( pte ) 77-4 . according to the aba survey , at least 39 states allow bank fiduciaries to invest trust assets in proprietary mutual funds . regardless of state law , under its regulation y , the federal reserve prohibits bank fiduciaries from purchasing , in their sole discretion , proprietary mutual funds if the advisor to the fund is a subsidiary of the bank holding company . the federal reserve stated that banks that had been criticized under this provision have responded by either restructuring the investment advisor as a subsidiary of the bank , rather than of the bank holding company , or obtained co - trustees who have given consent or used outside counsel to petition the federal reserve to reexamine its interpretation of regulation y provisions . while it was not possible to quantify the exact extent to which assets in trust accounts had been invested in bank proprietary mutual funds , some inferences could be drawn from the information that was available . for example , while trust assets had been invested in proprietary mutual funds , most of the assets in proprietary mutual funds appeared to have come from other sources . two , the level of funds contained in discretionary trust accounts far exceeded the amount of assets in proprietary mutual funds . finally , industry and regulatory officials said that most of the trust assets that had been converted into proprietary mutual funds had come from employee benefit accounts . bank proprietary mutual funds held about $202 billion in assets at the end of 1993 , an increase of $187 billion since 1983 . data were not available to indicate what portion of that total came from each bank's trust assets . however , even if all the assets in bank proprietary mutual funds came from the investment of trust assets , they would represent only 15 percent of the $1.5 trillion in discretionary employee benefit and personal trust assets .