this act ( p.l . 103-355 , enacted on oct. 13 , 1994 ) authorizes simplified acquisition procedures for leases having an average annual rent of $100,000 or less and could result in performance improvements for gsa . not achieving what its customers want . ignores its customers' needs , pays higher prices than necessary , is filled with peripheral objectives , and assumes that line managers cannot be trusted . its complexity forces businesses to alter standard procedures and raise prices when dealing with the government . so process oriented as to minimize discretion and stifle innovation . these statements were made by the national performance review ( npr ) about the overall federal procurement process . these same statements also characterize the general services administration's ( gsa ) leasing process . historically , gsa's leasing policies , procedures , and practices and the laws and federal regulations that guide them have been focused on process rather than on results . over the years , procedural control after procedural control was added to gsa's leasing process in response to gao and inspector general audits , congressional concerns , and the laudable goals of ensuring compliance with overall federal procurement rules and regulations , safeguarding the government's interests , and minimizing fraud , abuse , and the number of bid protests by unsuccessful offerors . such procedural controls are important and useful provided they are balanced with efficiency and effectiveness and do not cause organizations to lose sight of their basic missions . in the leasing area , however , the cumulative result of these well - intended procedural controls is a leasing process that has become rule - focused and inflexible , complex and cumbersome , and time consuming and costly . our work showed that gsa's process - oriented approach does not work very well in the dynamic commercial marketplace . it does not enable gsa to respond quickly enough in today's competitive real estate environment and impedes its ability to get the best available leasing values . we identified several characteristics of gsa's leasing process that seem to put gsa at a distinct disadvantage in the commercial marketplace , cause it to pay more than necessary for leased space , impede timely space delivery , and discourage competition for government leases . as discussed in chapter 4 , gsa recognizes that its leasing process takes too long , is too costly and inefficient , and inhibits its ability to compete effectively for good leasing values in today's dynamic commercial real estate market . to help overcome these disadvantages , gsa has initiated several actions aimed at streamlining its leasing process , reducing procedural controls that are within its administrative authority , and improving its leasing performance . in response to npr , gsa is exploring other changes to reengineer its leasing policies , procedures , and practices . office space is a unique commodity . each building has a different combination of attributes and amenities , and commercial lease rates are influenced by various factors , such as the overall business and real estate conditions , location and quality of the building , length and size of the lease , and cost of customizing space to meet tenants' needs .