there is insufficient demand for the ipo from institutional investors . underwriters may target individual investors when there is insufficient institutional demand for the ipo . an official of an underwriting firm , who usually sold ipos exclusively to institutional investors , told us of a situation that forced the firm to sell shares to individual investors . in marketing the ipo , officials at the underwriting firm determined that institutional investor interest was insufficient to sell the entire issue . ( according to the officials , the issue's profit potential was too low. ) to locate purchasers for the remaining shares , the underwriting firm extended its marketing efforts to individual investors . these efforts were successful and enabled the underwriting firm to sell the entire ipo to a combination of institutional and individual investors . under existing sec and nasd rules , underwriters generally have wide latitude in deciding how best to market and allocate ipo shares . except for rules governing fraud and manipulation of securities offerings , sec rules do not address the allocation of ipo shares . nasd has an interpretive rule prohibiting free - riding , withholding , and sales to certain insiders under certain market conditions . officials from underwriting firms told us that they discouraged these practices , but enforcing such policies , especially among syndication partners , can be difficult . according to an sec official , sec has received a number of complaints from individual investors about their lack of access to the ipo market . the underwriter has a high percentage of individual clients . underwriting firms with a high percentage of individual investor clients were more likely to allocate a portion of the ipo shares to these investors . an official at one underwriting firm we interviewed estimated that his firm sold 80 percent of its ipo shares primarily to individual investors because its client base primarily included individual investors . while agreeing that investors have a right to know about an underwriter's disciplinary history , officials associated with two underwriting firms expressed reservations about disclosing such information in the prospectus . officials at the two firms said that sec's broker - dealer form already requires the reporting of extensive information about an underwriter's criminal and disciplinary history and that this information is available to the public . an official at another underwriting firm suggested that the prospectus , instead of disclosing information on an underwriter's disciplinary history , should inform investors that they could obtain this information by contacting nasd or state securities regulators . to help investors more fully assess their ipo investment risk , we believe it is important for companies to disclose in the prospectus material information on the criminal and disciplinary histories of their underwriter . a requirement that companies disclose information on underwriters is similar to information already required to be reported on officers and directors of the issuing companies and should not be a difficult or costly task . underwriting firms should have ready access to detailed knowledge of all formal disciplinary actions that regulatory organizations have imposed against them . in addition , they could access the crd through on - site computer terminals or telephone nasd to ensure the completeness of their information .