attached . are instructions which explain how to move forward on dps . which are effective immediately.” headquarters officials , in a subsequent plan concerning dps implementation , stated that failure to gain a new agreement with the nalc had left delivery units in various stages of development in their plans to capture savings . for example , dps volumes that remained below the targets set by many units had delayed implementation and allowed carriers to continue sorting dps letters , delaying capture of workhour savings . the service said that its instructions to field units mirrored the 1992 joint agreements . one of the instructions advised managers to base calculations of dps volume for purposes of meeting the targets on weekly averages . the service believed that this aspect of the joint agreements was not negotiated and was left open for managerial discretion . however , nalc contended that the joint agreements had been reached based on an understanding that target volumes would have to be met for 12 consecutive delivery days . therefore , nalc said that the service violated the joint agreements by unilaterally advising its managers to use a method that the parties had not agreed upon . another disagreement arose when nalc challenged the service's interpretation of a 1992 joint agreement involving the dps work methods carriers were expected to use . carriers traditionally have used one of several sorting methods to prepare mail for delivery , resulting in either all the mail sorted together and carried as one bundle , or letters sorted separately from larger pieces , called flats ( eg , magazines ) , and carried as two bundles . factors — like number and type of deliveries , such as apartments or commercial buildings or amount of walking versus driving between deliveries — can influence which sorting method is chosen . the service's dps instructions required carriers to pick up trays of dps letters and load them into their vehicles for delivery along with their trays of manually sorted mail . during delivery , carriers select mail from the trays of letters and flats at each delivery point or select and carry letters and flats in their hand as separate bundles while walking portions of the route . the dps - sorting methods authorized in the joint agreements result in either two or three bundles of mail , in addition to certain types of unaddressed advertising mail delivered to every address . the following are the two authorized dps sorting methods: sort non - dps letters with the flats into the case . pull down from the case and carry the combined flats / non - dps letters as one bundle and dps letters as a second bundle . sort into and pull down from the case non - dps letters separately from the flats , and carry dps as a third bundle . under the joint agreements , selection of the most efficient method for each route was to be made jointly by local managers and nalc representatives . for example , the parties could agree that carrying two bundles was more efficient on park and loop routes , which require walking between deliveries , or that a third bundle is more efficient for motorized curbside delivery .