both requests were approved . the amounts requested equaled about 4.7 percent of the amount initially requested by gsa in its budget requests for the rental - of - space account for fiscal year 1997 , and 9.4 percent of the amount requested for fiscal year 1998 . in its august 8 , 1997 , reprogramming request for fiscal year 1997 , gsa attributed the need for the reprogramming to three causes . first , it had estimated that the overall average rents would increase by 2 percent , but actual rent increases ranged from 3 to 5 percent . this resulted in the cost to the account being underestimated by about $30.9 million . second , on the basis of regional expectations , gsa had overestimated the amounts that would be saved through lease cancellations by about $74.1 million . third , gsa had not been able to absorb a $5.1 million congressional reduction in appropriations requested for rental - of - space expenditures in fiscal year 1997 . according to a gsa official , the agency could not absorb this cut because gsa was already short of noa in this account . gsa alerted its oversight committees in its reprogramming request letter that these problems would also affect the rental - of - space account in fiscal year 1998 . in its january 9 , 1998 , reprogramming request for fiscal year 1998 , gsa attributed the need for the reprogramming to four causes . first , gsa needed $143.6 million to cover the $110 million underestimation in fiscal year 1997 and to annualize this error for fiscal year 1998 . second , as in fiscal year 1997 , gsa had estimated the overall average rental rate increase at 2 percent , but actual increases ranged from 3 to 5 percent . this resulted in the cost to the account being underestimated by about $22.5 million . third , as in fiscal year 1997 , it had overestimated savings from lease cancellations , this time by about $41.8 million . finally , on the basis of what regional staff believed was going to happen , gsa had underestimated the need for expansion space . this resulted in a need for an additional $6.1 million . the process of formulating the budget is to begin no later than the spring of each year , about 9 months before it is transmitted to congress and 18 months before the beginning of the fiscal year in which the budget becomes effective . during the first 6 months of this period ( from about april through september ) , pbs compiles information on the various budget elements , including the rental - of - space account ; reviews the information for reasonableness and accuracy ; and prepares its budget estimates . during the next 3 months ( october through december ) these estimates are to be submitted as a portion of gsa's budget request to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for review . omb reviews the budget request and passes it back to gsa with any changes , and gsa may appeal omb ‘s changes before the budget is finalized .