the fbi and the u.s . postal inspection service , under existing federal criminal statutes , have broader authority to investigate fraud in any public or private program . other agencies that are involved in health care fraud enforcement include the drug enforcement administration , internal revenue service , and department of labor . in addition to federal enforcement agencies , states also have health care fraud enforcement responsibility . regarding medicaid , for example , while hhs is responsible for oversight of the program , the agency has largely delegated primary investigative enforcement responsibility to state medicaid fraud control units , which are predominately funded through federal grants . regarding private insurance , some states have established insurance fraud bureaus that investigate health care fraud ; in other states , the department of insurance has a fraud unit that investigates fraud . while these state agencies can often pursue administrative and civil penalties for health care fraud , most criminal enforcement authority is in the hands of local prosecutors and attorneys general . the private sector is also active in health care fraud enforcement . private insurers have established active anti - fraud programs and special investigative units that work with a wide range of public law enforcement agencies to investigate fraud . these units may report fraud cases to federal or state agencies with health care fraud enforcement responsibility . in addition , a group of private sector health insurers and public sector law enforcement agencies has established the national health care anti - fraud association ( nhcaa ) , which represents a cooperative effort to prevent health care fraud and improve capabilities to detect , investigate , and prosecute such fraud . the nhcaa conducts anti - fraud education seminars , provides a forum for members to share information on fraudulent schemes , and assists law enforcement in the investigation and prosecution of health care fraud . as shown in figure 1.1 , while public sector health care fraud is primarily the responsibility of federal enforcement and program agencies , private sector fraud can be pursued by both state and federal enforcement agencies . in some states , private insurers are required by law to report suspected fraud to state enforcement agencies , while reports to federal enforcement agencies are optional at the discretion of the insurer . in addition to the reporting of suspected fraud from insurers to federal and state authorities , fraud - related information can also be shared between federal and state authorities . in commenting on a draft of this report , doj officials told us that the department has placed increasing emphasis on working with the medicaid fraud control units and nhcaa . “in the 1970s , we found that we were largely dealing with individual providers who were involved in relatively uncomplicated schemes , such as filing false claims which resulted in a few thousand dollars of damage to the medicare program . today , it is more common to see cases involving groups of people who defraud the government . some of the schemes are relatively complex , often involving the use of sophisticated computer techniques , complicated business arrangements , and multiple locations across state lines .