this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on these recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight not later than 60 days after the date of this letter . a written statement must also be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to various congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . if you have any questions about this report please call me on ( 202 ) 512-9110 . information reporting is one of only a few key means available to irs to ensure that taxpayers fully report income on their tax returns . over the last 15 years or so , irs' audit coverage has dropped substantially . during that period , however , expanded information - reporting requirements and irs' use of that information has allowed irs to increase its checks for unreported income in a more cost - effective manner . the bonds were issued by 34 corporations . of these , 3 had issued other bonds that were listed in publication 1212 ; the other 31 had not . the total oid income payable over the lives of these 37 bonds ranged from $27.1 million for one bond to $1.5 billion for another . we asked the irs examination division to determine whether any of the 34 issuers had been audited for the year of bond issuance and , if so , whether the audit identified a failure to file form 8281 . according to the examination division , of the 34 issuers , two issuers had been audited , but irs had neither identified nor addressed their apparent failure to file form 8281 ; one issuer was under audit , but the firm's apparent failure to file form 8281 had not been identified ; and two other issuers were under audit , and because we brought the matter to irs' attention , irs planned to determine whether each was responsible for filing form 8281 . this lack of checking by auditors for required submissions was an issue that we discussed in 1989 . at that time , we said irs had missed identifying businesses that failed to file required information returns in about 50 percent of the 932 business return audits we reviewed . as a result of our review , irs auditing officials were going to determine whether there were reasonable causes for the corporations not filing the 37 forms 8281 . as of august 1995 , irs had not resolved any of the 37 cases . however , as a result of our review , the assistant irs commissioner for examination issued a memorandum reminding audit staff of the form 8281 filing requirement and reemphasizing the need to check for filing compliance when auditing corporate taxpayers .