i heard it through a a . are you an attorney ? ( check one. ) cases , if any , have you had experience in representing clients ? ( enter number and continue to question 2 . if none , enter "0" and read box below. ) if you had no experience ( entered 0 ) with mspb cases , please stop here and return the questionnaire to us in the enclosed envelope . thank you . considering all the cases since october 1991 with which you have had experience representing clients before mspb ( see question 1 ) , about how many were in each of the following categories ? ( enter numbers in appropriate boxes. ) mspb was established by reorganization plan no . we mailed a total of 1,179 questionnaires on april 27 , 1994 , to appeals process practitioners asking for their views on ( 1 ) how successful mspb has been in accomplishing its mission through the appeals process , ( 2 ) the fairness of the appeals process , and ( 3 ) the time limits for filing and processing appeals . the practitioners included ( 1 ) general counsels of federal agencies , ( 2 ) federal agency attorneys and representatives , ( 3 ) employee and labor - management relations representatives in federal agencies , ( 4 ) private attorneys representing appellants , and ( 5 ) union officials representing appellants . the questionnaire was designed by a social science survey specialist in conjunction with gao evaluators who were knowledgeable about mspb's appeals process . we pretested the questionnaire with members of each of the five participant groups to determine if ( 1 ) the respondents possessed the information desired ; ( 2 ) the questionnaire would be burdensome to the respondents ; and ( 3 ) the questionnaire design , including such elements as the type size , layout , and procedures for recording the information , was appropriate . any problems with the questionnaire that were identified by the pretest process were corrected . we also provided the questionnaire to mspb for review and incorporated the agency's comments as appropriate . after the questionnaires were completed and returned by survey respondents , the questionnaires were edited . merit systems protection board ( mspb ) at the request of the chairman , senate committee on governmental affairs and the chairman , subcommittee on civil service , house post office and civil service committee . as part of this review , we are surveying all mspb employees to get their views on the work environment in general and mspb's efforts to ( 1 ) foster a work environment that is based on trust , respect , and fairness ; ( 2 ) ensure that its employees work in an environment that is free of discrimination ; and ( 3 ) create a climate that encourages reporting of waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . we also ask for views on the reasonableness of mspb's standard time frames for processing and deciding cases . the questionnaire should take about 20 to 30 minutes to complete . space has been provided at the end of the questionnaire for any comments you may want to make . additional pages may be added if necessary .