( see app . i for the text of massachusetts regulators' comments. ) we did our work in boston and springfield , ma , between january 1993 and july 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . financial troubles of the holding company endangered the solvency of monarch life and led to the regulatory takeover . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . the public report of massachusetts' 1988 examination — issued in january 1990 — listed monarch life's $102 million balance in the pool account but did not discuss whether the balance was recoverable . the reported examination scope included “a general examination of the accounts and records of the subsidiaries” within the insurer's control . according to the special counsel to the receiver of monarch life , however , the 1988 examination did not detect the riskiness of the pool account transactions because the examiners did not follow examination policies and procedures . naic's examiners handbook identifies unsecured loans to affiliates as a potentially abusive transaction and suggests examiners verify that an insurer's cash accounts are not used for the benefit of affiliates . naic's examiners handbook also recommends confirming collateral for loans and obtaining information as to the financial capability of affiliated companies to repay material balances . even though monarch life's pool account balance represented 72 percent of its capital and surplus in 1988 , we saw no evidence in the 1988 examination workpapers that massachusetts examiners assessed the holding company's ability to repay the pool account loans . the massachusetts examiners verified that monarch life transferred cash in the amounts reported as of 1988 , but the workpapers contained no evaluation of whether monarch life could recover its money . in an october 1993 report on the massachusetts division of insurance , the massachusetts state auditor found that the state's field examinations of insurance companies were ineffective . monarch life was subject to solvency monitoring in each state in which it was licensed . massachusetts regulators examined monarch life as of 1985 and again as of 1988 . as the state of domicile , massachusetts had primary responsibility for taking action to resolve the insurer's financial troubles . the public examination reports we reviewed did not reveal the problems with interaffiliate transactions that led to the regulatory takeover of monarch life . we used naic data to determine to what extent massachusetts had adopted naic's model insurance holding company system regulatory act . this model — one of the minimum standards for accreditation — details regulatory authorities recommended by naic for monitoring an insurance company within a holding company structure . in particular , we considered whether massachusetts had ( 1 ) requirements for prior approval of material transactions , ( 2 ) examination access to affiliated companies , and ( 3 ) sanctions for violating insurance holding company laws .