i for more information ) . ii ) . as table ii.1 shows , the national institute of justice is one of justice's components that provided crime technology assistance . the institute's role includes allocating funds for certain research and development projects that may directly or indirectly involve crime technology assistance to state and local law enforcement agencies . we added this information to the appendix . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to senator orrin g. hatch , chairman , and senator patrick j. leahy , ranking minority member , senate committee on the judiciary ; representative henry j. hyde , chairman , and representative john conyers , jr. , ranking minority member , house committee on the judiciary ; the honorable janet reno , attorney general ; the honorable robert e. rubin , secretary of the treasury ; the honorable barry r. mccaffrey , director of ondcp ; and the honorable jacob lew , director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8777 . senator mike dewine requested that we identify crime technology assistance provided by the federal government to state and local law enforcement agencies . specifically , for fiscal years 1996 through 1998 , senator dewine requested that we identify the types and amounts of such assistance provided by the departments of justice and the treasury and the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) . as agreed with the requester , we categorized the assistance into three types: ( 1 ) direct funding or grants ; ( 2 ) access to support services and systems , such as automated criminal history records and forensics laboratories ; and ( 3 ) in - kind ( no - cost ) transfers of equipment or other assets . initially , we conducted a literature search to determine whether there was a commonly accepted definition of “crime technology assistance.” since our search did not yield a definition , we developed our own by reviewing ( 1 ) a then pending bill ( s. 2022 ) , which has since been enacted into law,related to crime technology assistance introduced by senator dewine during the second session of the 105th congress , and its legislative history ; ( 2 ) his request letter to us and subsequent discussions with his staff ; ( 3 ) the general services administration's catalog of federal domestic assistance , a reference source of federal assistance programs , including crime control programs ; and ( 4 ) congressional research service reports on federal crime control assistance .