washington , d.c . customer satisfaction with mail service , as measured by csi , varied among residents in northern virginia , suburban maryland , southern maryland , and washington , d.c . in fiscal year 1991 , the postal service developed and implemented csi to track residential customer satisfaction . northern virginia was the exception . delivery service in northern virginia was better in fiscal year 1994 than it was in 1991 and 1992 , but not as good as it was in fiscal year 1993 . washington , d.c. exfc scores can be affected by the performance of neighboring p&dcs . for example , mail originating in southern maryland and going to the district of columbia passes through the southern maryland p&dc and the washington , d.c. , p&dc ( the destinating facility ) . the time taken is reflected in washington , d.c.'s exfc score , even though it may have been delayed because of a problem at the southern maryland p&dc . because of the impact other locations may have on individual exfc scores , we obtained and compared the test scores for “turnaround” mail in northern virginia , southern maryland , and washington , d.c. , with the published exfc scores for each of the three locations where service is measured in the washington area . table ii.2 shows that delivery scores for turnaround mail were higher than the published exfc scores , but still below the 95-percent delivery performance standard . csi is administered under contract by opinion research corporation . each quarter since it was implemented , the contractor has mailed a questionnaire to thousands of households throughout the nation asking them how they would rate their overall satisfaction with the postal service's performance ( poor / fair / good / very good / excellent ) . the postal service publicly discloses quarterly overall satisfaction ratings for 170 metropolitan areas , as well as the nationwide average . the postal service began reporting quarterly csi scores in the first quarter of fiscal year 1991 for 40 metropolitan areas . since then , the survey has been expanded to 170 locations . results from the first survey showed that , nationally , 87 percent of customers thought the postal service's overall performance was excellent , very good , or good . since then , quarterly scores have ranged between 85 and 89 percent . the csi score for quarter 4 , 1994 , was 85 percent . among the 170 locations surveyed , customer satisfaction scores are reported for four locations in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area: northern virginia , suburban maryland , southern maryland , and washington , d.c. of these locations , as shown in figure 2 , residents of northern virginia gave the highest satisfaction rating on the overall performance of the postal service . in 12 of the 16 quarters since the postal service began reporting csi scores , northern virginia's scores equalled or exceeded the national average . however , in 3 of the last 4 quarters reported , satisfaction decreased , with scores falling 1 to 3 percentage points below the national average . suburban maryland's postal customers were less satisfied .