ii. ) the postal service publishes its international rates by services , weight , destination country , or group of countries . for most services , the rates for canada and mexico are established separately from and are lower than those for other countries . for example , the rates for a 1-ounce letter to canada and mexico are 52 cents and 46 cents , respectively ; the 1-ounce letter mail rate is $1.00 for all other foreign countries . although the european commission found that the cept agreement was anticompetitive and therefore inconsistent with the treaty of rome , it dismissed iecc's complaint because it believed that european postal administrations corrected the situation by negotiating a new terminal dues agreement . iecc had appealed the decision to the european court of justice at the time of our review . postal service officials said that the service does not consider its agreements with other postal administrations to be postal treaties or conventions that require presidential consent under the 1970 act . accordingly , the postal service implemented the cept agreement notwithstanding the commerce and justice departments' objections . both the cept and canadian agreements will expire in 1996 . the postal service and postal administrations from canada and 19 european countries were working on a successor to the current agreements at the time of our review . according to acca , the postal service has benefited from ( 1 ) its official role as a national postal administration and ( 2 ) its exclusive access to foreign postal administrations through upu , by receiving special treatment from customs services under both united states and foreign laws . acca has also maintained that the postal service has abused its official role at the upu congress , at the expense of private carriers . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . consequently , acca challenged the postal service's representation at the upu congress saying that the service has represented the united states without lawful authority of the president . their comments are discussed on pages 27 to 31 . a upu international agreement , the universal postal convention , sets the basic principles and guidelines for the exchange of letter post mail and to a lesser extent for express mail . other upu agreements and guidelines apply to parcel post and financial services , such as postal money orders . upu , one of the oldest intergovernmental organizations , was founded in 1874 by postal administrations of 22 nations to create a “single postal territory.” in 1995 , 189 countries were upu members .