our approach was threefold . first , we met with top - level aousc officials and were briefed on aousc's oversight and management assistance activities . we also met with managers from aousc program divisions that conducted program reviews and provided assistance to local courts to discuss oversight and management assistance functions and activities . senior aousc management officials attended most of our meetings with managers from aousc's program divisions . we reviewed manuals and other documentation on the operations and responsibilities of aousc's management and program offices and divisions and aousc's assessment and efficiency promotion activities . second , using data maintained by the opa , we identified 376 on - site reviews ( excluding financial audits , judgeship surveys , and other nonprogrammatic reviews ) conducted by selected program divisionsduring fiscal years 1992 through 1994 and requested reports on all of them . however , 244 of the reviews listed either did not result in written reports , were erroneous entries , had reports that aousc could not locate , were duplicate entries in opa's data , were never completed , or had reports that were still in draft form when we requested them . in the end , we reviewed 93 of the 132 written reports available to determine how the process followed in these reviews compared to generally accepted government auditing standards . we used a data collection instrument to systematically collect information from the program review reports , including the office that conducted the review , the person or persons who initiated the review and why , issues addressed , problems noted , efficient and effective practices identified , recommendations made , information available on the implementation of any recommendations , and standards and guidelines used for identifying problems and / or efficient and effective practices . finally , we interviewed judges and court officials from a selection of appellate , district , and bankruptcy courts plus probation offices in a judgmentally selected cross - section of courts of different sizes in three regions of the country — the northeast , midwest , and south . we determined court unit size on the basis of fiscal year 1993 workload . for appellate , district , and bankruptcy courts , we used cases filed ( rounded to the nearest hundred ) as our measure of workload . for probation offices we used the total number of persons under supervision in each probation office ( rounded to the nearest hundred ) . we also interviewed the chairs of four judicial conference committees: the committee on the aousc ( current and former chairs ) , the committee on court administration and case management , the committee on judicial resources , and the budget committee's economy subcommittee ( one of the co - chairs ) . we did our work primarily in washington , d.c. , between october 1994 and march 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . one or more senior aousc officials monitored our discussions with judicial conference committee chairs and most of our meetings with the assistant directors of aousc's program offices ; however , we believe we were able to independently obtain needed information from the chairs and assistant directors . we obtained written comments from aousc on a draft of this report .