i for more details. ) japan and the european union have also invoked wto dispute settlement procedures in response to various aspects of brazil's automotive regime . these consultations were pending as of april 30 , 1999 . in a second dispute , in june 1996 , canada requested consultations with brazil regarding its claim that export subsidies granted by proex , a brazilian government export financing program , to foreign purchasers of brazil's embraer aircraft were inconsistent with the wto's agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures . a single indonesian company was granted pioneer status , and in 1996 it began importing finished national cars from korea , where they were produced by a company that was jointly owned by the indonesian company and a korean firm . in october 1996 , 6 months after indonesia announced the establishment of its national car program , the united states and the european union initiated wto dispute settlement procedures against the program and against the other automotive sector subsidy , the local content tariff exemption . after its financial crisis began and while the wto dispute settlement procedure still was ongoing , indonesia committed to the imf to eliminate the national car program by removing its special tax , customs , and credit privileges . in january 1998 , while the wto dispute was ongoing , indonesia revoked these privileges as a commitment to the imf . indonesia also pledged to the imf to phase out tariff privileges tied to local content levels , although a wto panel had not reached a final decision . in june 1998 , the wto panel issued a final ruling against indonesia , and indonesia was given until july 1999 to eliminate the second subsidy . in january 1999 , the indonesian government announced that it would formulate a new national car policy that would conform to its wto obligations . in addition to the national car program , during 1997-99 the u.s. government has investigated one other indonesian export subsidy under u.s. cvd law . in response to a complaint from a u.s. company regarding extruded rubber thread , on march 26 , 1999 , the commerce department found that the bank of indonesia's rediscount export financing program was a subsidy because , during 1997 under the program , “special” exporters received financing at a lower rate than was available to other firms . however , the commerce department determined that the subsidy provided to the two indonesian producers of extruded rubber thread products in question was not countervailable because the subsidy amounted to less than 3 percent of the value of the products . since 1996 , the united states has not formally raised concerns about thai subsidies in the wto ; however , in the past the u.s. government has found a number of thai subsidies to be countervailable . some of these programs were found to be countervailable with regard to certain apparel , steel pipe and tubing , ball bearings , and pocket lighters , but no cvd order was issued with respect to pocket lighters because the itc did not find material injury to the competing u.s. industry .