ii. ) for each employee , a small business is generally responsible for collecting and remitting several federal taxes with varying frequency stipulations – withholding for employees' personal income tax and the employee's share of fica , the employer's share of fica , and federal unemployment tax ( futa ) . a small business employer must report quarterly the amount of personal income tax withheld and fica taxes paid for employees on form 941 , employer's quarterly federal tax return . the employer must deposit employee income tax and fica taxes withheld and the employer's share of fica taxes by mail or electronically either quarterly , monthly , semiweekly , or the next business day , depending on the employers' tax liability . a large majority of all businesses are small businesses . to illustrate , for tax year 1995 , we used irs data to identify approximately 23.4 million businesses that filed returns . of this population , 94 percent of partnerships reported total assets of less than $5 million , and 98 percent of s corporations reported total assets of less than $5 million . about 97 percent of u.s. corporations reported assets of less than $5 million in 1995 . sole proprietorships accounted for approximately 16.3 million of the nearly 23.4 million business filers in 1995 . to identify the federal filing , reporting , and deposit requirements that apply to small businesses , we examined information such as irs forms , publications , manuals , and related irc provisions . we also interviewed irs officials who were cognizant of small business tax issues , including officials in irs' office of public liaison and small business affairs , compliance research division , appeals division , and the small business / self - employed / supplemental income team . to help ensure completeness , we had knowledgeable irs officials review our listing of irs requirements . to develop a more comprehensive list of federal tax requirements that apply to small businesses , we contacted the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ( atf ) in the department of the treasury for information on requirements pertaining to the excise taxes that it administers . appendix i describes the data limitations we experienced in more detail . we requested comments on a draft of this report from irs . the atf requirements apply generally to any business . each business type has its own primary income tax return , some of which include a set of schedules embedded in the form . for example , the primary corporate income tax return , form 1120 , u.s . corporation income tax return , contains eight embedded schedules . to support their primary income tax return , certain types of businesses and individuals with business income must also attach a mandatory schedule to their return . ( see table 1. ) for example , sole proprietorships must file form 1040 , u.s . individual income tax return , and schedule c , profit or loss from business . as pass - through entities , partnerships and s corporations each have two separate sets of returns – one for the entity and one for its owners .