iii ) . for large system projects , the federal reserve has often taken a systemwide approach to procurement and management . when the federal reserve determined the need for a new generation of currency processing equipment , a single contract was used to purchase all 132 machines from a single vendor . according to the board's division of reserve bank operations and payment systems' ( drbops ) cash manager , this helped ensure a better price compared to prices resulting from the reserve banks' purchasing the machines individually . when the federal reserve determined the need for the federal reserve's data processing and communications to have improved reliability , risk management , and security , among other things , reserve bank and board decisionmakers chose to centralize those operations at three centers rather than continue separate operations at each of the reserve banks . finally , when the office of the inspector general ( oig ) criticized the individual ethics programs at the reserve banks , the federal reserve responded by establishing uniform ethics standards ( the uniform code of conduct ) and standardizing financial disclosure and other ethics - related forms throughout the federal reserve . we have also identified several opportunities for the federal reserve to better control costs and increase efficiencies through increased systemwide management . these include the federal reserve's taking the following steps: review benefits programs at the 12 reserve banks to reduce or eliminate benefits that are not necessary to attract and retain a quality workforce ; manage other benefits — such as health plans — on a cost - effective systemwide basis , utilizing the combined bargaining power of the 12 reserve banks ; standardize travel policies and procedures to eliminate anomalies among the reserve banks that may result in unnecessary expenditures ; and review contracting and procurement practices at the 12 reserve banks to ( 1 ) eliminate practices that could result in excessive costs and ( 2 ) promote and publicize “best practices” that are identified . as more centralized management is instituted , the continuing need for separate management structures at the 12 reserve banks may increasingly be called into question . for example , increasingly uniform reserve bank personnel policies would reduce the need for 12 separate reserve bank personnel departments . similarly , if travel policies are made more consistent , travel may be able to be managed more efficiently on a systemwide basis . the structure of the federal reserve was shaped when the u.s. economy was much more regional in nature . for example , during congressional debate on establishing the reserve banks , a member of congress said that the numbers and locations of the reserve banks should be such that “ . no bank be more than an overnight's train ride from its reserve bank.” today , the increased use of electronic funds and securities transfers make the geographical location of reserve banks irrelevant for many functions . demographics that shaped decisions about the location of reserve banks have also changed profoundly . except for minor boundary changes , the geographical structure of the federal reserve has remained unchanged since 1914 , while the nation's population has shifted dramatically .