the comment period has expired . the following is gao's comment on the august 28 , 1998 , letter from the securities and exchange commission . based on discussions with sec staff to further clarify the intent of our recommendation and the capabilities of sec's planned system enhancements , we revised the text of the report . the report now recognizes that , if implemented as described , sec's planned enhancements to its systems capabilities would be consistent with the intent of our recommendation . the intent of our recommendation was that sec be capable of identifying , across firms , trends in violations found during its broker - dealer examinations that could warrant greater regulatory attention . rosemary healy , senior attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . no further agreements on this point have been reached . in the absence of a rule change , no reporting has occurred and thus no record exists of the movement of unscrupulous securities brokers to banks or unregistered affiliates of banks . completion of crd's modernization ( discussed further below ) will not ensure effective surveillance of the migration of these brokers to banks because banks are not required to report to crd . recommendations in our unscrupulous broker and hotline reports addressed the need to modernize crd to allow regulators to more easily monitor brokers with disciplinary histories and to improve public access to broker disciplinary information , including internet access . although many actions have been taken on these recommendations , including limited internet access , the crd modernization is not yet complete . as previously discussed , crd's original role as the securities industry's centralized licensing and registration system has expanded and now includes numerous other regulatory and disclosure functions . crd's original technology , however , was not able to accommodate this expansion . as a result , nasd began a redesign of crd in 1992 . this redesign has taken longer than expected , partly because of a switch in 1997 to technology that would allow internet access .