( app . v provides a listing of possible uses of taxpayer information received from irs. ) before receiving taxpayer information from irs , agencies are required to provide irs with a detailed safeguard procedures report ( spr ) that describes the procedures established and used by the agency for ensuring the confidentiality of the information received . the spr is a record of how the agency processes the federal taxpayer information and protects it from unauthorized disclosure . they did not respond to this question . under various irc section 6103 subsections , agencies may receive taxpayer information for one of several reasons , such as to administer state tax programs , assist in the enforcement of child support programs , or verify eligibility and benefits for various welfare and public assistance programs ( eg , food stamps or public housing ) . agencies may also receive taxpayer data for use during a criminal investigation , to apprise appropriate officials of criminal activities or emergency circumstances , or to assist in locating fugitives from justice . one of the most common reasons why agencies said they received taxpayer information was their participation in the tax refund offset program . pursuant to the irc , agencies submitted qualifying debts , such as student loans or child support payments , for collection by offsetting the debt against the taxpayer's refund . seventy - five percent of the federal agencies and 15 percent of the state and local agencies in our sample indicated that they received taxpayer information for this purpose . effective january 1 , 1999 , tax refund offset procedures for collecting qualifying debts were modified . the department of the treasury's financial management service was given the responsibility for the federal refund offset program , which was merged into the centralized administrative offset program known as the treasury offset program . this program commingles tax refund information with other federal financial information ( eg , benefit payments , pensions ) . if a match is found when an individual has an outstanding debt and is receiving federal money in any form ( eg , tax refund , pension , or vendor payments ) , the individual is notified that his federal money can be withheld to pay off the debt . the source or sources of any money withheld is not revealed to the agencies , but simply the fact that an offset has been made . this information , then , is no longer identifiable as tax refund information ; thus , it is no longer considered taxpayer information . because of this change to the offset program , several agencies we surveyed indicated that they no longer needed taxpayer information . thirty - four percent of the federal and 3 percent of the state and local agencies in our sample indicated that they are participating in the treasury offset program and that they will no longer need to receive taxpayer information from irs . we asked the agencies we surveyed to indicate how they use taxpayer information .