( see app . i for a list of the federal reserves's detailed firewall conditions. ) the text was modified to include nasd's views on regulation of banks' securities brokerage activities . as nasd indicated , information about the cooperative effort to make securities industry qualification examinations available to the banking industry is now characterized as an ongoing effort rather than a proposal . ranking minority members of congressional committees asked us to determine whether bank examiners check for compliance with retail securities brokerage safeguards and whether sanctions are imposed on banks that breach those safeguards . to accomplish this , we needed to select for evaluation banks whose own employees were involved in the brokerage services offered by the bank . we also set out to describe the nature and extent of retail securities activities conducted by banks . to help meet this request , we mailed questionnaires to a random sample of 2,233 banks . the results of that survey are representative of the entire banking industry . our questionnaire gathered data on the different types of retail securities brokerage services offered and through what arrangements with employees , subsidiaries , affiliates , or third parties the services were being offered . in addition , we included a number of questions on the related subject of bank mutual fund sales programs . the fieldwork for the survey was conducted from february through june of 1994 . we developed the survey frame ( a listing , without duplicates or omissions , of each element in the population of u.s. banks ) from a file containing the june 1993 call report data . this database listed 13,360 banks . after removing international banking associations and new york investment companies ( which we felt were mostly commercial institutions unlikely to have retail brokerage programs ) , our frame contained 11,769 banks . later , we excluded 559 mutual savings banks from the analysis , because they fell outside the scope of our work . our total survey population , or universe , consisted of 11,210 banks . from this frame , we randomly sampled 2,233 banks . we divided the institutions in the frame into 12 strata ( see table viii.1 ) and distributed our sample across those strata so that survey estimates from each stratum would be likely to have sampling errors for the most important questions 5 percent at the 95-percent level of confidence . unless otherwise noted , the survey statistics in this report have sampling errors within that range . of no more than – because we surveyed only one of a large number of possible samples of the bank population to develop the statistics used in this report , each of the estimates made from this sample has a sampling error , which is a measure of the precision with which the estimate approximates the population value . the sampling error is the maximum amount by which estimates derived from our sample could differ from estimates from any other sample of the same size and design and is stated at a certain confidence level , usually 95 percent . this means that if all possible samples were selected , the interval defined by their sampling errors would include the true population value 95 percent of the time .