no effect on fees . unit value changed . quantity understated by 319,200 units . no effect on duties and fees . unit value changed . quantity understated by 3,009,096 units . no effect on duties and fees . unit value changed . quantity overstated by 540,000 units . no effect on duties and fees . unit value changed . legend: n / a = not applicable . unit of measurement: kilogram quota: sugar is under a tariff rate quota and only those countries with a quota can export sugar to the united states . the united states imposes a quantitative sugar quota on over 50 countries , and imports in excess of the quota are subject to a higher duty . we agree with this point . on pages 10 to 11 , we discuss acs procedures for screening each automated entry for unit value anomalies and customs' review of particular entries that fall above or below the census range . our primary concern is customs' use of the data to ensure compliance and to generate accurate trade statistics . in this regard , we recommend that customs determine the feasibility and cost effectiveness of developing narrower unit value ranges for its own use . census also believed clarification was needed in our statement that census may broaden the unit value range when too many transactions fall outside the range . census stated that it does not automatically adjust a range and that the more likely scenario is that adjustments are a reaction to new products entering the trade flow . one of the ways of identifying new products is through groups of transactions falling outside an established range . we have modified the language on page 11 accordingly . our main point is that the ranges are too broad for any practical use of the unit values as a screening device by customs in ensuring compliance and accuracy of transaction data . we are providing copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of commerce , the commissioner of customs , and other interested parties . copies also will be made available to others upon request . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix xiii . if you need additional information or have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 . on october 23 , 1992 , the chairman of the subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means , requested that we conduct a study of unit values of imports and exports . his concerns were based on work in 1990 by two professors from florida international university ( fiu ) , which found significant variations in the unit values of seemingly identical commodities . specifically , the chairman asked us to assess the risk of false pricing of imports and exports as a cover for money laundering , how such schemes were being used , the pervasiveness of the problem , and the federal response needed . on september 14 , 1993 , we briefed the subcommittee on our work to date .