all banks are required to have both . to help ensure that banks are implementing internal controls properly , cb proposed a regulation approved by crb and the minister of economic affairs in 1990 that specifies certain requirements for internal audit systems . cb officials have described this regulation as one of the most important that it enforces . 9.6 trillion . the number of banks in france has remained relatively stable in the last half century — around 400 since 1950 — with a few large banks accounting for the majority of loans and deposits . as of december 31 , 1993 , there were 409 authorized banks in france and 16 banks with their head offices in monaco . the five largest banks held over 63 percent of total bank - only deposits and close to 60 percent of total bank - only loans . ninety - nine of the 425 banks were foreign - owned subsidiaries — of which 3 were in monaco — and 90 were foreign - owned branches — of which 6 were in monaco . eighty - three of the foreign banks in france — 45 subsidiaries and 38 branches — were headquartered in other european union ( eu ) member countries . mutual and cooperative banks are distinguished from banks primarily by their ownership ; they are owned by their members ( depositors ) . they were established to provide credit to their members who belonged to certain categories of businesses or individuals — farmers , for example . mutual and cooperative banks may now conduct all the operations and transactions that banks may , and the largest among them — crédit agricole , which is the largest credit institution in france — are difficult to distinguish from banks . as of december 31 , 1993 , there were 146 mutual or cooperative banks with approximately fr.fr . 2.6 trillion in assets . savings banks and municipal credit banks , with few exceptions , are locally owned , nonprofit institutions . until various reforms were implemented in 1983 and 1984 , the powers of savings banks were restricted to offering passbook savings accounts to depositors and investing their funds in the central savings bank — the centre national des caisses d'epargne et de prévoyance . today they are able to offer more products and services , including mutual funds and checking accounts ; may invest in a wider variety of activities , including cable television , tourism , education , health , and regional planning ; and may lend to corporations . the savings banks — which held about fr.fr . 930 million in assets in 1993 — purposefully consolidated their numbers from 468 in 1984 to 35 , as of december 31 , 1993 , in order to allow savings banks to benefit from certain economies of scale . the bulk of the business of municipal credit banks , of which there were 21 with fr.fr . 15 million in assets as of year - end 1993 , consists of loans granted to the general public .