omb has not approved any of these proposals . in july 1997 , va's office of general counsel issued an opinion that fpi is not a mandatory source for va's purchase of eyeglasses . the opinion concluded that va could procure eyeglasses from the commercial marketplace because 38 u.s.c . 8123 allows va to procure prosthesis devices in a manner the secretary determines proper without regard to any other provision of law and va has defined eyeglasses as a prosthesis device . according to fpi's chief operating officer , fpi did not dispute this decision ; therefore , va may now purchase eyeglasses commercially . fpi officials said that seven va hospitals were still buying eyeglasses from fpi and provided data indicating fpi's on - time delivery for these hospitals , using a 7-day delivery standard , ranged from 71 to 86 percent for the period october 1 , 1997 , through may 21 , 1998 . as discussed earlier , fpi officials said that due dates were often driven by fpi's production lead times . officials from dla , fss , and one of the two offices we contacted in ssa also said that delivery due dates were driven primarily by fpi production capabilities and not agency mission needs . headquarters fss officials pointed out that its general services administration acquisition regulation ( gsar ) specifically states that “contracting officers shall establish delivery schedules based on the lead time required by fpi.” these fss officials said that due dates were set on a case - by - case basis and usually involved working with fpi to reach a mutual agreement . they said that when contracting with fpi and developing due dates , their approach was to weigh heavily on fpi's ability to deliver . one top fss official indicated that from a practical standpoint , it would not make sense to set due dates that fpi factories could not meet . although the headquarters fss officials indicated that fss worked with fpi within its production capabilities , fss / nfc officials viewed the due date setting process with fpi as more problematic . this accounted for most of the difference between the two analyses . second , fpi's analysis included blanket orders , which have regular shipments over an extended period of time . these orders make up about 3 percent of the orders , but they involve a large volume of data . early in our review , we decided to request data only on regular orders , excluding the blanket orders , to minimize the amount of data we were requesting , which ultimately included over 600,000 line items . dla headquarters officials said that the due dates were driven mostly by fpi production capabilities , but they did not view this as a problem . for the most part , these officials said that dla planned its orders well in advance and often stocked extra levels . they said that dla inventory managers and dla's automated systems alerted contracting officers when it was time to make an order to fpi so that future needs would be met . these officials said that there were exceptions to this practice , such as when a critical need arose . in these cases , they negotiated due dates with fpi .