( see fig . the availability of unreduced db plan benefits in fers and csrs for employees retiring at age 55 with 30 years of service is an advantage over most db plans in the private sector because private sector plans usually impose reductions in accrued benefits for employees retiring at age 55 , regardless of their number of years of service . we are not making any recommendations in this report . because social security retirement benefits are available to retirees in fers and the private sector programs at age 62 or older , the relative positions of the federal and private sector programs , in terms of replacement rates , change at age 62 . as agreed with your representatives , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to ( 1 ) the ranking minority members of the senate committees on appropriations and governmental affairs and of the house subcommittee on civil service , ( 2 ) other appropriate congressional committees , ( 3 ) the director of the office of personnel management , ( 4 ) the executive director of the federal retirement thrift investment board , and ( 5 ) other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . major contributors to this report were robert e. shelton , assistant director , and laura g. shumway , senior evaluator . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8676 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . csrs - covered employees may also contribute up to 5 percent of their salaries to the tsp , but the government does not make matching contributions for them . employees in fers and the private sector paid 6.2 percent of their salaries to the social security system ( excluding medicare ) on earnings of up to $65,400 in 1997 . fers - covered employees receive the same social security benefits as private sector employees . for a 30-year career , 20 years are calculated at the highest rate ; while for a 20-year career , only 10 years are calculated at the highest rate . for employees who retire at age 62 or older with 30 years of service , csrs benefits are still smaller than the benefits available from fers and the private sector programs that include both db and dc plans , but the csrs benefits become similar to the benefits available from private sector programs with db or dc plans only . the level at which employees contribute to their dc plans is a significant factor in determining the benefits that are available from fers and the private sector programs that incorporate dc plans . considerably smaller benefits are available from such programs when employees contribute lesser amounts than are necessary to receive maximum employer contributions .