each made a different estimate of the overstatement . a study by bls researchers estimated that problems in measuring consumer spending patterns caused cpi to overstate inflation by 0.1 to 0.2 percent annually . a study by staff of the federal reserve bank of dallas concluded that the cpi overstated inflation by less than 1.0 percent annually , while cbo staff and federal reserve staff studies estimated annual overstatement ranges of 0.2 to 0.8 percent and 0.4 to 1.5 percent , respectively . bls officials emphasized that the authors of each of the four studies consider their estimates to be subject to great uncertainty . the estimates are based , in part , on projecting measurement problems that have been identified for specific components of the cpi to other components that may face similar problems . bls officials noted that in making their estimate , the authors of the federal reserve bank of dallas study warned that “at present we simply do not know” the magnitude of cpi mismeasurement . because of its concern for the accuracy of the cpi , over the years bls has made changes to the cpi's methodology . for example , in the 1980s , bls changed its methodology for measuring changes in cost of shelter . we reviewed four of the most recent of these studies . it switched from measuring the costs associated with purchasing a house to measuring the cost of consuming the services provided by housing . since the cpi is intended to measure consumption , this methodology allows bls to remove the investment aspect of homeownership from the cpi and thus more accurately reflects the cost of shelter in the cpi . more recently , in january 1995 , bls incorporated new estimation techniques intended to further increase the accuracy of the cpi's shelter , food - at - home , and prescription drug components . bls also has taken steps designed to improve its methodologies for measuring the effect of quality on price changes . research had pointed to the possibility that quality - related problems may have resulted in the cpi understating inflation . for example , a 1988 study indicated that measurement problems associated with quality caused the cpi to understate inflation for several large cpi components including housing , new automobiles , and apparel . since this study , bls has changed its methodologies for measuring quality changes for the housing and apparel components of the cpi . in addition , bls has initiated an effort intended to improve the cpi's ability to reflect changes in consumer spending patterns . in late 1994 , bls began a 6-year , $61 million project , part of which is to update the information on the percentage of consumption spending on particular items in the market basket . bls officials told us that when the market basket update is finished , the cpi will be revised to better reflect current consumer spending patterns , which would address one of the measurement problems that tend to cause cpi to overstate inflation . the update is scheduled to be completed by january 1998 .