the bank on which the check is drawn . the last bank in the check - collection process demanding payment from the paying bank . a bank handling a returned check . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . weekends and holidays were excluded from the elapsed times . some of the return dates fell outside of the study week . the 213 such cases in the federal reserve data were included in the analysis , while cases that were outside of the study period were excluded from the michigan bank data . for those return items with return dates falling on a weekend date , the dates were adjusted to have been returned on the next business day because checks cannot be collected or returned on a nonbusiness day , weekend date , or holiday . a voluntary association formed by banks that establishes a meeting place for the exchanging of checks drawn on those banks . any bank except the paying bank handling a check for collection . a bank that holds deposits owned by other banks and performs banking services , such as check collection . the first bank at which a check is deposited . the time between when the check is accepted for payment and when the paying bank deducts the amount of the check from the check writer's account . checks for which the depositary bank and the paying bank are not the same entity . a bank other than the depositary or the paying bank to which a check is transferred in the course of collection . the line at the bottom of a check that identifies the routing number of the paying bank , the amount of the check , the number of the check , and the account number of the customer . the board's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . the board agreed with the facts as stated in our report . in addition , the board provided technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate .