taxes on parcel . completes customs declaration , using shipping documentation , and calculates duties and taxes . to usps for delivery and collection customs broker and inspects for of duties and taxes owed . content admissibility . customs verifies duties and taxes owed on parcel . duties and taxes . usps remits to customs duties and taxes collected from recipient . payment of applicable duties and taxes to customs . parcel to carrier , which delivers parcel to u.s. recipient . in 1996 , we reported to the chairman of the subcommittee on the postal service , house committee on government reform and oversight , the major unresolved issues in the international mail market , including concerns about unfair competition by private carriers . during the summer of 1997 , representatives from the largest u.s. private express carriers expressed concerns to congress about gpl , alleging that usps ( 1 ) received preferential customs treatment , ( 2 ) used its governmental status to negotiate special arrangements with other governments , and ( 3 ) charged shipping rates that did not cover all of its operational and administrative costs for gpl service . in response to these concerns , the chairman of the house subcommittee on the postal service requested that we review several issues related to the competitiveness of the international mail market . to accommodate resource limitations , we agreed to address these issues in a series of reviews . in a separate review , we are examining issues related to the postal service's role and u.s. representation in upu . in a future review , we plan to look at issues related to the postal service's pricing and allocation of costs for its gpl service . to identify whether customs treatment differed for gpl parcels and similar private express parcels , we compared ( 1 ) the customs statutory and regulatory requirements and ( 2 ) the operational practices and processes for importing merchandise through gpl or through private express carriers into each of the three foreign countries . we were assisted in our analysis of the legal requirements in japan by dr . sung yoon cho , assistant chief of the far eastern law division at the library of congress . some of the differences in customs treatment could not be linked to written requirements . rather , officials from the private express carriers , usps , and foreign customs and postal services described them to us as the operational practices and processes that were followed . to obtain detailed information about gpl service to the three countries in our review , we interviewed usps officials responsible for implementing and administering gpl . we met with officials at the u.s. customs service to better understand differences in u.s. customs clearance of postal and commercial shipments . we interviewed government officials at the japan postal bureau and the japan customs bureau in tokyo and osaka , japan ; parcelforce and h.m. customs and excise officials in london ; and revenue canada officials in ottawa to understand the customs clearance processes and requirements in each country . we talked to officials at purolator and pbb global logistics , respectively , which handle delivery and customs clearance of gpl parcels shipped to canada .