they represent wholesale activities . we did not independently verify any of these data . in using call report data to compare u.s. - owned banks and foreign - owned u.s. bank subsidiaries and foreign branches and agencies , it must be noted that the domestic assets and liabilities reported by these entities represent the location of the bank , branch , or agency — not the nationality of the borrower or depositor . for example , domestic loans could represent loans made to foreign - owned companies operating in the united states while foreign loans could represent loans made to the overseas offices of u.s. corporations . to understand the relationship between foreign branches and agencies in the united states and their shell branches , we reviewed the most recent examination report of the 50 largest foreign banks with branches or agencies operating in new york . in 42 of these reports , we found that the branch or agency managed some assets for a shell operation . we also reviewed 19 other examination reports , selected at random , of branches or agencies with offices in new york , which indicated that they also managed some operations for shell branches . to explore the reasons for foreign bank expansion in the united states , the role that foreign banks play in the u.s. economy , and whether u.s. banks face disadvantages in competing against foreign banks in u.s. markets , we interviewed officials at both u.s. banks and branches , agencies , and subsidiaries of foreign banks operating in the united states . because we were able to speak with only a limited number of bankers and other market participants , the results are not generalizable to the entire banking industry . we also reviewed the literature on foreign bank operations in the united states . we did not attempt to assess the benefits to the u.s. economy from foreign bank participation in u.s. markets or to undertake a study of the comparative role and treatment of u.s. banks abroad . we interviewed officials at eight foreign banks operating in the united states . the banks were chosen on a judgmental basis with consideration given to their size , location ( new york city is the most common location of foreign branches and agencies ) , and ability to compete with u.s. banks across a number of product lines . the u.s. operations of these banks reported assets between $2 billion and $47 billion . all of the banks had branches or agencies in the united states and four owned subsidiary banks . the interviews were conducted in either the banks' new york or san francisco offices . all of the banks had operations in more than one state , and six banks had shell branches managed by a u.s. office . to understand how u.s. banks view their competitive position compared with foreign banks , we interviewed officials at six large u.s. banks . these banks were chosen because their size and the extent of their u.s. operations made it likely that they faced competition from foreign banks in some of their markets . each of these banks had over $10 billion in assets and competed with foreign banks in providing loans and services to multinationals and other corporations .