drs . boskin , dulberger , and jorgenson all provided 0.6 percentage point as the lowest point in the plausible range for remaining bias , taking into consideration the seven methodological changes that were already effective as of june 1999 . drs . boskin , dulberger , and gordon all provided 1.2 percentage points as the highest point in the plausible range . figure 2 shows the former members' point and plausible range estimates of remaining cpi bias taking into consideration ( 1 ) the seven methodological changes already effective as of june 1999 ; and ( 2 ) the combination of the seven methodological changes already effective as of june 1999 and the three planned methodological changes . dr. boskin said his estimates reflect his view that the remaining bias is about three - quarters of the 1.1 percentage points bias originally estimated by the commission . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . further , dr. boskin and dr. dulberger stated that they could not estimate how much reduction in bias could be attributed to some of the methodological changes . dr. boskin said that he did not provide a specific estimate when methodological changes likely reduced the bias by less than 0.1 percentage point . in part , to compensate for the reductions they could not provide specific estimates for , dr. boskin's and dr. dulberger's point estimates for the remaining bias in the cpi show a greater amount of bias reduction than the total of the specific estimates they made for individual methodological changes . dr. boskin said that when the boskin commission developed its estimate of bias , it took into account the changes bls had announced it was planning to make . therefore , according to dr. boskin , the 1.1 percentage points estimate should not be reduced as a result of the changes bls had announced but not completed before december 1996 . dr. gordon said that he used estimates published by the president's council of economic advisers as the basis for some of his estimates of bias reduction due to individual methodological changes .