detected ? data detected ? notice ( s ) . ncu proposes revision - seeks agreement from ? ris ? to assess the clarity and usefulness of irs notices , we reviewed 47 individual master file ( imf ) and business master file ( bmf ) notices that irs frequently sends to taxpayers . these notices accounted for about 50 percent of all imf and bmf notices sent to taxpayers in 1993 . as explained in more detail in the objectives , scope , and methodology section of this report , we used a long list of factors to determine whether each notice clearly conveyed the message irs wanted to convey . for example , we reviewed each notice to determine whether ( 1 ) the title of the notice was consistent with the text and ( 2 ) the terminology in the notice was easy to understand and presented in a logical order . we used these factors to judge clarity because irs had not established guidance to determine what constitutes a clear notice . we identified items of concern in 31 of the 47 notices . our concerns take into account the version of the notice currently being sent to taxpayers and , if applicable , the revision proposed by ncu . at the time we did our work , ncu had reviewed 46 of the 47 notices . our concerns include the need for additional guidance , more specific language , clearer references , appropriate terminology , logical presentation of material , sufficient information or detail , and correct and consistent formats . we also identified several imf and bmf notices that could confuse or frustrate taxpayers who may receive several of these notices , instead of a single comprehensive notice , that would summarize the status of their tax accounts . these notices are also identified in this appendix . among the notices we reviewed were several ncu revisions proposed more than a year ago , but not yet implemented at the time we did our work . our positions on these notices mirrored ncu's . our only additional concern was the length of time that had elapsed since ncu's revision was proposed . irs already has efforts underway that should help address some of our concerns . ncu officials generally agreed with our suggestions but typically could not specify if and when our suggestions would be adopted . the delays in implementing notice text revisions , as discussed in the body of this report , often precluded the officials from giving a more precise response . our specific concerns with the imf and bmf notices that we reviewed are noted in this appendix . irs' response immediately follows . also , examples of these notices currently being sent to taxpayers accompany our concerns highlighting the potential problem . in some cases , we raised the same concern with more than one notice . in these instances , we described the concern in relation to a particular notice and mentioned the other notices with comparable problems . type of change: additional guidance and specific language . this notice assumes that to social security association's ( ssa ) records need correction , which may not be true .