480 programs . agricultural commodities typically sold under the title i program are bulk commodities ( i.e. dcc working - level groups met on a biweekly basis to plan and approve the p.l . 480 programs as they operated in each country . no one agency had lead responsibility , and decisions were reached by consensus . dcc members' interests usually reflected the p.l . 480 objective that most closely agreed with their agency's views . in 1990 , we found that , when differences of opinion arose among agencies over the proposed p.l . 480 objectives or policies with respect to a particular country , the dcc decision - making process was cumbersome and time - consuming and would cause delays in the negotiation and signing of a country agreement . the role of the interagency body in managing the p.l . 480 programs changed substantially when the 1990 act assigned usda direct program responsibility for the title i program and aid direct responsibility for titles ii and iii . in february 1991 , dcc was replaced by the food assistance policy council ( fapc ) , which is an interagency body consisting of senior representatives from usda , aid , the state department , and omb . fapc oversees rather than administers the p.l . 480 programs . a presidential executive order established fapc to ( 1 ) ensure policy coordination of the assistance provided under the agricultural trade development act of 1954 ( p.l . 83-480 ) , as amended , and the food for progress act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c . 1736o ) ; ( 2 ) advise the president on appropriate policies under the act ; and ( 3 ) coordinate the decisions on allocations and other policy issues . once actively involved in administrating the p.l . 480 programs , the role of the interagency body , fapc , is now primarily limited to approving the country selection and program allocations proposed by usda and aid . fapc meets annually to review and approve the initial program allocations . midyear changes to the p.l . 480 program allocations are generally made by the responsible agency after consultation with individual member agencies . fapc also serves as the “court of last resort” for interagency disputes that cannot be resolved directly among the agencies involved . since february 1991 , fapc has met about 10 times on an ad hoc basis to respond to a variety of interagency issues . for example , in september 1993 , an fapc meeting was convened to address the impact of potential congressional budget cuts on the p.l . 480 programs and discuss a food aid strategy for countries of the former soviet union . 480 funds , including title i , to serve the most needy countries . ultimately , the amendments required that 75 percent of the title i concessional sales go to countries designated by the united nations as most seriously affected by food shortages . amendments in 1977 shifted the emphasis of the food aid program to promoting the self - sufficiency of recipient countries . recipient governments were encouraged to use proceeds from local sales of title i commodities for agricultural and rural development projects under a revised title iii program .