iv ) . in written comments , the world bank found the draft informative and balanced and described its ongoing initiatives to strengthen financial sectors ( see app . v ) . we also received technical comments on a draft of this report from the treasury , the federal reserve bank of new york , occ , imf , and the world bank . there has been one such action recently . according to a ministry of finance and economy press release in june 1999 , the financial supervisory commission designated a bank as a nonviable financial institution under provisions of the new law . the bank is to be subject to an order , whereby funds are to be sought through the korea deposit insurance corporation and the korea asset management corporation to purchase the bank's nonperforming loans and recapitalize the bank . according to korean documents , additional funding may be needed in the course of selling the bank to a foreign buyer or to add more provisioning as the bank reclassifies its loans . bank supervisors in thailand may be held personally liable for loss to the state without immunity for their job performance under the government enterprise act . this act effectively states that if a supervisor causes loss to a government entity through the course of his work , he / she can be criminally prosecuted . both the issues of losses and application of the law are broadly defined and could potentially be subject to political influence . while bank supervisors want to change this law , many of the legal staff at the bank of thailand opposed the change , reasoning that a supervisor who is properly performing his / her duties would not be subject to liability . according to a world bank official , this issue was still unresolved . progress in fully implementing some of the international standards will take time . the ability to conduct effective onsite examinations is a key component of adherence to the basel core principles . the effectiveness of the examination , in turn , depends on the qualifications of the examiner staff and its experience . in the united states , for instance , while the bank supervisory agencies have extensive formal training programs for examiner staff , they rely heavily on on - the - job training for developing qualified examiners . officials at these agencies said that , as a rule of thumb , it takes about 8 years for an examiner to become fully qualified . while the united states and other governments have provided training and technical assistance to the bank and financial supervisory agencies in indonesia , korea , and thailand , the supervisors in these three countries have not had time to develop an examiner staff with experience operating under the international standards that the countries have recently adopted . while national authorities have the primary authority for addressing banking problems , the united states and other industrial nations have provided assistance to indonesian , korean , and thailand efforts to improve their financial supervisory systems . much of this assistance has been provided through international financial institutions , such as the world bank or imf .