dic is supervised by mof . institutions required to be insured include banks ( city banks , regional banks , trust banks , long - term credit banks , foreign exchange banks ) , shinkin banks , credit cooperatives , and labor banks . agricultural cooperatives , fishery cooperatives , and fishery production cooperatives , due to their special characteristics , are not required to be insured by dic . depositors at these institutions are instead protected under a separate system administered by the savings insurance corporation , established in september 1973 . boj is headed by its governor . the governor is appointed by the cabinet for a term of 5-years and may be reappointed . historically , boj governors have alternated between individuals with mof or boj backgrounds . the governor is the link between the bank's executive board and boj's policy board . the policy board , which is boj's highest decisionmaking body , is the sole decisionmaking body for monetary policy , including decisions on the official discount rate . the policy board was established in 1949 by amendments to the 1942 bank of japan law . the amendments were in response to a desire to modernize the japanese monetary and economic system and to enhance boj's independence . board members include boj's governor and representatives from mof , the economic planning agency , and four individuals with experience in and knowledge of banking , commerce , manufacturing , or agriculture . government representatives from mof and the economic planning agency are nonvoting members . the four “knowledgeable and experienced” members , who are appointed by the cabinet with approval from the diet , serve renewable 4-year terms without restrictions . boj has 13 departments , a secretariat of the policy board , the governor's office , and an institute for monetary and economic studies . in addition to its 33 branches and 12 local offices in japan , boj has overseas offices in new york ; washington , d.c. ; london ; paris ; frankfurt ; and hong kong . bank monitoring is handled by the bank supervision , financial and payment system , and credit and market management departments , according to boj . within boj , the bank supervision department is primarily responsible for monitoring financial institutions . headed by a director , it is divided into two divisions: the bank supervision division and the data analysis division . the former division manages on - site examinations of banks and securities companies through four examination groups . this report presents information on japan . it describes the japanese bank regulatory structure and its key participants , how that structure functions , how banks are supervised in japan , and how participants handle other financial system responsibilities . we are sending copies of this report to members of the house and senate banking committees , other congressional committees and subcommittees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . this report was prepared under the direction of kane a. wong , assistant director , financial institutions and markets issues . if you have any questions , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-8678 . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii .