additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . “the alternatives were discussed at length . alternative a , b , and c were discussed . it was agreed upon that these alternatives will solve the major operating needs of the antelope valley , but will not address all of our needs for delivery and retail facilities . a reassessment of the proposed concept and the requirements for lancaster and palmdale main post offices will be conducted following site selection to ascertain whether the specific site is conducive to delivery or retail activities as a result of its location.” “the existing facilities in lancaster , palmdale , and mojave could not be expanded to provide sufficient space to accommodate the current and projected growth in the antelope valley . continuation of mail processing operations at the mojave mpo will not meet corporate goals for improved delivery times and efficiencies.” however , since the proposed project was revised in 1998 , expansion of the existing mojave facility was one of two alternatives under consideration , along with the preferred alternative to construct a new facility on the service - owned site in lancaster . available documentation did not explain why expansion of the existing mojave facility was not considered viable in 1990 but was considered a viable alternative in 1998 . the problem of inadequate documentation of the service's real estate acquisition decisions is not a new issue . in 1989 , we reviewed the service's real estate acquisition process . at that time , we reviewed a sample of 246 sites purchased during fiscal year 1987 and made recommendations to improve the service's real estate acquisition program . our 1989 report found that the service usually purchased sites that exceeded both its operational needs and advertised size requirements . when alternative sites were available for purchase , the service generally selected the larger , more costly sites without requiring site selection committees to document why less expensive alternative sites were less desirable . the report raised concerns , based on the service's requirements for advertising and purchasing practices , that the service might be spending more than was necessary for land and accumulating an unnecessarily large real estate inventory . the report also recognized that sometimes larger , more costly sites may best meet the service's operational requirements but that justification for such selections should be required when smaller , less costly contending sites were available . in the service's letter dated august 25 , 1989 , responding to a draft of that report , the postmaster general agreed with our recommendation relating to more complete documentation of the selection process . he stated , “the postal service is concerned only with the best value and will make sure that the reasoning behind the determination of best value is more carefully documented in the future.” however , improvement in documentation was not evident in the documentation related to the proposed antelope valley area project , which was prepared soon after our report was issued . we identified inconsistencies in internal postal memorandums related to the required site size and disposition of any excess land .