cep cases . does not apply to issues designated for litigation or for which the taxpayer has or intends to seek competent authority assistance . allows taxpayers whose returns are being examined to request the referral of one or more employment tax issues to appeals . limited to employment tax issues . ( continued ) taxpayers can request an agreement on the factual nature of intercompany transfers , a transfer pricing methodology , and an expected range of results from the methodology . agreement may be applied to prior tax years still in dispute . limited to transfer pricing issues . $5,000 user fee . grants discretionary authority to examination case managers to accept settlement offers where a prior settlement has been negotiated by appeals for the same issue with the same taxpayer , or of another taxpayer who was directly involved in the taxable event . limited to cep . the facts must be substantially similar ; appeals must have settled the subject issue on the merits independent of other issues ; and legal authority must be unchanged . grants authority to examination case managers to accept settlement offers with respect to coordinated issues within the industry and international field assistance specialization programs on which appeals has coordinated issue papers containing settlement guidelines or positions . applies to issues coordinated under the industry and international field assistance specialization programs for which appeals has settlement guidelines . allows district directors , in coordination with other irs functions , to execute closing agreements with cep taxpayers that cover both the tax year under audit and unaudited tax years ending prior to the date of the agreement . limited to cep . not available for issues subject to an apa , issues involving employee plans or exempt organizations or partnership items under tax equity & fiscal responsibility act of 1982 , issues for which resolution would be contrary to an irs position , or issues designated for litigation . tax court rule 124 — in 1990 , the tax court promulgated rule 124 allowing voluntary binding arbitration of factual issues under the direction of the tax court . arbitration has not been seriously considered to resolve disputes between taxpayers and the irs outside of docketed tax court status . although no specific tax court mechanism for the use of mediation has been developed , mediation can be used by the parties to resolve a tax court case under existing tax court authority . taxpayers may request simultaneous appeals / competent authority procedures in four situations: after examination has proposed an adjustment , after the taxpayer files a protest against the adjustment , after the dispute goes to appeals , and after a competent authority request has been made . environmental cleanup costs — irs is developing a revenue procedure that will provide special procedures for requesting written guidance on the tax treatment of environmental cleanup costs incurred over several years . the procedures will attempt to facilitate resolution of issues involving the capitalization or deduction of such cleanup costs for prior and future years of a single environmental cleanup transaction .