( see p . we recognize that without explicit legislation , treasury has no authority to hold ncb to the conditions of any plan . we modified the text as appropriate . we modified the text to clarify our position , with which fca agrees , that it is appropriate for fca to evaluate ncb's compliance with a treasury - approved plan for ncb's repayment of treasury debt . the following are gao's comments on the treasury's december 23 , 1994 , letter . our draft report noted our agreement with treasury's position that under present law treasury is not obligated to ensure ncb has and follows an acceptable repayment plan . we added treasury's reiteration of this point on page 24 . we did not suggest in our draft report that treasury challenge ncb's current policy not to sell class b stock . our draft noted treasury's finding that the ncb policy is not inconsistent with the act , and we did not take issue with this position . ( see pp . treasury proposed that it likewise could not challenge ncb if it decided to deviate from its class a note repayment plan in the future . we do not disagree with treasury , and we again note our recommendation that congress give treasury authority to approve and , through fca , monitor a repayment plan . our draft report noted that treasury was monitoring the interest payments and renewal of ncb's class a notes . ( see p . we clarified treasury's position regarding its treatment of ncb , or other borrowers who might fail to pay principal owed when due , by adding the additional information provided . ( see pp . rosemary healy , senior attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . we analyzed the statutory provisions applicable to safety and soundness . we reviewed fca's examination reports and related documents on ncb for 1990 through 1994 to determine the key safety and soundness and other issues fca assessed . we also analyzed the deficiencies or problems examiners identified . we reviewed fca , ncb , and other organizations' relevant documents to determine ncb's responses to fca's findings .