additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . dottie self was the key contributor to this report . j. christopher mihm associate director , federal management and workforce issues the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . verification and validation can include assessing the quality of existing performance data . assessments of data quality are of little value unless agencies are responding to identified data limitations . building quality into the development of performance data may help prevent future errors and minimize the need to continually fix existing data . these approaches can help agencies improve the quality , usefulness , and credibility of performance information . however , as noted earlier , making stakeholders aware of significant data limitations allows them to judge the data's credibility for their intended use and to use the data in appropriate ways . obtaining more credible results - oriented performance information is essential for agencies to plan their efforts and gauge progress toward the achievement of their goals . hhs has substantially strengthened its emphasis on determining whether head start has achieved its purpose . in part in response to the direction of congress , hhs has new initiatives that will , in the next few years , provide information not previously available on outcomes , such as gains made by children and their families while in the program . in addition , the program is currently designing an impact study to assess whether children and their families would have achieved these gains without participating in head start . congress has required that hhs submit a final report on the impact of the head start program by september 30 , 2003 . the long - standing inability of many federal agencies to accurately record and report financial management data on both a year - end and an ongoing basis for decisionmaking and oversight purposes continues to be a serious weakness . without reliable data on costs , decisionmakers cannot effectively evaluate programs' financial performance or control and reduce costs . under the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act , agencies are expected to develop and deploy modern financial management systems and to routinely produce sound cost and operating performance information , among other things .