the lenders sell the hltv loans to the pool . under current accounting rules , any such profits must be immediately recognized on those sales where certain equity interests are maintained by the seller as part of the deal and recorded as an asset . the estimated fair value of the asset is added to sales proceeds when calculating profit . officials representing securities firms also noted several ways in which the lenders would retain some risk . first of all , some hltv loans were not securitized and were held on the lenders' books . the officials we talked with estimated that 5 percent of the hltv loans were not securitized , but there is no way to reliably know how many loans were not securitized or to identify their value . in addition , even when the hltv loans were securitized ( about 95 percent ) , the officials said the lenders often retained a stake in the retained assets pools . the lender might hold a class of securities that was designed to absorb credit risk to protect investors , for example . by taking on the credit risk with these securities , the lender provides an internal credit enhancement to the other investors in the pool . in addition , by absorbing these credit risks , the lender may protect the pool and its reputation as a securitizer from the consequences of securities that do not perform . in cases where the seller retains an equity interest as part of the securitization , the retained asset carries risk for the lender because the value of the asset is based on assumptions about the future performance of the loans sold and assumptions about future cash flows . if these assumptions do not hold and the value of the retained asset decreases , previously recognized accrued income will not be realized in cash . several classes of securities were created from each pool of hltv loans and sold to investors . different securities classes offered different mixes of expected returns , credit risk , and interest rate risk ( the risk that cash flows will vary as interest rates change in the future ) to investors . in general , classes with higher risks were designed to pay higher expected returns . although it is difficult to identify investors of hltv lending pools because of a lack of data , officials from a securities firm told us that investors were mainly large insurance companies . to protect investors , securitization redistributes credit risks so that one class of securities is designed to absorb all or much of the credit risk in return for a higher expected return . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . other institutions were affiliated with depository institutions . their minimal benefits , however , might have included service fee income from any hltv loans that banks originated and sold .