no wec . in general , totally disabled beneficiaries who have little or no reemployment potential . these beneficiaries receive unreduced workers' compensation benefits . wec undetermined . beneficiaries with temporary total disabilities who also receive unreduced workers' compensation benefits . labor's procedures call for it to review the status of these cases once a year . wec established . beneficiaries who received reduced compensation benefits because they were partially disabled and either were working or had the ability to work . compensation benefits are determined by a formula that takes actual or potential earnings into consideration . we obtained information on 30,057 beneficiaries on the long - term rolls who either did not have a wec or had an undetermined wec and whose last two benefit payment checks for the 1997 chargeback year were for the same amount . we selected cases in which the last two checks were the same to eliminate cases in which beneficiaries received either lump - sum payments or payments for only a portion of the 4-week period normally covered by a payment . for our analyses , we excluded feca beneficiaries who ( 1 ) were expected to receive benefits for relatively short periods before returning to work ; ( 2 ) received schedule awards ; ( 3 ) had established wecs ; ( 4 ) lived overseas ; or ( 5 ) received feca benefits that were less than the minimum authorized under feca because they were part - time or nonfederal employees ( eg , civil air patrol ) . in many cases , the calculation of take - home pay replacement rates required the computation of individual states' income taxes . to limit the number of states for which we needed to make these calculations , we limited our replacement rate analyses to about 75 percent of the 30,057 beneficiaries selected . we chose states where the largest number of these beneficiaries resided as of june 1997 , until we had selected enough states — 19 — to include about 75 percent of beneficiaries . we then developed replacement rate information for 23,257 beneficiaries ( 77 percent ) , who resided in 19 states , 4 of which did not have an income tax . beneficiaries' actual pay at the time of injury could not be efficiently determined because this information is only available from beneficiaries' case files located in owcp's district offices . we therefore made several calculations to estimate the current value of beneficiaries' take - home pay . first , we recomputed beneficiaries' workers' compensation benefits to reflect benefits received at the time of injury by reducing their june 1997 benefits by the amount of periodic cost - of - living allowances they received . second , based on this recomputation of benefits received at the time of injury and whether they had at least one dependent as of june 1997 , we calculated employees' pay before their injury based on either the 66-2 / 3 or 75 percent benefit level . third , by increasing employees' pay at the time of injury by average federal pay comparability increases authorized since then , we calculated the current value of beneficiaries' pay at the time of injury .