scope changed . scheduled for restudy . retained in - house . post - meo review of performance showed the activity to be 0.5% above the adjusted meo estimate . retained in - house . the activity is exempt from post - meo review because it is remote and uneconomical to study . scope changed . scheduled for restudy . converted to a cfm contract . retained in - house . post - meo review of performance showed the activity to be 3.2% above the adjusted meo estimate . ( continued ) retained in - house . post - meo review of performance showed the activity to be 1.6% above the adjusted meo estimate . retained in - house . the activity is exempt from post - meo review . retained in - house . post - meo review of performance showed the activity to be 1.7% below the adjusted meo estimate . failed post - meo review ( over 25% above the adjusted meo estimate ) . retained in - house but was combined in a full service group for w. washington . the post - meo review for the combined activity found it to be operating at 7.1% below the adjusted meo estimate . retained in - house . post - meo review of performance showed the activity to be 7.1% above the adjusted meo estimate . washington , d.c . retained in - house but reconfigured . responsibility for managing almost all of the facilities covered by the original activity was delegated to other federal agencies . table iii.2: sample activities not retained in - house after original review ( 33 ) the activity remained contracted out , but the active contract added janitorial services at the federal building - agency motor pool to the original activity covering the courthouse - customhouse . the activity remained contracted out . the activity remained contracted out . the activity remained contracted out but became part of a cfm contract covering the federal building and courthouse , federal building / courthouse annex , and parking garage . ( continued ) the activity remained contracted out but became part of a cfm contract . the cfm contract covered facilities management at the knoxville , athens , wartburg , chattanooga , kingston , and jacksboro , tennessee federal buildings . the services included were operations and mechanical maintenance , elevator maintenance , maintenance repair , architectural and structural , janitorial , utilities , and protection . the activity remained contracted out . the active contract also included services for corbin , ky . the activity remained contracted out . the active contract resulted from resolicitation after previous contract options were not exercised due to unsatisfactory performance . the activity remained contracted out but had been combined with other activities handled out of the local field office . the contractor defaulted , and the activity was brought back in - house ( jan. 1992 ) . gsa reviewed the activity and determined it would be beneficial to return the activity in - house ( feb. 1989 ) . the activity was abolished for economic reasons . the activity had been combined with another activity in greenville .