the duty is not absolute , however . where a defendant intentionally misrepresents facts concerning the potential for a year 2000 failure in the “device or system used or sold by the defendant” that caused plaintiff's harm , the plaintiff will be relieved from this statutory mitigation duty . depending upon the effects of the settlement incentives and litigation - related limitations contained in the y2k act , insurance liability exposure could be less than would be the case if liabilities for year 2000 actions were determined under less limiting state laws . these categories are discussed in the following sections . state responses indicated that 17 percent of their domiciled insurance companies were not year 2000 ready by september 30 but were projected to be ready by december 31 . these companies missed naic's milestone calling for all mission - critical systems to be year 2000 ready by june 30 , 1999 . states estimated that on average , 84 percent of the companies progressing toward becoming year 2000 ready by december 31 were considered to be making satisfactory progress in their contingency planning efforts , which suggests that the remaining companies were not making adequate progress . this lack of adequate progress is of particular concern for companies that may be fully preoccupied with remediating their mission - critical systems during the last quarter of the year , leaving them little time to attend to their contingency plans . these companies would also have an increased likelihood of a system failure if any of their compliant mission - critical systems happen to be integrated with less critical systems that have not been fully remediated . one purpose of the pleading requirements is to reduce the potential for frivolous claims by requiring the plaintiff in a year 2000 action to articulate certain bases for the claim and remedy . provisions of the act for preserving warranties and contracts also are intended to discourage frivolous lawsuits . as previously discussed , the act generally requires that all written contract terms , including exclusions of liability and disclaimers of warranty , are to be strictly enforced unless those terms are contrary to any applicable state statute in effect as of january 1 , 1999 . the y2k act limits liability exposure and damages . this duty to mitigate is in addition to any such duty imposed under state law . viable contingency plans are especially important for larger companies that may have complex systems that were not projected to be year 2000 ready until the end of the year . survey responses indicated that while 887 , or 83 percent , of the companies not ready by september 30 , but projected to be year 2000 ready by december 31 , were small , the remaining 188 companies each wrote $100 million or more in net premiums nationwide , as shown in table 3 . the states indicated that as of september 30 they lacked sufficient information to determine the year 2000 readiness of 4 percent of their domiciled insurance companies . specifically , 14 states placed 235 companies in this category .