additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . audits initiated against known taxpayers who did not file a return with irs . over 25 other audit sources , such as referrals from other irs divisions , which were not one of the 10 largest sources during the period of our review . manually selected returns for audit that do not result from other specified audit sources . returns identified for audit due to questionable tax practitioners . returns involving self - employment tax issues initiated by irs service center examination staff . total income , such as wages and interest , reported on a tax return prior to any deductions or adjustments . we collected information on the overall annual audit rates by type of taxpayer . we also collected information on the number of returns filed and the number of returns audited each year by irs' regions and by the district offices within those regions . we reviewed this information to identify irs' overall published audit rates for fiscal years 1988 through 1995 , which included a combination of district office audits and service center contacts . to show what the overall rates would have been based solely on traditional district office audits , we recalculated these rates excluding service center contacts . we also used this information to calculate regional audit rates , both including and excluding service center contacts , as well as audit rates for each district office . to determine the specific results of irs' audit efforts for fiscal years 1992 through 1994 , we analyzed irs audit information management system ( aims ) data . related returns from prior or subsequent years for the same taxpayer identified during the audit of a dif - source return . related returns identified during an audit of a dif - source return , other than returns from prior or subsequent years . related returns from prior or subsequent years for the same taxpayer , when the initial source was other than a dif - source return . returns identified through service center projects initiated by the irs national office . returns identified from various state sources , generally under exchange agreements between the irs and the states . related returns of partners , grantors , beneficiaries , and shareholders identified during audits of either partnerships , fiduciaries , or subchapter s corporations involving potential tax shelter issues . returns involving refundable credits and dependency exemptions , such as the earned income credit , initiated by service center examination staff . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .