( see app . i for a listing of categories of issues ) . this report discusses our assessment . one fundamental question that cannot be answered is the number of individual employees who have filed complaints . eeoc does not collect data on the number of employees who file complaints , nor on how often individual employees file complaints . these numbers would be crucial to an analysis of the extent to which the increase in the number of complaints in the 1990s ( see p. 1 ) was due to individuals filing first - time complaints or included individuals who had filed other complaints in the past . without data on the number of complainants and the frequency of their complaints , decisionmakers do not have a clear picture of the nature and extent of alleged discrimination in the workplace and the actions that may be necessary to deal with these allegations . for example , a number of factors indicate that the increase in the number of discrimination complaints does not necessarily signify an equivalent increase in the actual number of individuals filing complainants . first , an undetermined number of federal employees have filed multiple complaints . according to eeoc and postal service officials and representatives of the council of eeo and civil rights executives , while they could not readily provide figures , they said it has been their experience that a small number of employees — often referred to as “repeat filers” — account for a disproportionate share of complaints . additionally , an eeoc workgroup that reviewed the federal employee discrimination complaint process reported that the number of cases in the system was “swollen” by employees filing “spin - off complaints” — new complaints challenging the processing of existing complaints . further , the work group found that the number of complaints was “unnecessarily multiplied” by agencies fragmenting some claims involving a number of different allegations by the same employee into separate complaints rather than consolidating these claims into one complaint . in addition , there has been an increase in the number of complaints alleging reprisal , which , for the most part , involve claims of retaliation by employees who have previously participated in the complaint process . questions about the prevalence of bases and issues in the universe of complaints are not answerable because of the manner in which eeoc collects these data . accurate answers to such questions are necessary to help decisionmakers and program managers discern trends in workplace conflicts , understand the sources of conflict , and plan corrective actions . these data could give managers a clearer picture of the extent to which particular groups of employees may feel aggrieved and the conditions or events that trigger their complaints . for example , managers would be able to better discern trends in the numbers of black employees alleging racial discrimination and the issues they have raised most frequently . eeoc prescribes a format for agencies to report complaint bases and issues data ( see app . the form is a matrix that , according to eeoc instructions , requires agencies to associate the basis or bases of an individual complaint with the issue or issues raised in that complaint .