incomplete files . in some cases , the case files did not document important information , such as dates , transmittal memorandums , and final case dispositions . in one instance , the case file consisted of a single e - mail message . the case was serious enough to warrant suspending the individual . noncompliance with procedures . in several instances , field staff imposed discipline before the deputy commissioner had concurred with the proposed action . several files contained memorandums to the field staff , reminding them not to impose discipline or close a case until the deputy commissioner had indicated his approval . further , as mentioned in appendix iii , a premature disposition occurred in one of our case studies . according to two 1998 irs internal studies , outdated procedures led to inefficient case handling and confusion as to who was responsible for what . because of regional and district consolidations and a national office restructuring , the written , 1994 case - handling procedures no longer accurately depicted the proper flow of cases . although procedures were informally adjusted and work kept moving , it was not efficient . as a result , ad hoc procedures were developed in each region , leading to communication problems between the regions and the national office . irs recognized this problem in march 1998 and completed a draft of new case procedures in july 1998 . during that time , the internal revenue service reform and restructuring act of 1998 established the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) , and procedures were again revised to accurately depict tigta's role . according to irs officials , draft procedures were sent to irs field offices for comment in mid - march 1999 . another factor contributing to case - processing delays was internal disagreement surrounding the proper level of discipline to impose in particular cases . in our case studies , we noted instances in which internal disputes significantly lengthened case - processing times . oes officials told us that this situation occurred much more frequently in the past . however , over the past few years , irs has made a concerted effort to resolve disputes below the deputy commissioner level . as shown in table 6 , in the cases involving executives c and d , disagreements were serious . in fact , they warranted formal statements of differences . in each of these two cases , oes endorsed a stronger level of discipline than that suggested by the recommending official . as of march 1999 , an irs disciplinary review team was proposing changes to overcome problems with complaints processing . one of the units of its proposed commissioner's review group was to provide labor relations support for ses and other cases . this unit would have 11 employees . in addition , the commissioner's review group would have a contractor available to supplement it and support field investigations when management believed help was needed . as previously mentioned , the group would also be responsible for overcoming communication and coordination problems among complaint - processing systems . irs did not comprehensively collect and analyze information on reprisals against irs employee whistleblowers or on irs retaliation against taxpayers .