section 127 . job ? work ? our objectives were to provide information about ( 1 ) employer - provided educational assistance , including the characteristics of employers providing educational assistance and employees eligible for and receiving it , and ( 2 ) other tax provisions related to employer - provided educational assistance and how they differ from section 127 . to achieve the first objective , we identified and obtained relevant data . we did this by contacting the irs , searching the internet to identify relevant organizations and research , and contacting various associations . because no one source of information provided comprehensive data , we used available data from a variety of sources . we relied primarily on data from form 5500 and schedule f , provided to us by irs , and data from npsas to develop our profile of employers and employees . we also used information about the eligibility of employees for educational assistance from bls reports on employee benefits . the irs data consisted of information about employers providing educational assistance and employees eligible for and receiving section 127 assistance . employers reported this information to irs on form 5500 and its schedule f for 1992 through 1994 . irs provided us with a database of these employer returns for 1992 and 1993 , and for 1994 returns filed with irs through may 31 , 1996 , which irs officials told us represented 90 percent of the data it expects to receive from employers for 1994 . we used these data to develop information about employer characteristics , such as how many programs employers have that offered educational assistance and employer size . npsas data consisted of information about postsecondary student aid , including section 127 assistance , from postsecondary students , their parents , and educational institutions . the department of education's national center for education statistics ( nces ) conducted this national study for the academic year 1992 to 1993 and compiled the results in the npsas database . we obtained the npsas database from the nces and used the data primarily to develop information on characteristics of employees , such as their level and type of education . the bls reports contained estimated data about employee eligibility for educational assistance . this information was collected by bls as part of its surveys on employee benefits in small , medium , and large private establishments . these reports were done over a 2-year period: the survey of employee benefits in medium and large private establishments covered 1993 , and the survey of employee benefits in small private establishments covered 1994 . we did not verify the validity or reliability of the data collected by irs or the other agency study sponsors . because of the series of expirations and extensions of section 127 , some employers may not have filed form 5500 and schedule f with irs as required . further , not all employers who filed provided all required data on form 5500 and schedule f. for example , of the employer returns that reported providing educational assistance , 65 percent reported the amount of assistance in 1992 ; 74 percent , in 1993 ; and 80 percent , in 1994 .