app . the definition does not cover committees that are established solely to advise the congress . however , a committee can be established in the interest of advising the president or the executive branch , and thus subject to faca , even though part of the purpose of the committee is to report to the congress . after we discussed this issue with ngisc staff , the chair told us that the ngisc does not plan to pay for this employee's relocation costs to washington , d.c. , or for any employee relocation costs in the future . were ngisc employees allowed to work at a location other than the ngisc office ? you asked us to determine whether the current ngisc executive director was allowed to work at a location other than the ngisc office and if he actually worked the hours as scheduled . in response to a request dated november 21 , 1997 , from ngisc's administrative officer , the current executive director completed a work schedule of his 40-hour workweek when he was serving as the research director . the work schedule indicated that he planned to work 3 hours at his home on fridays and 4 hours on the train ( commuting between washington , d.c. and richmond , va ) per day on mondays and tuesdays . the current executive director told us that while he served as research director between october 1997 and february 1998 , he often charged official work time for work he had done at these alternate locations as provided for on his work schedule . he also said that his supervisor was aware that he was working at alternate work locations and had not raised any objections . further , he maintained time sheets indicating the number of hours he worked every 2 weeks . these time sheets showed that he accounted for at least 80 hours and that he often worked more than 80 hours every 2 weeks . his time sheets from october 1997 through february 1998 sometimes identified the number of work hours being charged for work at his residence and on the train . he also provided a record of the tasks he performed at the locations other than ngisc's office . according to ngisc's current executive director , his predecessor authorized ngisc's former deputy director to begin working on a full - time basis at a location other than ngisc's office starting in the later stages of her pregnancy . according to the ngisc's administrative officer , the former deputy director was employed by ngisc between november 1997 and january 1999 and reported first to the previous executive director and subsequently to the current executive director . the administrative officer said there was no written work schedule for the former deputy director approved by a supervisor , which showed the number of hours she was scheduled to work at home . according to the current executive director , the former deputy director began working at her home on a full - time basis in october 1998 , but she discontinued this arrangement after her first week because she went on maternity leave .