( see app . i for a copy of irs' letter. ) irs said that it generally agreed with the issues raised in our report and is taking the necessary steps to correct them . irs also amplified on its business contingency plan testing process and clarified some facts and provided updated information , which we included in the report where appropriate . the plans were to be tested to identify any needed changes . the two plans that we reviewed were tested on july 8 and 9 , 1999 , respectively . the refund plan and the paper submissions plan were inconsistent and incomplete in two key areas of irs' guidance . these areas were performance goals and mitigating actions . these weaknesses raise questions about whether these two plans provide sufficient assurance that irs has taken all the necessary steps to reduce the impact of a potential year 2000 failure . irs officials agreed to make changes to these two plans to improve their consistency and completeness in these areas . in addition , irs officials said they have taken steps to help ensure the consistency and completeness of other business contingency plans and make changes to those plans if necessary . irs does not have viable , alternative backup systems for the various information systems used for processing tax returns . further , irs' refund plan acknowledges that in the event that one or more of these systems fail , irs may experience “a major work stoppage,” depending on how long the failure continues . given the lack of automated alternatives , the refund plan calls for ( 1 ) notifying the public and ( 2 ) reverting to manual issuance of refunds — a process that irs currently uses for certain types of taxpayers ( eg , those receiving a refund of more than $1 million or those with a specific hardship ) . although this business contingency plan includes a specific performance goal as required by irs' guidance , that goal is inconsistent with the recommended contingency actions . specifically , the plan's performance goal calls for issuing 20 percent of the normal refund volume , using a $5,000 minimum as the threshold for manual issuance . however , the plan's contingency procedures call for instituting a manual operation that would give priority to processing refunds for 1040ez returns . for example , if irs is trying to reduce the potential for incurring increased interest costs on late refunds , high - dollar refunds should be targeted regardless of the type of return.however , if irs is trying to expedite tax refunds for those taxpayers who may have the greatest financial need , a performance goal that focuses on issuing refunds of $5,000 or more may not be appropriate . in our june 1999 meeting with irs officials , we pointed out this inconsistency , and they agreed that they needed to change the plan's performance goal . in our meeting , the executive that was responsible for this plan said the plan's performance goal should focus on issuing refunds to certain “hardship” taxpayers .