some are never paid . eft was available , but not used extensively , in mdor's installment agreement program before the july 1995 requirement was implemented . the program's default rate was then about 50 percent . since the requirement was implemented , most of the state's taxpayers with installment agreements have used eft , and according to mdor officials , the default rate for eft installment agreements dropped to between 3 and 5 percent . the california ftb's overall installment agreement default rate also decreased sharply after eft use was promoted . officials told us that before eft was available , the default rate for installment agreements was about 40 percent . as of october 1997 , about 6 months after ftb implemented its eft procedures , the default rate for new eft agreements was about 5 percent . ftb officials told us that although their eft procedures had only been in effect for a relatively short time , they expect their default rate to continue to remain lower than before eft use . recurring eft payments are generally set up to be made on a specific day of the month , which reduces some of the problems related to non - eft arrangements , such as taxpayers' forgetting to send in their payments or sending in the wrong amount . officials in both states said that , because these problems were reduced , some of the amounts owed were received sooner and without the need for follow - up collection actions , such as letters , telephone calls , liens , levies , or seizures . officials in both states also said that they experienced increased collections from installment agreements after changing their programs to promote eft . collections increased if payments made through eft would not have otherwise been made . however , the states had not measured the dollar amounts that directly related to changing their programs . also , they found it difficult to determine if other effects , such as economic conditions , were a factor ; and in california , the program was less than a year old when we completed our field work . the officials from both states told us , however , that they had not made any other changes to their installment agreement programs that would account for the increased collections . in discussing the benefits of eft with officials in california and minnesota , we were told that eft use reduced the administrative costs of their installment agreement programs . officials in both states said that the greater use of eft has reduced the amount of paper processing and mailing costs related to their installment agreement programs . additional administrative cost savings have occurred because fewer resources were needed to follow up on defaulted agreements . administrative cost savings from eft stem from not having to process and handle paper relating to the financial transactions . with eft , much of the personnel costs used to generate and process documents and the mailing costs generally associated with paper financial transactions can be reduced or eliminated .