employee listens to the taxpayer . we also documented additional comments about an employee's interaction with the taxpayer such as ( 1 ) the employee is firm with or demands payment from the taxpayer and ( 2 ) the employee sets time frames or limits for the taxpayer . the critical job elements are different for revenue agents , tax auditors , and revenue officers . in order to discuss the narrative comments for all three employee types together , we grouped the critical job elements for each employee type into five skill groups , as shown in table iv.1 . irs examination and collection officials agreed with our grouping of the job elements into those skill groups . tables iv.2 through iv.12 present the results of our analysis of narrative comments made by supervisors in our sample of enforcement employees . we analyzed two evaluations for each employee . in table iv.3 and table iv.4 , we combined the data from the two evaluations into one record for each employee . note 1: confidence intervals are bracketed . this appendix provides examples of written comments by supervisors from evaluations of the enforcement employees reviewed for this report . the comments are grouped in two categories: ( 1 ) comments on revenue production and efficiency that reflect irs' old mission statement and ( 2 ) comments on customer service behaviors that reflect irs' new mission statement . at the beginning of each excerpt from an employee evaluation , we note which of the critical job elements the statements are from . “time spent , both in terms of hours applied and months in process , was on the high end of an acceptable range . decisions need to be made in a more timely manner and weighed against the ultimate tax potential of the issues being developed.” “you do not hesitate to use the full array of collection tools to resolve a case or move it along . summonses , prompt assessments , levies , and seizures have all been frequently used with great success throughout the rating period . your success in that regard is referenced above . during the selection of cases for one entity review it was noted that 84% of your inventory was less than 5 months old . on another it was noted that only 4 of your cases had been assigned for longer than six months.” while this discussion of the employee's performance may be appropriate , it was not balanced with statements indicating the employee considered the taxpayer's circumstances when setting deadlines and taking follow - up actions . although the employee's actions from the perspective of revenue production and efficiency may warrant discussion , given irs' new mission statement , these comments logically would need to be balanced with comments on the employee's action from the perspective of customer service . appendix v contains examples on how supervisor comments can reflect the old versus new mission statements . the current irs evaluation process contains four features that provide supervisors with opportunities to reinforce the customer service orientation reflected in irs' new mission statement .