conagra , inc. n.p . ferruzzi finanziaria , s.p.a. n.p . boro hall international , ltd. n.p . what will be the impact on countries that do not subsidize their agricultural exports ? what is the cost of the proposal compared to the expected benefits ? fas recently changed the emphasis in its review of eep proposals from furthering trade policy negotiations to market development . according to fas , the implementing legislation for the gatt uruguay round agreement made furthering trade policy negotiations with competitor nations less significant . if fas recommends approving the proposal , the proposal must then be approved by the department of agriculture's under secretary for farm and international trade services and by the interagency trade policy review group . the group includes representatives from agencies with an interest in foreign trade issues . once a proposal is approved , fas issues invitations for bids specifying the targeted country or countries , the commodity , the maximum quantity of the commodity eligible for a bonus , the eligible buyers , and the other terms and conditions of the sale . exporters can then bid for an eep bonus award . first , exporters must negotiate a sales price with an eligible buyer in the target country . after determining what bonus amount is needed to close the gap between the going price for the commodity in the targeted country ( world price ) and the u.s. price , the competing exporters then submit this information to fas as bids . next , fas reviews the bids to determine if the price and bonus amounts are within fas' acceptable ranges . fas calculates the prevailing price for the commodity in the target market using various information sources . fas rejects bids proposing prices that undercut the world price it calculated for the commodity as well as those proposing bonus amounts that exceed the difference between the world price and the u.s. market price . fas then awards bonuses starting with the lowest bonus amount requested per unit of the commodity and proceeds to the next highest bonus amount until the quantity of the commodity eligible for eep bonuses is exhausted . to assess whether providing eep bonuses to foreign - owned exporters is consistent with program goals and objectives , we researched the legislative and regulatory history of the program to identify ( 1 ) the objectives of the program and ( 2 ) the intended role of exporters in the program . we also interviewed fas headquarters officials to discuss those issues and whether changes to eep contained in legislation recently passed by congress would alter the role of exporters in the program . to assess whether restricting foreign - owned exporters from participation would adversely affect eep , we obtained and analyzed fiscal year 1992 fas data on eep bids and awards for eight commodities . fiscal year 1992 data were used because they were the most current and complete fiscal year data available at the start of our review . we also obtained and analyzed data from fas on exporters participating in the program from may 1985 to may 1994 . we did not verify the accuracy of data obtained from fas .