all records must be viewed by the supervisor . the supervisor must approve the record , and the record must be linked to supporting documentation , such as a memorandum of information received . according to the tecs user manual , tecs users can modify and delete records that they own , and on the basis of the record update level in their user profile record , may modify and delete the records of other users as follows: if the users are supervisors or scos with the proper record update level ( three or five ) , they may modify and delete the records owned by users in their supervisory or sco chain . if the users' record update level ( two , four , or five ) allows , they may modify and delete the records created or owned by other users in a specific customs sublocation , such as a port of entry . no other controls or restrictions are written in the tecs user manual or any other document that we reviewed . the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 required , among other items , that we establish internal control standards that agencies are required to follow ( see 31 u.s.c . the resulting comptroller general's standards for internal controls in the federal government contain the criteria we used to assess customs' controls over the deletion of lookout records from tecs . during our review , we identified three areas of control weakness: separation of duties , documentation of transactions , and supervision . the comptroller general's internal control standards require that key duties and responsibilities in authorizing , processing , recording , and reviewing transactions should be separated among individuals . to reduce the risk of error , waste , or wrongful acts or to reduce the risk of their going undetected , no one individual should control all key aspects of a transaction or event . rather , duties and responsibilities should be assigned systematically to a number of different individuals to ensure that effective checks and balances exist . key duties include authorizing , approving , and recording transactions and reviewing or auditing transactions . customs' current policy authorizes a wide variety of people within and outside of an individual's supervisory and sco chain to individually delete the records that another individual owns without any checks and balances ( eg , concurrence by another person ) . this situation increases risk because , as one sco that we interviewed told us , the more individuals — supervisors , scos , or others — with the required record update levels there are , the more vulnerable tecs is to having records inappropriately altered or deleted . according to the tecs user manual , supervisors , scos , and other users with the proper record update level may delete tecs records that they do not own . moreover , we noticed a range in the number of individuals who were authorized to individually delete others' records at the three cmcs and three ports we visited . for example , the southern california cmc had 1 official — the sco — with the authority to delete others' records , while the arizona cmc had 41 individuals — supervisors , scos , and others — with that authority .