tax expenditures . tax expenditures , or revenues forgone through preferential provisions in the tax code — for example , deductions , exemptions , and credits — can be a useful part of federal policy , but these expenditures should be scrutinized more closely and more often to ensure that , when used , they are the most effective means to an end . we assessed the growth of federal revenues forgone through income tax expenditures and presented three options for reviewing and controlling their growth: ( 1 ) strengthening and extending tax expenditure controls used by congressional tax - writing committees , ( 2 ) integrating tax expenditures further into the budget process , and ( 3 ) reviewing tax expenditures jointly with related federal outlay programs ( gao / ggd / aimd - 94-122 , june 3 , 1994 ) . ( see p . further , data from the federal reserve and the investment company institute indicated that taxpayers may have underreported an estimated $7.2 billion in tax - exempt income on their 1989 tax returns . recommendation ( s ) to irs we recommended that the secretary of the treasury direct irs to identify the amount of additional taxes that have been assessed on social security benefits through its underreporter program . given the uncertainty of the tax revenue losses from underreporting of tax - exempt income and the financial industry's potential processing burden , we recommended that irs conduct a detailed study of tax returns to better identify the benefits of having taxpayers report tax - exempt income . in addition , irs should obtain data on the costs of reporting and processing such information . the study could involve irs' tcmp or a pilot study that solicits the cooperation of several payers so that the benefits and costs of reporting tax - exempt income can be estimated . if a favorable cost - benefit ratio is identified , irs should take appropriate steps to make it possible to routinely acquire this information . the commissioner of internal revenue stated that the tcmp survey of tax year 1994 returns filed in 1995 would examine 153,000 returns of which 92,000 will be form 1040 based — 33,000 nonbusiness and 59,000 business . all income , deduction , and exemption items on the returns are to be examined , which should enable irs to analyze the levels of compliance related to underreporting of tax - exempt interest . congress should amend the internal revenue code to allow hud temporary access to federal tax data to validate its cost - benefit analysis of using tax data to identify subsidized households' misreporting of income congress may wish to consider clarifying the internal revenue code to ( 1 ) specifically provide irs authority to withdraw a notice of a lien when it is in the best interests of the taxpayer and the government and ( 2 ) eliminate the uncertainty over whether taxpayers should be given 21 days to correct an erroneous levy under section 6332 ( c ) .