he shall . notify the employer . of the penalty . .” the act goes on to say that “the citation and the assessment shall be deemed a final order . f the secretary has reason to believe that an employer has failed to correct a violation for which a citation has been issued . “ he area director shall review the inspection report of the compliance safety and health officer . if , on the basis of the report the area director believes that the employer has violated a requirement of section 5 of the ct , of any standard , rule or order promulgated pursuant to section 6 of the ct , or of any substantive rule published in this chapter . he shall issue to the employer either a citation or a notice of de minimis violations . we do not believe that osha could have developed a less burdensome regulatory approach while still meeting the requirements of the occupational safety and health act . the statute gave osha no discretion in drafting the regulatory requirements at issue in this concern , and the agency's regulations were consistent with the statutory requirements . as stated in 29 u.s.c . 651 ( b ) , the purpose of the occupational safety and health act is to ensure so far as possible every working man and woman in the nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve human resources . the statute delineates 13 actions intended to achieve this goal , including ( 1 ) encouraging employers and employees in their efforts to reduce the number of occupational safety and health hazards at their places of employment , and to stimulate employers and employees to institute new and perfect existing programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions ; ( 2 ) providing that employers and employees have separate but dependent responsibilities and rights with respect to achieving safe and healthful working conditions ; and ( 3 ) authorizing the secretary of labor to set mandatory occupational safety and health standards applicable to businesses affecting interstate commerce . an official from bank a said that the regulation on the availability of funds and collection of checks ( regulation cc ) requires the development and maintenance of expensive and time - consuming information on the current availability of funds . the official said that to provide this information to clients as the regulation requires , the bank must regularly review , update , and reprint brochures with this information . officials at frb said that regulation cc implements the expedited funds availability act ( 12 u.s.c . 4001-4010 ) , which limits the length of time depository institutions may place holds on deposits to transaction accounts . they said the act and the regulation also require depository institutions to provide to their customers written copies of their availability policies and written notices when certain types of extended holds are placed on deposits . in addition to providing general policy disclosure notices to customers , depository institutions also incur the ongoing costs of providing exceptions to hold notices and change - in - policy notices , as well as costs related to employee training .