postal service employees . as of fiscal year 1995 , fers covered slightly more federal employees than csrs . in response to the request of senator carl levin , in his former capacity as ranking minority member of the subcommittee on international security , proliferation and federal services , senate committee on governmental affairs , our objectives in preparing this report were to provide information on what opm officials and retirement experts view as the recommended content , presentation formats , and timing of retirement education programs and opm's and agencies' retirement education roles , responsibilities , and practices in the context of these recommendations . opm and commerce provided written comments . dod's and irs' comments were provided orally by the audit liaison and legislative affairs officer , respectively . these agencies' comments are presented at the ends of chapters 2 and 3 , and opm's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . as federal employees plan for their eventual retirement from government service , they often consider many financial and lifestyle issues . agency - provided retirement education is generally the primary source of the information that employees need to plan for these issues before they retire . retirement benefits represent an important portion of total federal compensation and employees often cite these benefits as a primary reason for staying in government service . thus , agencies also benefit from sponsoring retirement education programs , which allow them to capitalize on their comparative advantage in competitive labor markets as well as invest in the government's human capital . the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( fersa ) granted the office of personnel management ( opm ) and federal agencies broad authority to design and implement retirement education programs for employees covered by the two largest federal civilian retirement programs — the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) . specifically , fersa authorizes agencies to designate retirement counselors who are responsible for providing employees with benefits information , and mandates that opm establish a training program for these agency retirement counselors.fersa also created the federal retirement thrift investment board to administer the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) . the thrift board provides training and information on tsp to agency personnel offices and groups of employees upon agency request ; however , it is not responsible for providing retirement education for the federal workforce . csrs , which was established in 1920 , currently includes an annuity and tsp . csrs' annuity predates the social security system by several years . when the social security system was established , congress decided that employees in csrs would not be covered by social security through their federal employment . starting in 1987 , employees covered by csrs may also contribute up to 5 percent of their salary to tsp ; however , they receive no government contributions . csrs was closed to new entrants after december 31 , 1983 , and , according to opm actuaries , is estimated to end in about 2070 , when all covered employees and survivor annuitants are expected to have died .