ii. ) according to fbi officials , all of the advisory committee's recommendations , including system administration activities , system security , theft status determination , and visual sight checks were addressed during the pilot study , as described below . however , according to the fbi , several of the recommendations cannot be implemented until regulations are developed to implement the system nationwide . according to the fbi , nicb received approval from the ncic advisory policy board in june 1993 to receive a copy of the ncic vehicle file to establish the system . the recommendations are detailed in appendix i . according to the task force chairman , the recommendations would have to be implemented to achieve the uniformity needed to ensure that the titling system would operate as envisioned . in october 1994 , transportation accepted most of the task force's recommendations ( see app . i regarding transportation's views on the task force recommendations ) . nhtsa contracted with aamva to identify the states' costs for a titling system . aamva surveyed the 50 states and the district of columbia to obtain their estimated costs for implementing the titling system . on january 31 , 1994 , nhtsa's survey report stated that for the 37 states that provided cost estimates , the cost ranged from zero ( 1 state ) to $12.2 million . for example , some states would have to modify their existing titling systems . in march 1996 , aamva officials estimated that about $19 million in federal grants would be needed to fund states' implementation costs . nhtsa officials said that since 13 states and the district of columbia did not provide a cost estimate , they did not believe that the total costs to the states could be accurately determined . aamva pointed out that about 80 percent of the nation's motor vehicle population is in the states that responded to the survey . in may 1994 , transportation sent proposed legislation to congress to allow the secretary of transportation to extend the target date ( from january 1996 to october 1997 ) for implementation of the national title information system . according to nhtsa officials , the proposed legislation was not introduced in congress . transportation requested the authority to extend the implementation date for the titling system because it understood that aamva was planning a pilot study of a titling information system , using only state and private sector funds and resources , and transportation wanted to evaluate the study results . subsequently , aamva requested funding from nhtsa for the pilot . in december 1994 , nhtsa denied aamva's request for funds to conduct a pilot study because , in nhtsa's view , such a study would have been premature without first having uniformity in state titling laws and regulations . however , congress provided $890,000 for a pilot study by nhtsa as part of transportation's fiscal year 1996 appropriation . nhtsa officials said that aamva would have responsibility for the pilot . according to aamva officials , as of january 1996 , they were in the process of acquiring contractors to conduct the pilot , using aamva's commercial driver's license information system as the pilot's model .