( see app . ii for a more detailed description of foreign market development by these four countries. ) in france , the société pour l'expansion des ventes des produits agricoles et alimentaires ( sopexa ) is responsible for foreign market development . jointly owned by the french government and private trade organizations , sopexa promotes french food and wine in about 23 foreign countries . there is no uniform scheme for classifying agricultural products , and there are various definitions for what constitutes a high - value product . the numbers used in this report for exports of u.s. and european hvps are based on analysis by usda's economic research service of data from the food and agriculture organization of the united nations . for the purposes of these 1992 export statistics , ers' definition of hvps included semiprocessed foods , such as wheat flour and vegetable oil , but excluded certain products that did not meet ers' statistical definition of an agricultural product . thus the hvp export data for 1992 did not include cigarettes , distilled spirits , fishery products , or forestry products . trade statistics sometimes exclude intra - eu trade , since this trade is sometimes viewed as comparable to u.s. interstate commerce . however , we have included intra - eu trade in our trade statistics , since the european organizations we reviewed treat trade with other eu countries as foreign ( as opposed to domestic ) market development , and since a considerable portion of their export promotion activity is within the eu . c. jeffrey appel , evaluator - in - charge jason bromberg , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . these comments are discussed at the end of this letter . the structure for foreign market development of hvps is fundamentally different in the united states than in three of the four european countries we reviewed . france , germany , and the united kingdom each rely primarily on a centralized marketing organization to promote their agricultural exports . the organizations are funded either entirely through user fees and levies on private industry , as with germany , or through a combination of private and public funds , as with france and the united kingdom . both public and private sector representatives play a role in managing the marketing organizations . they conduct a number of different types of promotions , provide an array of services to exporters , and promote nearly all high - value products and commodities .