this is done both formally and informally . federal reserve officials said that the federal reserve also evaluates information that it regularly compiles across banks to identify emerging trends . occ and the federal reserve occasionally issue regulatory guidance to examiners , alerting them to emerging issues in the financial services industry . for example , both the federal reserve and occ issued guidance on lending to highly leveraged institutions in response to problems observed in the aftermath of the near collapse of ltcm . they also issued warnings when it appeared that underwriting standards were slipping due to increased competition along with the recent continued economic prosperity . this guidance sometimes results from the reviews of issues across banks described earlier . the federal reserve and occ both also have research staffs who work to identify and communicate industry risk trends to examiners . for example , the federal reserve said it regularly does peer group analyses on the top 50 banking organizations . however , efforts by the federal reserve and occ to communicate industrywide risk trends are only intended to assist examiners in identifying risks at institutions . neither the federal reserve nor occ have procedures to aggregate the risks that examiners have identified during examinations . such aggregation might have proven useful in the case of ltcm , where regulators identified individual credit exposures to the large hedge fund but did not identify the threat posed by ltcm , primarily because they looked for problems involving the largest credit exposures of the individual banks . ltcm was not among the largest exposures of any of these banks and the overall industry exposure to ltcm and the potential for market disruption was not realized until after its near collapse . both occ and the federal reserve have attempted to develop management information systems designed to store , and make readily available , industrywide risk information . the supervisory monitoring system ( sms ) is occ's primary internal source of information about the condition of individual national banks . occ uses the system to record the current condition , strategy , and supervisory concerns for each bank . examiners are also to use the system to document follow - up actions , board meeting discussions , commitments for corrective action , progress in correcting identified problems , and subsequent events . other bank regulators also have access to sms as well . however , occ large bank examination staff in both headquarters and in the banks we visited said that the sms system does not fit their needs and that they generally do not use it . occ has initiatives under way to develop a system more suited to large banks , however , these efforts are in their early stages . the federal reserve is developing the banking organization national desktop ( bond ) , to provide examiners with the information - sharing and ongoing collaboration it believes is necessary to support the risk - focused supervision of the largest , most complex banking organizations . bond is intended to expand the capabilities of the national examination database , an automated platform for sharing supervisory information that has been in existence for a number of years .