what are these objectives ? if there are national performance objectives , is a national program needed to achieve them , or could they feasibly be attained through state or local programs ? this question is particularly relevant to new service outcome objectives , such as decreasing drug use among students . state and local programs designed with different objectives in mind may have difficulty incorporating this new objective . or conditions that enable achievement of that outcome ( such as solid knowledge of how to produce it ) may not be met . what implementing provisions are needed to support attainment of these objectives ? implementing provisions might include constraints on activities and funds distribution or operational objectives , standards , and criteria for performance . these can be set for the program as a whole or delegated to the level of government responsible for program management . for state or local programs , the next question would be whether the program would operate as a funding stream or support distinct projects . this having been decided , the next general questions are: what data are needed for grantee accountability , and is it feasible to collect these data from providers ? as we have seen , diverse activities and funding stream operation may make the collection of uniform data difficult . the answers to these questions provide the basis for setting grantee reporting requirements . is additional information needed for program oversight ? if so , the logical next step is to provide for such information to be gathered and reported through program evaluation studies or other relevant , cost - effective means . we use the title vi innovative education program strategies grant program to illustrate how figure 2 flows . the objectives of the grant , to support local education reform and innovation , are primarily fiscal , putting us on the upper decision path on our diagram . funds may be used to support local projects ( such as magnet schools ) , but the title vi program's purpose does not require that project - level performance objectives be set , so we continue to the step of designing provisions to match fiscal objectives . title vi has such provisions , stating that grant funds may not be used to supplant funds from nonfederal sources and that the state must maintain prior levels of fiscal effort . to obtain information required for accountability , the program requires local districts to describe their intended use of the funds and how this will contribute to the grant's objectives of supporting education reform . states , drawing on district records , must report biennially on general uses of funds , types of services furnished , and students served . as these data are of limited utility for program oversight , congress mandated national evaluation reports on this program in 1986 and 1994 . the 1994 report provided information about federal share , the size of state and local grants , how funds were used , the minimal performance accountability requirements imposed by states , and the difficulty of evaluating a program that provides supplemental resources for other activities . the safe and drug - free schools and communities grant provides a further illustration .