( app . i contains the details of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) criminal enterprises generate enormous amounts of cash . to make them easier to conceal and transport , some criminal enterprises convert illicit cash proceeds into monetary instruments , such as traveler's checks , money orders , or cashier's checks . in addition , after it had received inquiries from financial institutions about whether suspicious transactions should be reported and what information should be reported , the department of the treasury issued administrative ruling 88-1 on june 22 , 1988 . this ruling encouraged but did not require financial institutions to report transactions that might be “...relevant to a possible violation of the bsa or its regulations or indicative of money laundering or tax evasion” to the local office of the internal revenue service's ( irs ) criminal investigation division ( cid ) . also in 1988 , the comptroller of the currency regulation 12 c.f.r . section 21.11 and corresponding regulations issued by the other bank regulatory agencies required financial institutions to report suspected money laundering and / or bsa violations and provide a copy of these reports to the local office of irs' cid . a 1992 amendment to bsa prohibits financial institutions from notifying persons involved in suspicious transactions that the transaction had been reported to irs . table 1 summarizes the current recordkeeping and reporting requirements for cashier's checks . in 1990 , treasury developed a regulation to implement the 1988 amendment to bsa that required financial institutions to capture , verify , and retain information on the identity of purchasers of cashier's checks and other monetary instruments . federal regulators , financial industry and advisory groups , and federal law enforcement officials with whom we spoke or who had expressed their views in published documents agreed that current recordkeeping requirements for cashier's checks — together with the renewed emphasis being placed on the development of effective know - your - customer programs and suspicious - transaction reporting requirements — are sufficient means for assisting law enforcement officials in their efforts to combat the use of cashier's checks and certain other monetary instruments to launder money . in june 1995 , we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of the treasury or his designee , the commissioner of irs or her designee , and the american bankers association . to further assist law enforcement officials in their efforts to combat money laundering , financial institutions are urged by treasury and federal financial industry regulators to develop an effective know - your - customer program . know - your - customer programs are designed to encourage employees of financial institutions to become familiar with the banking practices of their customers so that they can recognize transactions that are outside the normal course of a customer's business practices and report them as suspicious to the appropriate federal oversight agencies . in implementing bsa requirements , treasury requires financial institutions to file a currency transaction report for each deposit , withdrawal , exchange of currency , or other payment or transfer by , through , or to financial institutions , that involves more than $10,000 in currency . this requirement includes cashier's checks .