miss . 1994 ) ; ( 3 ) u.s. vs. blackpipe state bank ( d. s.d . 1994 ) ; ( 4 ) u.s. vs. chevy chase savings and loan ( d. d.c. 1994 ) ; ( 5 ) u.s. vs. northern trust company ( n.d. ill. 1995 ) ; ( 6 ) u.s. vs. security state bank of pecos ( w.d . tex . as described by fdic , self - assessment is a way of measuring , in a controlled manner , differences in treatment of customers and potential customers . it can consist of a variety of programs , including preapplication testing and comparative - file analysis . the goal of these programs is to help find potential problems so that corrective actions can be taken and to help ensure that an institution's lending practices and decisions are not discriminatory . in addition , an institution can also gain insight into how its lending personnel and practices are perceived by prospective loan applicants , a valuable insight not readily available through other audit methods . however , some self - assessment activities , like self - testing , pose a dilemma for lending institutions in that under current law the results of self - testing programs may not be privileged or protected from disclosure to federal regulatory agencies or private litigants . hence , despite the obvious preventative benefits to be gained from having lenders adopt continuous self - testing programs , many institutions are reluctant to undertake such programs out of fear that the findings could be used as evidence against them , especially by third - party litigants . a few states have recognized this dilemma faced by financial institutions and have moved to eliminate , or at least partially mitigate the fears institutions have regarding self - incrimination . for example , maryland has passed legislation that partially protects from discovery by third parties information obtained through the use of self - testing programs . additionally , the attorney general of massachusetts has entered into an agreement with the massachusetts banker's association to seek the enactment of legislation to ensure that institutions engaging in self - testing and comparative - file review evaluation by senior level management , as it relates to residential financing , will not be ( a ) forced to disclose to private litigants in civil actions the results of the use of such methods and ( b ) subject to legal action by nonregulatory government agencies based on the results of such self - testing and comparative - file reviews . the legislation was under consideration by the massachusetts state legislature at the time of our review . such legal protection is intended to engender voluntary self - testing programs and place greater emphasis on prevention rather than ex - post government enforcement through regulation and legal action . some legal experts have suggested that a lending institution's relationship with appraisers , loan brokers , and other financial institutions could pose potential compliance problems if the third - party were found to be in violation of fha or ecoa .