omb had no comments . in response to the request for comments from the administrator of gsa , fss and fts officials provided comments on a draft of this report , as did responsible officials from the four countries . tables ii.1 through ii.5 identify the organizations in the united states and each of the four countries discussed in this report and their internet addresses . table ii.1: united states general services administration ( gsa ) gsa / federal supply service ( fss ) gsa / federal technology service ( fts ) gsa / office of governmentwide policy ( ogp ) office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) table ii.2: canada department of national defence ( dnd ) department of public works and government services canada ( pwgsc ) pwgsc / government telecommunications and informatics services ( gtis ) pwgsc / supply operations service ( sos ) office of the auditor general of canada ( oag ) treasury board secretariat of canada ( tbs ) table ii.3: united kingdom central computer and telecommunications agency ( ccta ) her majesty's treasury ( hm treasury ) hm treasury's task force on pfi ministry of defence ( mod ) national audit office ( nao ) the buying agency ( tba ) the stationery office ( tso ) table ii.4: australia australian national audit office ( anao ) department of family and community services ( dfacs ) department of finance and administration ( dofa ) joint committee for public accounts and audit ( jcpaa ) office of asset sales and it outsourcing ( oasito ) office for government online ( ogo ) table ii.5: new zealand gsb supply corporation ltd. ( supplycorp ) health funding authority ( hfa ) ministry of commerce ministry of defence ( mod ) ministry of health office of the controller and auditor - general of new zealand state services commission ( ssc ) . benefits driven procurement ( bdp ) is a new approach the canadian government has started to use to help ensure the success of complex acquisition projects traditionally characterized as having significant risk . bdp stresses a focus on results and on the benefits that the government and its suppliers can gain from each acquisition project . developed by the canadian government in collaboration with canadian industry , the bdp approach is designed to avoid the pitfalls that beset many complex projects — delays , cost overruns , and end results that often fall far short of expectations . bdp was first developed to solve problems with major it acquisitions ; but according to canadian government officials , the concept has a broad application and is relevant to a wide range of complex , high - risk acquisitions . according to information on bdp from public works and government services canada ( pwgsc ) , canada's central procurement agency , major it projects , which are among its most complex procurement projects , have a history of failure . research done in the united states and canada support this assertion . for example , in 1990 , the president's council on management improvement cited the “unwieldy procurement process” as a reason it projects often failed .