initiative . program . to explain how that program will address our recommendations , the service discussed its approach to identifying and sharing best practices . it said that in the past “best” had been a matter more of intuition than measurement , and a team is looking at how to develop systems that will identify possible best practices and validate their effectiveness by measuring their results . according to the service , once a practice is determined to be truly a best practice , it will be shared with the field , possibly through electronic bulletin boards and presentations at national or area - wide managers' meetings . in providing quality first ! training , the service instructed field employees on use of csi and exfc data in improving the reliability of mail service . most of the employees at mail processing plants are members of the american postal workers union ( apwu ) , which in the past has not participated in the service's initiatives to involve employees in service improvement efforts . in this regard , we recently reported that breakthrough improvements in customer service cannot be achieved unless the postal service and labor unions representing postal employees resolve long - standing workfloor problems . postal management has had difficulty getting labor unions to agree on the involvement of employees with each other and with management in solving customer service and other problems . for example , apwu is the largest postal union and did not participate in initiatives , such as striving for excellence together ( set ) , employee involvement , and quality of work life , which are described in our earlier reports . neither apwu nor the national association of letter carriers , which together represent about 85 percent of the total number of craft employees , participate in the set program . as we reported earlier , a lack of labor - management cooperation has been a serious limitation on the service's ability to make significant , sustained improvements in customer satisfaction . as of july 1995 , the service and three of its four major unions ( the rural letter carrier union being the exception ) had not agreed to meet and begin developing new approaches to involve employees with union and management leaders in improving the processing and delivery functions of the postal service . although it had numerous improvement efforts under way , the postal service did not have at the time of our review an overall plan to guide and integrate all of its csi - related improvement efforts at post offices and processing plants . during our review , the postal inspection service issued its december 1994 report and recommended that the service develop a plan involving all field offices in the use of residential csi data to improve customer satisfaction . in response to that recommendation , the vice president for work force planning and service management said that a corporate service plan would be developed , with emphasis on the role of processing and distribution as well as customer service in jointly improving service levels , as measured by csi and other systems .