most taxpayers are required to have only one identification number . however , individuals who are self - employed are sometimes required to have two identification numbers , a social security number ( ssn ) for their individual income tax returns and an employer identification number ( ein ) for their business returns . this report discusses whether irs ( 1 ) accurately cross references the two identification numbers that self - employed individuals report and ( 2 ) needs to take any actions to improve the accuracy of its cross - reference files . sole proprietors are to file form 1040 , individual income tax return , and attach to it schedule c , profit or loss from business ( sole proprietorship ) , or schedule f , profit or loss from farming . irs examiners have been instructed to screen the information manually to detect inaccuracies so that taxpayers will not be inappropriately contacted . the problem associated with erroneous cross - referencing is highlighted by the underreporter leads that cref generates . for tax year 1991 , irs received about 5.9 million information returns with eins for about 1.1 million sole proprietors . using cref data , irs developed a nationwide list of about 28,400 sole proprietors who may have underreported their income for tax year 1991 . about 4,700 of these cases were handled by the fresno service center . these potential underreporter cases were created because the sole proprietor's tax return appeared not to have reported all of the income shown in information returns . ( irs computers match the tax return and information return data to produce the potential underreporter list. ) irs requires most sole proprietors to write their ssn on form 1040 and to write both their ssn and ein on schedules c and f. however , not all sole proprietors are required to have and use eins . irs requires only those sole proprietors who also file employment , pension , or excise tax returns to have and use eins . irs received about 15 million 1040 returns from sole proprietors for tax year 1991 , and about 2.2 million included an ein on a schedule c. the internal revenue code requires taxpayers to include taxpayer identification numbers on tax returns and gives irs the authority to decide what identification system will be used . the social security administration issues ssns to individuals . irs issues eins to businesses , which must apply to irs to obtain an ein . irs has two master files containing the tax accounts of individuals and businesses . data from form 1040 returns , including schedules c and f , are posted to the individual master file using the primary ssn as the primary account number . data from employment and excise tax returns filed by sole proprietors are posted to the business master file using the ein as the primary account number . if a sole proprietor has an account on each file , irs can connect them by cross - referencing account numbers . the proprietor's ssn is recorded in the business master file account , and the ein is recorded in the proprietor's individual master file account .