( see app . ii for a copy of those comments. ) he said that he had serious concerns about the methodology we used to determine whether osha's page revisions had resulted in reductions in regulatory burden . first , he said that simply counting the number of actions in each burden category does not accurately reflect osha's efforts because the agency combined many separate deregulatory actions into several large packages . their comments are discussed at the end of this letter . any analysis of the effect of reductions in the number of pages of regulatory text must initially recognize that one sentence of a regulation can impose more burden than 100 pages of regulations that are administrative in nature . therefore , the number of pages eliminated from the cfr is , at best , an indirect measure of burden reduction . nevertheless , the number of cfr pages eliminated is one of the measures that the administration is using to gauge its own efforts . as of april 30 , 1997 , 15 agencies reported to omb that they had eliminated 79 percent , or more than 13,000 , of the 16,627 pages they had targeted for elimination . the 4 agencies that we examined reported that they had eliminated a total of 5,532 ( 85 percent ) of the 6,529 pages they had targeted . however , officials at each of those four agencies told us that these page elimination totals did not include the pages that they had added to their parts of the cfr at the same time that pages were being removed . as table 1 shows , after taking into account the 4 agencies' estimates of the major cfr page additions that were made during the same period that pages were eliminated , the agencies' cfr sections decreased in size by about 926 pages — about 3 percent of their total cfr pages at the start of their initiatives and about 17 percent of the 5,532-page elimination total that had been reported to oira by these agencies . the effect of accounting for pages added to the cfr varied across the four agencies . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8676 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . therefore , in some ways it is not surprising that the administration does not have a mechanism in place to measure burden reductions as a result of its cfr page elimination and revision initiative . however , in the absence of an agreed upon and demonstrably valid measure of regulatory burden , disagreements are likely to continue regarding the effectiveness of the page elimination and revision effort as well as other initiatives designed to lessen the impact of federal regulations . a detailed explanation of our scope and methodology is in appendix i . to address our first objective of determining whether agencies' page elimination totals accounted for pages added , we obtained cfr page elimination and revision totals as of april 30 , 1997 , from oira and interviewed agency officials at hud , dot , osha , and epa . the officials said that the elimination totals did not include pages added while the eliminations occurred .