iv. ) one reason why puerto rico's per - capita income tax is relatively low is that per - capita personal income in puerto rico is significantly lower than that in any of the 50 states and the district of columbia . in 1992 , puerto rico's per - capita personal income was $6,428 , compared to $14,083 in mississippi , the state with the lowest per - capita personal income . puerto rico's individual income tax collections amounted to 5.3 percent of the commonwealth's personal income in 1992 . one u.s. tax policy significantly affecting puerto rico is the possessions tax credit defined in section 936 of the federal internal revenue code ( irc ) . under this section of the irc , a portion of income derived from operations of qualified subsidiaries of u.s. corporations in u.s. possessions is effectively exempted from u.s. income tax . firms are qualified for the credit if , over the 3-year period preceding the close of a taxable year , 80 percent or more of their income was derived from sources within a possession , and 75 percent or more of their income was derived from the active conduct of a trade or business within a possession . the 1993 budget reconciliation act limited the possessions tax credit.for tax years beginning after 1993 , taxpayers are to calculate the credit as under prior law , but the credit would be capped under one of two alternative options selected by the taxpayer: the “percentage limitation” option provides for a decreasing credit equal to a decreasing percentage of the amount computed under prior law . the percentages are set by law at 60 percent for 1994 , 55 percent for 1995 , 50 percent for 1996 , and 45 percent for 1997 . the percentage will be 40 percent for 1998 and thereafter . the “economic activity limitation” option provides a cap on the credit equal to the sum of three factors: the first factor is 60 percent of the firm's wages plus allocable employee fringe benefits paid in the possession , with wages limited for each employee to 85 percent of the maximum wage base under the old age survivor and disability insurance portion of social security . the second factor is a specific percentage of the firm's depreciation deductions for qualified tangible property for each taxable year . the type of property defines the applicable percentage , with factors ranging from 15 percent for property with a relatively short recovery period to 65 percent for assets with a long recovery period . the third factor , which applies only to firms that do not use the 50-percent profit - split method of income allocation is a portion of the income taxes paid to the possession government . included taxes , however , cannot exceed a 9-percent effective tax rate . u.s. and puerto rico's tax laws for partnerships have several significant differences . with a few exceptions , u.s. partnerships are not taxable entities . distributions of partnership profits are included on the partner's individual income tax return and are taxed at personal income tax rates .