iii ) . aoc recognized that the judiciary is responsible for providing its requirements to gsa as one of gsa's many tenants and has done its part to project space requirements in a methodical way . however , aoc pointed out that , since the executive branch has not released strategic real property plans for the federal government as a whole , our comment about the lack of a strategic real estate plan would be more appropriately addressed to the executive branch . we agree that a governmentwide strategic plan for real property is needed and have recommended that gsa take the lead in developing such a plan in several of our prior products ( see related gao products at the end of this report ) . we recognize that the plan is transitional and that it will evolve . we also recognize that the process for funding courthouse projects is dynamic and that various factors influence funding decisions . within this context , the judiciary's plan and the related urgency score methodology have the potential to provide important baseline information to help decisionmakers weigh priorities and make more informed decisions . this plan and its related material do not alert congress , an important stakeholder , that the projects do not reflect all the judiciary's most urgent needs nor do they explain that pipeline projects with high funding priority do not always have the highest urgency scores . absent this information , decisionmakers may not be aware of the severity of needs in other locations not included in the plan — such as los angeles — or that projects in the plan with high scores — such as richmond — have a lower funding priority than other projects with lower scores . we recommend that the director of aoc work with the judicial conference committee on security , space , and facilities to make improvements to the 5-year plan . these improvements should be aimed at making the plan more informative and a more useful tool for helping congress to better understand project priorities and individual project needs . at a minimum , the plan should ( 1 ) fully disclose the relative urgency of all competing projects and ( 2 ) articulate the rationale or justification for project priorities , including information on the conditions that are driving urgency — such as specific security concerns or operational inefficiencies . aoc , on december 13 , 1996 , provided written comments on a draft of this report that generally concurred with the draft and our recommendations . aoc said that many of the improvements we recommended were already under consideration ( see app . however , the development of a governmentwide plan was not the subject of this review . instead , we reviewed the judiciary's 5-year plan , which serves as input to gsa's overall planning efforts . to date , through the 5-year plan and related urgency score methodology , the judiciary has begun playing an important role in improving strategic planning for the courthouse construction initiative . their approach has the potential to provide important baseline data that are key ingredients to strategic planning . however , the judiciary's efforts to date have been incomplete and could benefit from the improvements outlined in our recommendations .