additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . our work has underscored the need for such coordination efforts . uncoordinated program efforts can waste scarce funds , confuse and frustrate program customers , and limit the overall effectiveness of the federal effort . our recent report to you provided further information on mission fragmentation and program overlap in the federal government.we have often noted that the results act presents to congress and the administration a new opportunity to address mission fragmentation and program overlap . omb and congress recognize that the results act provides an approach for addressing overlap and fragmentation of federal programs . omb's guidance stated that agencies' final submission of strategic plans should contain a summary of agencies' consultation efforts with congress and other stakeholders , including discussions with other agencies on crosscutting activities . during its summer review of 1996 , omb provided feedback to agencies where it found little sign of significant interagency coordination to ensure consistent goals among crosscutting programs and activities . this feedback also underscored the need for such coordination . in an august 1997 letter to heads of selected independent agencies and members of the president's management council , omb reiterated the importance of interagency coordination and stated that during the 1997 fall budget review , it intended to place a particular emphasis on reviewing whether goals and objectives for crosscutting functions or interagency programs were consistent among strategic plans . congress has also shown active interest in using the results act to better ensure that crosscutting programs are properly coordinated . the february 25 , 1997 , letter from congressional majority leaders to the director of omb outlined the leaderships' interest in agencies' strategic plans addressing how the agencies were coordinating their activities ( especially for crosscutting programs ) with other federal agencies working on similar activities . in addition , the staff teams in the house of representatives , which were to coordinate and facilitate committee consultations with executive branch agencies , often have asked agencies about crosscutting activities and programs . despite this interest , we found that 20 of the 27 draft plans lacked evidence of interagency coordination as part of the agency and stakeholder consultations and that some of the plans — including those from some agencies that are involved in crosscutting program areas where interagency coordination is clearly implied — lacked any discussion of coordination . for example: according to energy , it does not have any crosscutting programs because its functions are unique . however , our review of draft strategic plans indicated areas of potential overlap concerning energy's programs . for example , energy's science mission was to maintain leadership in basic research and to advance scientific knowledge . the national science foundation's ( nsf ) mission included promoting the progress of science and enabling the united states to uphold a position of world leadership in all aspects of science , mathematics , and engineering . nsf's plan also did not discuss the possible overlap between the two missions .