omb denied the request . instead , the president's fiscal year 1999 budget included a separate 27-agent anti - narcotics initiative . the resource allocation process was affected by policy considerations related to the drug smuggling threat . specifically , for fiscal year 1997 , asd changed its initial allocation of inspectional personnel to include a port not located at the southwest border . asd had originally planned to allocate all of the additional inspectional and canine enforcement officers exclusively to southwest border ports . according to an asd official , asd modified the allocation because the south florida cmc appealed to the commissioner of customs for additional inspectional personnel , citing a significant drug smuggling threat as indicated by the number of cocaine seizures — totaling about 10,000 pounds — at port everglades port . the commissioner agreed with the appeal . consequently , asd adjusted its allocation to provide nine inspectors and canine enforcement officers to this port . for fiscal year 1998 , during the course of its review of customs' request for the additional resources and its plans to allocate them , ondcp directed customs to change its allocation to include cargo ports along the southwest border . according to customs and ondcp officials , this was done to maintain the national drug control strategy's emphasis on the southwest border . subsequently , customs reallocated 47 of the 119 positions to southwest border ports . according to customs officials , the potential reallocation of existing inspectional personnel has also been affected by legislative requirements . as discussed earlier , positions funded with the user fees established in the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 as amended , cannot be redeployed because these positions are funded for specific purposes at specific ports . in addition , according to the officials , the positions funded in the fiscal year 1997 appropriation for operation hard line were to be used exclusively at southwest border ports . it is too early to definitively determine ( 1 ) any implications of customs not receiving all of the inspectional personnel it originally estimated to be needed and ( 2 ) the effect of the additional personnel that were appropriated on customs' drug enforcement operations . according to customs officials , the new inspectors need to gain experience before they are fully effective . further , while many of the fiscal year 1998 inspectors have been hired , few , if any , have finished basic training . customs plans to assess the effectiveness of drug enforcement operations by establishing performance measures and conducting internal evaluations . one reason that it is too early to determine the impact of the additional inspectional personnel on customs' drug enforcement operations is that new inspectors need to gain experience . for example , according to a southern california cmc official , the cmc's policy is to provide extensive on - the - job training lasting up to 1 year to new inspectors at its passenger processing port before deploying them to cargo processing . new inspectors are effective in interdicting drugs in the passenger processing environment , but must receive commercial operations training to be proficient at drug interdiction in the truck and rail environments on the southwest border .