ins is to remove the alien from this country . aliens who are issued an expedited removal order generally are barred from reentering this country for 5 years . the expedited removal provision also established a new process for aliens who express a fear of being returned to their home country and who are subject to expedited removal . inspectors are to refer such aliens to ins asylum officers for an interview to determine whether the aliens have a credible fear of persecution or harm if returned to their home country . ins training materials note that there have been many cases for which asylum was ultimately granted that may not have initially appeared to relate to the definition of asylum . additionally , the inspector should err on the side of caution and refer to the asylum officer any questionable cases . if the alien asserts a fear or concern that is clearly unrelated to an intention to seek asylum or a fear of persecution , then the inspector should not refer the case to an asylum officer . during our observations , we saw an instance where an alien initially expressed a fear of removal during a sworn statement for which the inspector did not refer the alien for a credible fear interview . the alien expressed concern about not being able to see her boyfriend who lived in the united states . the inspector checked with the supervisor to make sure that she should not refer this alien for a credible fear interview . when an inspector is going to refer an alien for a credible fear interview , the inspector is to process the alien as an expedited removal case.additionally the inspector is to explain to the alien in a language the alien understands information about the credible fear interview including ( 1 ) the alien's right to consult with other persons , ( 2 ) the alien's right to have an interpreter , and ( 3 ) what will transpire if the asylum officer finds that the alien does not have a credible fear of persecution . this information is contained in an ins form that the inspector is to give the alien ( see app . vi for a reprint of this form ) . the inspector also is to provide the alien with a list of free legal services , which is prepared and maintained by eoir . generally , ins requires that aliens who are subject to expedited removal should be processed immediately unless they claim lawful status in the united states or a fear of return to their home country . those aliens who arrive at air and sea ports of entry who are to be removed from the united states are to be returned by the first available means of transportation . aliens arriving at land ports of entry who are ordered removed usually should be returned to canada or mexico . if the inspector is unable to complete the alien's case or transportation is not available within a reasonable amount of time from the completion of the case , the inspector is to send the alien to an ins detention center or other holding facility until he or she can complete the case or remove the alien .