crane was the only company to submit an offer . in the absence of competition , bep had to rely on cost and price analyses to evaluate proposed prices to determine if the prices paid for currency paper were fair and reasonable . price analysis is to be used to verify that the overall price offered is fair and reasonable in comparison with current or recent prices for the same or similar items . according to bep , as of may 1998 , it has a 3-month reserve for each individual denomination with the exception of the $20 denomination , which has been recently redesigned . bep officials anticipate reaching the 3-month reserve for the newly designed $20 note during calendar year 1999 . obtaining competition in currency paper procurement is challenging , partly because of the uniqueness of the currency paper , which requires a relatively large investment in capital equipment . in addition , special statutory provisions govern the acquisition of currency paper that provide a 4-year limit to contracts for the manufacture of currency paper and that it be manufactured in the united states , and prohibit the purchase of currency paper from foreign - owned or controlled entities . • have prices paid for currency paper been fair and reasonable and has the quality of the paper been ensured ? to address these objectives , we reviewed federal procurement statutes and regulations and specific laws related to currency paper . is there potential for disruption to the u.s. currency paper supply from bep's reliance on a single supplier ? we reviewed various indicators of the competitiveness of the currency paper market , such as the number of paper manufacturers who said they were capable of supplying currency paper to bep , and the factors that make it difficult for them to provide currency paper . we also reviewed bep studies of the currency paper market and obtained information from other federal agencies , such as the secret service and the department of defense ( dod ) . to address the first two objectives , we reviewed bep's currency paper procurement files for paper contracts in effect from 1988 to 1997 , analyzed how bep bought currency paper during this period , and compared certain bep actions with requirements in the far and applicable laws . we surveyed 30 domestic and foreign cotton paper manufacturers on their interests in supplying currency paper and factors that prevented them from competing for bep currency paper contracts , and we surveyed other g - 7 nations on how they procured banknote paper . we interviewed numerous officials of bep , treasury , the secret service , the federal reserve , crane , and other agencies . we also interviewed several of the domestic and foreign cotton paper manufacturers that were included in our survey . to help us analyze the fairness and reasonableness of prices paid by bep for currency paper , we analyzed how bep used audits of the single supplier's costs and proposals in its negotiations and evaluated whether bep had an appropriate basis for determining the fairness and reasonableness of prices it paid for currency paper over the last 10 years .