we modified the report where appropriate . irs officials also raised other points that merit special mention . first , they pointed out various initiatives related to transfer pricing that were beyond the scope of our work . as shown in table v.4 , the large fccs that did pay u.s. income tax paid less relative to fccs' total gross receipts in 1991 than the large usccs that paid tax . these initiatives included recent technological improvements given to irs international examiners . second , an irs official from the statistics of income division noted some limitations of our statistical analysis of the corporations that did and did not pay taxes . by focusing on corporations that paid no tax , we gave little attention to those that paid minimal taxes . by defining large corporations in terms of asset size rather than receipts , we included , for example , a larger number of finance companies such as banks and fewer trade companies than we would have otherwise . finally , by comparing all fccs to all usccs , we did not consider industry differences . although these limitations are inherent to some degree in our selected methodology , our analyses provide data on corporations that paid minimal taxes ( see table v.4 ) and on industry differences ( see table v.6 ) . the corresponding numbers for fiscal year 1992 were 164 and 19 . according to irs officials , the time spent on cases closed is expected to fluctuate from year to year because large cases may close that incurred time charges over several years . in addition , most of the time reflected on cases that close early in a fiscal year will likely have been incurred on the cases in previous years . when adjustments to income are proposed in examinations , the taxpayer can take the dispute to appeals , which is the administrative body within irs authorized to settle tax controversies . also , when litigation is involved , so is irs' chief counsel . in march 1993 , we testified that irs' experience with section 482 issues in appeals had not improved from the experience we described in our 1992 report . since that time , while irs examiners again identified billions of dollars in proposed adjustments to income for section 482 issues , appeals again substantially reduced previous years' proposals . as table ii.4 shows , as of june 30 , 1994 , irs had 114 large taxpayers with total section 482 proposed adjustments to income of $14.4 billion pending administrative resolution in appeals or litigation with counsel as opposed to the 180 taxpayers with proposed section 482 adjustments of $14.4 billion as of september 30 , 1992 . thus , although the dollar value of open proposed adjustments stayed the same , the number of taxpayers involved declined . as of june 30 , 1994 , irs appeals officials had spent almost 96,000 hours on the open work units that contained section 482 issues as well as other issues . none of the tax returns involved were for tax periods after 1990 . of the $14.4 billion in proposed adjustments as of june 30 , 1994 , $1.8 billion was for foreign - controlled issues .