iii ) . hhs generally concurs with our recommendations . the department expressed its commitment to moving forward in the direction of our recommendation that ocse develop its own long - term management strategy . it stated that developing longer - term management strategies and program priorities can be beneficial and cited steps ocse has taken in this direction , such as creating a series of federal / state work groups to address longer - term issues and planning major enhancements to the federal parent locator service . we are encouraged by the department's commitment to ocse developing its own long - term management strategy and by these initial efforts . as ocse proceeds to fully implement our recommendation , it also should ensure that , as the national office for the child support enforcement program , it has strategies to establish its own priorities , specify anticipated results from its program activities , and develop measures to assess its performance . in response to our recommendation on program results auditing , hhs commented that with the enactment of welfare reform , ocse will be required to conduct program results audits . while welfare reform legislation requires that ocse verify the accuracy of state - reported data , our recommendation covers several additional steps essential for reorienting ocse's audit function toward program results . specifically , program results audits conducted by ocse should investigate why states have not met performance targets and make recommendations , when appropriate , to assist states in improving their performance . with regard to our recommendation related to developing a new incentive funding structure , hhs stated that ocse , through its strategic planning process and the performance measures work group , has made progress toward revising the basis on which states receive incentive payments . while these steps show promise in strengthening the linkage between the incentive funding structure and state performance , the revised structure , when fully implemented , should base payments on state progress made toward achieving all three program goals as we recommend . hhs also provided technical comments that we incorporated in the final report as appropriate . other gao contacts and major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . the general well - being of children and families is a critical national policy goal . current priorities aimed at protecting children and preserving families include an effective child support enforcement program to meet the needs of millions of parents who annually seek child support for their eligible children . ocse has made progress in reorienting its management toward program results by working with the states to develop national goals and objectives for increasing the number of paternities established , support orders obtained , and collections received . through this joint planning process , ocse has also strengthened its partnership with state child support enforcement programs . the partnership was further strengthened by ocse's designating regional staff to provide technical assistance responsive to local needs . as a next step in its planning process , ocse needs to develop its own long - term strategies for how it will help achieve the national goals and objectives , in addition to annual performance agreements established for top managers .