( see app . i for a more detailed discussion of bank risk - based capital requirements. ) as discussed earlier , regulators of securities broker - dealers and fcms seek to protect customers of the firms they oversee as well as to protect the integrity of their markets . the regulatory foundation of customer protection efforts includes capital requirements in the form of net capital rules and customer protection and funds segregation rules , which are designed to protect the regulated entity's customers and thereby other market participants from monetary losses and delays that can occur when the regulated entity fails . the objective of protecting investors does not extend to the protection of the going concern of broker - dealers or fcms , nor does it extend to the protection of investors' holdings against market losses . these rules , respectively , require sec - registered broker - dealers and cftc - registered fcms — the regulated entities — to continually maintain sufficient liquid assets to protect the interest of customers and other market participants if the firm ceases doing business , and as applicable , to keep customer assets segregated from the regulated entity's assets . the rules focus specifically on the regulated entity's financial condition and activities . as noted above , sec and cftc do not have statutory authority to regulate holding companies of broker - dealers or fcms . the financial condition of holding companies or other affiliates of the regulated entity are generally not included in computation of net capital or compliance with the customer segregation rule . in addition to the minimum base requirements , the regulatory net capital rules and the rules of the various sros establish early warning capital levels that exceed the minimum requirement . these capital triggers allow regulators and sros to identify at early stages broker - dealers and fcms that are experiencing financial difficulties and to take corrective actions to protect customers and the marketplace . broker - dealers and fcms are required to promptly notify their regulators when early warning violations occur . sros are required to notify sec and cftc and place restrictions on the activities of regulated entities whose net capital falls to the early warning levels . for example , under the sec net capital rule , a broker - dealer that uses the alternative method of calculating net capital may not withdraw equity capital in any form to pay shareholders if its net capital is less than 5 percent of its customer - related receivables . when an fcm's adjusted net capital falls below its early warning level , which is generally 150 percent of the minimum net capital amount , it must promptly notify cftc . in addition , cftc requires fcms to report to cftc when a series of events , on a net basis , causes a 20 percent or greater reduction in their net capital . as soon as a broker - dealer's or fcm's net capital amount falls below the minimum net capital level , the firm must immediately cease conducting business and it must either demonstrate that it has come back into compliance with net capital requirements or liquidate its operations .