these comments are reprinted in appendix i . we did our work between august 1994 and october 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the pricing of mortgage loans is a difficult and complex process requiring the use of a sophisticated and technical methodology . rtc established a reasonable process to price mortgage loans that was anchored to agency and mortgage securities markets standards . this process provided for an independent valuation of 1- to 4-family residential mortgage loans that were offered for sale to minority acquirers of failed thrifts located in pmns . it is first important to note that rtc did not price the loans itself ; instead , in june 1994 it hired two independent valuation contractors experienced in mortgage securities markets to determine the price of each mortgage loan . each valuation contractor was required to price the mortgage loans on an individual basis , rather than at a portfolio level , because the acquirers were allowed to purchase some , all , or none of the loans under the minority preference resolutions program . rtc also hired three due diligence contractors to preliminarily review each loan to determine whether it was eligible for sale under the minority preference resolutions program . to be eligible for sale under the program , the loan had to be a performing 1- to 4-family residential mortgage type . the purpose of rtc's due diligence loan file review was to secure essential information that could be used to evaluate the loans for sale . some of the essential documents included the loan note , mortgage insurance certificate , title , appraisal , and credit and verification forms . the due diligence contractors were not required to make judgments about credit decisions or the loan's salability . as previously stated , the approach of the minority acquirers' contractor was similar to rtc's avr process . in summary , to determine the mortgage loan price , the minority acquirers' contractor said it used a discounted cash flow methodology based on the assets' expected income and yields on mortgage trading in the secondary market . the price was then adjusted for risk - related factors , such as the probability of default , loan quality , and document deficiencies . to determine the adjustments for movement in interest rates , prepayment speeds were estimated using the wall street consensus speeds for like mortgage loan rates . cash flows for each loan type were calculated using loan characteristics and prepayment speeds . according to rtc's valuation contractors , the pricing of the mortgage loans began upon receipt of the loan data files from rtc's due diligence contractors . the valuation contractors were to review these data files for completeness and accuracy and to notify rtc of any errors or missing documents in the loan file . rtc told us that it generally resolved these deficiencies by requiring the due diligence contractors to update the loan file . the valuation contractors said that the loans were then stratified to determine whether individual loans conformed to secondary market standards .