postal service . nevertheless , as we previously testified , postal reforms in other countries do hold some relevance for the united states . a variety of conditions led to the postal reform in other countries . a key reason was increased competition in the delivery and communications markets . in response , governments in most of the eight countries have granted postal administrations greater commercial freedom to meet growing competition . some foreign postal administrations have taken a range of actions to become more competitive , such as downsizing the work force ; increasing productivity ; making changes to the postal retail network ; and pursuing initiatives to compete in electronic mail , facsimile , electronic bill payment , and other electronic communications services . as competitive pressures increase , some other countries are contemplating further postal reforms , including additional steps to narrow or eliminate postal monopolies . some of the countries we reviewed have redefined and limited their letter mail monopolies , and sweden has eliminated the postal monopoly altogether . a common practice was to define the scope of the postal monopoly according to price , weight , urgency , or a combination of these factors . for example , the british postal administration limits the monopoly to letter mail with postage up to 1£ . this is in contrast to the definition of a letter in this country , where no measurable characteristics are used except for extremely urgent letters , for which the service has suspended the statutes . in 1979 , the service used a price limit as part of the criteria for suspending extremely urgent letters from the statutes . specifically , this limit provides that private firms may deliver letters if the price charged is at least twice the service's first - class postage rate or $3.00 , whichever is greater . the service believes this price limit — called the double - postage rule — is necessary to clearly distinguish those letters subject to the statutes . none of the eight countries had laws that give their postal administrations exclusive access to private mailboxes . however , practical limitations to mailbox access exist in some countries , such as post office boxes and locked mailboxes accessible only to the customer and the postal administration . ( see vol . ii , ch . as it now operates , the service has assumed two distinct roles as ( 1 ) a competitor with private delivery firms and ( 2 ) a federal entity established to provide universal mail service . difficult policy issues arise out of these potentially conflicting roles , including ( 1 ) the extent to which the private express statutes should restrict competition and ( 2 ) whether the service could continue to provide universal service if the statutes were relaxed . some first - class and third - class letters also could be diverted to private delivery , but the percentage of volume losses probably would be much lower than for priority mail letters , as figure 3 shows . most nationwide private carriers we interviewed said they would be ready and willing to deliver letters designated as priority mail if the statutes were relaxed .