additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . rtc's comments are reprinted in appendix i . we are sending copies of this report to rtc's deputy and acting chief executive officer ; the chairman of the thrift depositor protection oversight board ; the chairman , federal deposit insurance corporation ; and other interested parties . this report was prepared under the direction of mark j. gillen , assistant director , financial institutions and markets issues . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii . if there are any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8678 . jeanne barger , evaluator - in - charge the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . it also changed the timing of its liquidation cost estimates . our review of the one resolution that involved the uninsured depositor policy change showed that consistent with fdicia requirements , rtc paid uninsured depositors only that portion of their uninsured deposits equal to the expected pro rata share of the estimated proceeds from the resolution of the failed institution . rtc initially paid the uninsured depositors a 50-percent advance dividend , which was calculated by multiplying the book value of the assets by a percentage based on rtc's historical asset recovery rates , and then rtc reduced that amount by an arbitrarily determined 18 percent to provide a conservative cushion . about 6 months later , rtc was able to pay an additional 24 percent on the basis of actual asset recoveries . this resolution also involved the policy change concerning the timing of asset sales during conservatorships . the comments are summarized on page 8 and reprinted in appendix i . we did our work between june and october 1994 at rtc headquarters in washington , d.c. our work was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . rtc changed its corporate policies to require that uninsured depositors share in thrift losses if necessary to achieve least costly resolutions and to curtail its practice of selling performing assets during conservatorship operations . these changes brought rtc into compliance with fdicia's uninsured depositor requirements and enabled rtc to better conform with the act's requirement that it evaluate other resolution methods before selling assets .