this assumption proved to be incorrect . problems with both pre - and post - recapitalization loan portfolios resulted in significant loan charge - offs and the depletion of bank equity . for example , we found that about $270 million in assets that originated prior to the recapitalization at first city's houston and dallas banks resulted in nearly $75 million in losses . furthermore , problems with pre - recapitalization assets also plagued the collecting bank . these problems forced first city to charge - off nearly $200 million of collecting bank notes by the time the banks were closed in october 1992 . first city also experienced significant problems with loans originated after the 1988 reorganization . regarding the second resolution , why did fdic's estimate of bif costs to resolve first city at the time of the 1992 failure differ so much from the estimate when the banks were sold in 1993 ? what , if any , additional cost to bif is expected to result from the second resolution of first city ? what lessons does the first city experience offer relevant to the assistance , closure , and resolution processes ? as agreed with the committee , we focused our review on first city's largest bank ( located in houston ) and its second largest bank ( located in dallas ) because the financial difficulties of these banks resulted in the failure of first city's 18 other banks . our objectives , scope , and methodology are further discussed in appendix i . by the late 1970s , the first city bancorporation of texas , inc. , through its subsidiary banks , had a high concentration of loans to the energy industry in the southwest united states and was regarded as a principal lender in that industry . while first city realized at least some of the anticipated savings during its first 2 years of operations , it was unable to sustain these cost - cutting efforts . in the early and mid - 1980s , when the energy industry experienced financial difficulties , so did first city . by 1986 , first city was reporting operating losses . first city , its regulators , and fdic recognized that many of the subsidiary banks could not survive without major infusions of capital . our review of first city's escalating operating expenses showed that during 1990 and 1991 — a period when the banks' revenues and assets were decreasing — its data processing and professional services expenses increased because of the way in which payments for these services were structured in related long - term contracts . furthermore , first city's operating expenses were already high due to above - market long - term building leases negotiated before the recapitalization . the following are gao's comments on the federal deposit insurance corporation's letter dated october 24 , 1994 . we agree with fdic that it received bridge bank authority in 1987 , prior to the 1988 first city resolution , but did not receive cross - guarantee authority until later , in 1989 .