( app . i describes our sample , response rate , and procedures to assess sources of nonsampling error. ) we then analyzed the responses to determine at the time of our survey , among other things , the extent to which ( 1 ) taxpayers' problems were resolved either during or since the november 15 psd , ( 2 ) taxpayers considered the psd to be a good idea , and ( 3 ) taxpayers were aware of the problem resolution office located in each irs district office . ( check one. ) if you left problem - solving day thinking that your problem was resolved or knowing what steps needed to be taken , has irs said or done anything since then that leads you to believe that your problem may not be resolved after all ? ( check one. ) were you treated courteously by irs employees during and since problem - solving day ? ( check one. ) note 1: six taxpayers did not respond to this question concerning their treatment by irs during the problem - solving day . note 2: fifteen taxpayers did not respond to this question concerning their treatment by irs since the problem - solving day . based on your experience , do you think that irs' problem - solving day was a good idea ? ( check one. ) each irs district office has an office called the “problem resolution office,” which was established to help taxpayers resolve their tax problems . this office is headed by a “taxpayer advocate.” have you ever contacted a problem resolution office in order to resolve tax problems ? ( check one. ) irs has analyzed the types of problems that taxpayers have sought to resolve on problem - solving days since the beginning of the initiative and identified four main problem areas , including ( 1 ) penalties , ( 2 ) audit reconsiderations , ( 3 ) installment agreements , and ( 4 ) offers in compromise . ( check one. ) ( check one. ) following are definitions for each area . the internal revenue code contains various provisions authorizing irs to impose financial penalties on a taxpayer for violation of provisions in the code . for example , section 6651 of the code authorizes irs to assess a penalty if a taxpayer fails to file a required tax return or fails to pay a tax liability on time . irs assesses the penalty in addition to the taxes and interest owed by the taxpayer . treasury regulation 301.6404-1 authorizes irs to reconsider an audit assessment . for example , if a taxpayer disputes an assessment and provides additional information to support his or her position , irs may reconsider and abate the assessment . section 6159 of the internal revenue code authorizes irs to allow taxpayers to pay their taxes in installments , with interest , in order to facilitate payment of the tax liability . section 7122 of the internal revenue code authorizes irs to compromise tax debts . offers in compromise are taxpayer proposals to settle tax debts for less than the amount owed . susan malone , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .