( see app . iii for the text of the postal service's comments. ) apwu characterized our draft report as being inaccurate and substantially biased . it also expressed the opinion that a report on this subject is premature because the data necessary for adequate evaluation are not yet available . using the most recent 4-week period , the cost for in - house keying was greater than for the full 36-week period . however , because costs for any given period can contain extraordinary payments , we believe comparison periods should be as long as feasible to minimize the effects of those nonrecurring costs . apwu suggested that our analysis failed to recognize some of the direct costs associated with the entire remote barcoding program , including capital costs . the total cost of the remote barcoding program was not the focus of our review . our objective was to compare the direct cost of performing remote keying services in - house versus under contract . where the cost to the postal service was the same whether the work was to be done in - house or by contract , we did not include such cost in our comparison . this methodology is consistent with the service's guidelines for the preparation of cost data for comparison with contracting out proposals . using this approach , we did not include such costs as video display terminals , keyboards , and computers , for example , that were provided as government - furnished equipment to the contractors and also used at postal - operated sites . our report discloses in appendix ii the cost elements that we considered in our comparison and identifies cost elements not considered . apwu asserted that the draft report understated the cost of contracting for remote barcoding because we ignored such potential costs as overruns by government contractors . it is true that we have reported on cost overruns incurred by government contractors . after receiving apwu's comments , we revisited with postal service officials the issue of the effect of the agreement on labor management relations to assure ourselves that we had correctly characterized the postal service's position . the officials confirmed that we had , explaining that while the postal service believed at the time that the agreement was reached it would have a positive effect , the service now believes that its relationship with apwu has deteriorated since the 1993 agreement . we added language to further ensure that the final report presents a balanced discussion of the differing views of the affected parties . ( see app . iv for the text of apwu's comments and our detailed response to these comments. ) the contract services association of america believed we should have put more information into our report regarding what the association said was a complete breakdown in the postal service's labor - management relations . in view of our previous extensive work evaluating the state of labor - management relations in the postal service , we did not evaluate labor - management relations ; but at various places in the report , we describe the various parties' perceptions of the labor - management relationship .