we have a mission . but what keeps us focused and working on those issues of importance to us ? our corporate goals and our measurement thereof.” “in 1988 , our corporate goals came out , consisting of only three numbers . blackburn , richard and benson rosen . “total quality and human resources management: lessons learned from baldrige award - winning companies,” academy of management executive , vol 7 ( 3 ) 49-66 , 1993 . boyett , joseph h. and henry p. conn . workplace 2000: the revolution reshaping american business . ny: plume , 1992 . conference board . closing the human performance gap , report #1065-94-rr , 1994 . conference board . the changing human resources function , report #950 , 1990 . ingraham , patricia w. and barbara s. romzek ( eds ) . new paradigms for government: issues for the changing public service . san francisco: jossey - bass , 1994 . ingraham , patricia w. and david h. rosenbloom ( eds ) . the promise and paradox of civil service reform . pittsburgh: university of pittsburgh press , 1992 . ingraham , patricia w. and carolyn ban , ( eds ) . legislating bureaucratic change: the civil service reform act of 1978 . albany: suny press , 1984 . johnson , gail . recruiting , retaining and motivating the federal workforce . ny: quorum , 1991 . johnson , ronald n. and gary d. libecap . the federal civil service system and the problem of bureaucracy: the economics and politics of institutional change . chicago university press , 1994 . klinger , donald . “reinventing public personnel administration as strategic human resource management,” public personnel management , vol 22 ( 4 ) : 565-578 , winter 1993 . levering , robert and milton moskowitz . the 100 best companies to work for in america . new york: doubleday , 1993 . national academy of public administration . strategies and alternatives for transforming human resources management , august 1995 . national academy of public administration . innovative approaches to human resources management , august 1995 . there was one number . then we had our service quality index — a measure of the ten things our customers thought were most important . that was another number . and finally , there was our profit number , based on global pre - tax income . what was really exciting was the news that we had to reach our corporate goals for all three of these numbers , or there would not be a cent of incentive compensation for anyone in the company.” “one strength of our information management system is that , with the exception of the leadership average — which is an annual measure — you can track these corporate goals in real time . you can measure your service at federal express on a daily basis . you can measure it companywide or you can measure it at any location in the company . you can measure how your profits are doing , you can track profit and loss , you can track against the budget . and you can tie all this to every management level in the company , to every employee .