regulatory structure 28 . careful consideration of the desirability of more formal intermarket coordination and cooperation mechanisms , different regulatory regimes , a “tie - breaking referee” for intermarket issues , or emergency powers . development of mechanisms for international coordination on multimarket issues . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . market mechanisms 13 . the desirability of simultaneous , brief trading halts in all markets based on clear authority and carefully established and known standards . coordination of options and continuing trading of index futures and options with the trading of the underlying stocks . establishment of separate trading of index “baskets” of stock . providing for or requiring physical delivery for settlement of index futures and options . development of block trading procedures for index futures and options on futures . revision of the equity market short - sale rules . use of “open outcry,” “one price auction,” and specialist book disclosure approaches in large , intraday order imbalance situations in specialist markets to facilitate price discovery and market clearing and minimize intermarket disruptions and discontinuities . emergency measures to restrict large , rapid liquidations of positions . preestablished standards for shortened trading hour for all markets in periods of sustained heavy volume . a similar proposal was subsequently enacted into law . “ ( 1 ) clarify the treatment of certain financial contracts ( i.e. , securities contracts , commodity contracts , forward contracts,[] repurchase agreements,[] and swap agreements[] ) upon the insolvency of one of the counterparties to a transaction and ( 2 ) recognize certain netting arrangements in order to reduce the risk that the failure of one entity to pay its obligations will cause other firms to fail to meet their obligations.” the proposal also clarified that cross - product close - out netting would be permitted under law . thus , a master netting agreement would allow obligations arising from certain financial contracts to be netted against each other . however , the proposal maintained existing limitations on the types of entities that would benefit from the new provisions .