( app . ii summarizes eqms results since fiscal year 1992. ) before fiscal year 1997 , irs did not collect data on the reasons key elements were not met . starting in fiscal year 1997 , however , irs began collecting these data . table 3 summarizes these results . irs reemphasized the use of financial status techniques to address its concerns with finding unreported income . in the audits we reviewed in our 1995 and 1996 sample , we estimated that auditors used financial status techniques to identify unreported income totaling over $300 million . our review of the irs workpapers indicated that the auditors were unlikely to have identified unreported income without using the techniques . the workpapers did not show that this income was reported on an information return or identified by the taxpayer , the other two primary techniques used to verify the accuracy of reported income . however , table 3 shows that the use of financial status techniques has resulted in no adjustments to income in a significant number of cases . for example , in our 1992 and 1993 sample , 81 percent of the audits using financial status techniques resulted in no adjustments to reported income attributable specifically to the techniques . similarly , for the 1995 and 1996 sample , 83 percent resulted in no adjustment to reported income attributable to the use of the techniques . audits having no change attributable to the use of financial status audit techniques may have had changes attributable to other audit techniques . these no - change audits were closed with either ( 1 ) no changes to any tax issue or ( 2 ) changes such as reducing claims for a tax deduction , exemption , or credit after the auditor reviewed the taxpayer's documentation . the difference in these percentages is not statistically significant . during both periods , financial status techniques were used predominately on returns involving business or farm income . irs research has found that taxpayers with these types of income are more likely to underreport income than taxpayers whose income is reported by third parties on information returns . table 1 compares the two periods we reviewed . irs managers were concerned that auditors were not making use of techniques to identify unreported income . the financial status program and the associated training was designed to correct this problem . irs officials could not tell us why the percent of financial status audits had not changed after the reemphasis and training . however , they noted that one reason may have been because of the limited amount of follow - up training provided by the districts and the limited amount of national office oversight due to irs' reorganization activities after the initial training . in commenting on our draft report , irs officials indicated that the financial status training focused less on increasing the use of a specific technique and more on improving the auditors' ability to identify unreported income . we also analyzed whether irs changed the types of techniques being used . we found no significant change in usage by type of financial status technique since the reemphasis . generally , only two techniques were used , often in combination , during our two sample periods .