the first is information security . malicious attacks on computer systems are an increasing threat to our national welfare . despite their sensitivity and criticality , federal systems and data across government are not being adequately protected , thereby putting billions of dollars worth of assets a risk of loss and vast amounts of sensitive data at risk of unauthorized disclosure . since june 1993 , we have issued over 30 reports describing serious information security weaknesses at major federal agencies . for example , in may 1996 , we reported that tests at dod showed that dod systems may have experienced as many as 250,000 attacks during 1995 , that over 60 percent of the attacks were successful at gaining access , and that only a small percentage of these attacks were detected . leading private - sector employers — as well as some government entities both here and abroad — are creating personnel systems that diverge sharply from the federal government's traditional approach . the new model is more decentralized , focused more directly on mission accomplishment , and set up more to establish guiding principles than to prescribe detailed rules and procedures . in our contacts with experts from private - sector organizations and from other governments both here and abroad and with labor representatives , academicians , and experienced federal officials , we have identified several newly emerging principles for managing people in high - performing organizations . our transforming the civil service: building the workforce of the future — results of a gao - sponsored symposium ( gao / ggd - 96-35 , december 20 , 1995 ) distilled the key principles we learned . among these key principles were: first , in today's high - performing organizations , people are valued as assets rather than as costs . they are recognized as crucial to organizational success — as partners rather than as mere hired help — and organizations that recognize them as partners invest in their professional development and empower them to contribute ideas and make decisions . second , organizational mission , vision , and culture are emphasized over rules and regulations . in place of highly detailed rules to manage their employees , leading organizations are relying increasingly on a well - defined mission , a clearly articulated vision , and a coherent organizational structure to form the foundation for the key business systems and processes they use to achieve desired results . third , managers are given the authority to manage their people flexibly and creatively so they can focus on achieving results rather than on doing things “by the book.”they are held accountable for outcomes — for furthering the mission and vision of the organization — rather than for adhering to a set of minutely defined procedures . this , once again , is an approach that we have observed largely in the private sector . but the integration of human resource management into the business of the organization coincides with a practice we have identified as critical to the implementation of gpra — the alignment of activities , core processes , and resources to support mission - related goals .