this program has two components . first , information to measure proficiency is gathered through a mystery caller program . under this program , service contractor personnel are to make about 250 telephone calls each quarter to business mail facilities in each service district and ask service employees technical questions that a business mail customer would likely ask . the second component is a survey of business mail customers . the survey , administered by gallup , asks business mail customers their opinion on how well their needs were met on their most recent visit to a specific business mail facility . information provided by the service showed that the results from the mystery caller program and the survey are transformed into quarterly scores measuring each business mail facility's performance in ( 1 ) technical knowledge , ( 2 ) helpfulness , ( 3 ) consistency , and ( 4 ) facility appearance . the results are to be used to modify the training curriculum for each facility's staff to emphasize areas where the employees did not score as well as they should . for example , the denver business mail facility manager said that fiscal year 1999 scores indicated that the denver facility needed to emphasize training in 7 of 13 technical areas measured by the mystery caller program . she provided us data showing that these areas related primarily to eligibility requirements and acceptance standards for various categories of business mail . we did not determine whether the mystery caller program measures employee technical proficiency in any of the same technical areas where the inspection service found that additional training for some business mail acceptance employees was needed or whether the additional training needs identified by the inspection service have been addressed by the service . our 1996 report noted that the service acknowledged it lacked needed information on the extent of revenue losses associated with accepting improperly prepared business mailings . our report recommended that the service measure systemwide revenue losses as a basis for judging whether acceptance controls were working to prevent such losses . rather than develop a methodology to determine systemwide losses , the service decided to use its revenue assurance group to identify systemwide “opportunities” to improve revenue protection processes and to see that the service is properly compensated for all its products and / or services . this approach by the service is intended to provide it with certain information on revenue losses , which is one of the objectives that we had in mind when we made our recommendation in 1996 . the revenue assurance group was established in 1994 and has five goals: identify services that the service has provided without collection of proper postage or fees . protect future revenue by improving processes . ensure compliance with current policies and regulations . promote revenue protection awareness . communicate revenue awareness to customers and service employees . according to the service , as a result of using this approach , it collected $26.5 million in additional revenue at business mail units in fiscal year 1998 and an additional $30.1 million in fiscal year 1999 . revenue assurance officials provided us information indicating that they had identified causes and taken corrective actions for the problems they found in the business mail acceptance process .