iii ) . aousc's written comments incorporated the views of the chair of the judicial conference's committee on defender services . aousc said that the findings and issues identified in our report would assist the judiciary in its ongoing efforts to increase the type , quality , and consistency of data being collected on the activities of fdos , dprcs , and panel attorneys . aousc identified a number of specific efforts , planned and underway , to improve data collection and analysis and contain defender services costs . we also met with aousc officials in the office of audit , defender services division , office of finance and budget , and statistics division to discuss a number of issues , including studies they had or were conducting on defender services workload and costs . we identified the workload and cost data available from aousc . fpd and cdo workload data are reported semiannually by each office on form js - 50 . we obtained these semiannual workload reports for fiscal years 1990 , 1991 , 1992 , 1993 , and the first half of fiscal year 1994 and produced a dataset to analyze fpd and cdo workload by case type , disposition ( where available ) , and type of representation — criminal , appeals , and all other representations ( such as bail and probation / parole revocation hearings and habeas corpus proceedings ) . we obtained a copy of the automated database created from the vouchers submitted by panel attorneys for fiscal years 1990 through 1993 , plus the first 6 months of fiscal year 1994 . this database contained data on the amount of in - court and out - of - court compensation requested by panel attorneys and approved by the court , the approval date , the payment date , and the attorney's authorized hourly in - court and out - of - court billing rates . we did not verify the accuracy of the data entered on the forms or the database aousc provided . however , edit checks on the internal reliability of data in selected data fields in the database , such as attorney hourly rates , revealed some questions about the accuracy of the data in these fields . these problems are discussed in later sections of this appendix . aousc's master criminal file provided a wide variety of data on overall criminal workload in the federal district courts . we did not adjust the 1990 cost per representation closed for inflation because we wanted a comparable estimate for panel attorneys and fdos . while fdo attorneys received cost - of - living adjustments during the period ( though not always at the same time in the fiscal year ) , the basic panel attorney hourly rates in 78 of 94 districts remained unchanged at $40 ( out - of - court ) and $60 ( in - court ) . we had already separately estimated the impact of paying higher standard hourly rates to panel attorneys in the 16 districts in which higher rates were paid in fiscal years 1991 , 1992 , and 1993 .