we found little evidence of tying by banks . agency officials we interviewed were aware of only one instance of a tying violation identified during regulators' routine examinations of banks or inspections of bank holding companies since 1990 . likewise , they said regulators' investigations of complaints since 1990 , including an sia allegation of tying practices at several banks and bank holding companies , have identified only a few instances of tying . inquiries with a cross section of state and local officials , academic experts , consumer groups , and small business contacts who we were told were knowledgeable about tying likewise revealed few instances of bank tying . several bank representatives have argued that the lack of evidence indicates that tying is not occurring , although others believe that it indicates that the tying provisions are having a deterrent effect on such activity . finally , the limited evidence of tying may be indicative of the difficulty involved in identifying instances of tying or consumers' general hesitance to report such instances due to their reluctance to jeopardize their credit relationships . during routine examinations , both occ and federal reserve examiners are expected to evaluate a banking organization's compliance with the tying provisions . they are also expected to investigate potential tying practices that they become aware of during the course of their work . occ officials said they were not aware of any instances of tying identified through their routine examinations since 1990 . over the same period , federal reserve officials cited one instance of tying identified during a bank examination . officials at both agencies explained that tying violations are difficult to find during examinations because illegal tying arrangements are not clearly evident in loan documentation , and it is difficult to know where to look for evidence of tying without a specific complaint . occ procedures require examiners to look for tying arrangements among the various types of loans being reviewed , including commercial , real estate , and construction loans . examiners are expected to address tying practices along with other credit - related bank practices while reviewing credit and collateral files , especially those relating to loan agreements . federal reserve procedures also require examiners to review tying policies and to follow an inspection checklist in their examinations . examiners are required to review bank holding companies' and state - chartered banks' written policies and procedures , training programs , and audit practices . these reviews are to look at a bank's review of pertinent loans where products or services may be susceptible to improper tying arrangements and to include a review of specific transactions if the banking organization is found to be deficient in its antitying policies and procedures . in addition , procedures call for examiners to assess whether employees are aware of tying and of how to prevent tying violations . finally , examiners are required to determine whether internal audit departments perform any work to detect or prevent tying violations . in the nine occ and federal reserve examinations or inspections we reviewed , we found that examiners followed required examination procedures for monitoring compliance with the tying provisions .