the goal is to ensure maximum compliance . in fiscal year 1997 , customs estimated that it would take 8 to 10 years to complete compliance assessments at the top 2,100 importers based on the value of imports . however , because customs completed only 209 compliance assessments from fiscal year 1996 through march 31 , 1999 , it appears unlikely that customs will be able to achieve that goal . to expedite the lengthy compliance assessment process , customs implemented a revised approach in july 1999 , but it is too early to determine the impact of the revisions on customs' ability to meet its goal . customs began conducting follow - up reviews at importers who had received compliance assessments in fiscal year 1998 . the reviews were intended to determine whether importers had taken corrective action to improve their internal controls over imports and had improved compliance . however , customs has not yet developed a methodology for evaluating the overall impact of compliance assessments on importer compliance with u.s. laws and regulations . our analysis of 59 importers that had compliance assessments completed by the end of fiscal year 1997 raised some concerns about the impact of compliance assessments on overall compliance rates . in many cases , the compliance rates for the 59 individual importers were based on few examinations and were therefore not statistically valid , but they serve as indicators that compliance assessments may not be maximizing compliance at many importers that have received them . this analysis showed that from fiscal year 1996 to fiscal year 1998 , compliance worsened for 20 , improved for 27 , and stayed the same for 4 . eight importers already were in full compliance , and they stayed that way . for many years , customs has conducted regulatory audits of importer records to verify compliance with u.s. laws and regulations . in october 1995 , customs implemented a different kind of audit — compliance assessments . the primary focus of regulatory audits is to identify lost revenue and the primary focus of compliance assessments is to work with importers to ensure that their imports comply with u.s. laws and regulations . the regulatory audit division is responsible for performing compliance assessments with assistance from import specialists , account managers ( if assigned ) , and other staff , as needed . compliance assessments include evaluating an importer's operating practices and internal controls supporting its customs - related activities . assessments also include statistical sampling of entry transactions from the importer's previous fiscal year . each assessment involves a minimum review of compliance in five trade areas ( classification , value , quantity , special duty provisions , and recordkeeping ) . the findings of compliance assessments are to be used to determine the frequency of future compliance measurement examinations . the director expects the staff resources needed to manage accounts to be less in the maintenance step than earlier in the account management cycle . as shown in table 4 , as of march 31 , 1999 , 46 accounts had reached maintenance , including 21 national accounts and 25 port accounts .