( app . ii shows the results for each fiscal year for seven types of audits. ) to determine how much of the recommended additional tax amounts had been assessed and collected as of september 27 , 1997 , by type of audit closed in fiscal year 1992 , we did analyses similar to those done for our first objective . we expanded the analyses to array the results by seven types of audits . specifically , these analyses showed that irs collected taxes sooner from corporations than from individuals . irs collected 95 percent of the taxes from cep corporations and 92 percent from other large corporations before the assessments or within the first 5 weeks of the assessments . for individuals audited at service centers or district offices , irs collected about 60 percent of the taxes within these time periods . however , the portion of the taxes that irs collected after 15 weeks was much higher for individuals than for corporations ; staff from the collection division become involved after this time . for example , less than 5 percent of the taxes collected from cep and other large corporations were collected after 15 weeks . about 25 percent of the taxes collected from individuals audited at the service centers and district offices were collected after this period . table iv.1 and table iv.2 show the timing of collections of assessed taxes for the various types of audits closed in fiscal year 1992 . percent collected over 15 weeks after assessment “other” includes audits of returns for employment tax , estate tax , excise tax , and gift tax ; audits conducted in irs training ; and audits categorized by irs as other . amounts do not add to total due to rounding . percent collected over 15 weeks after assessment ( continued ) percent collected over 15 weeks after assessment 1040a = nonbusiness returns filed by individuals tpi = total positive income ( income reported as a positive on tax return tables ) c - tgr = form 1040 schedule c ( profit or loss from business ) total gross receipts f - tgr = form 1040 schedule f ( profit or loss from farming ) total gross receipts amounts do not add to total due to rounding . for the years we reviewed , the recommended amounts ranged up to about $32 billion . however , the recommended amount does not represent the actual revenue resulting from irs' audits . as of september 27 , 1997 , less than half of the recommended amount had been assessed as additional taxes , and not all of the assessed amount had subsequently been collected . for fiscal year 1992 audits , as of september 27 , 1997 , irs had assessed $8.5 billion ( 34 percent ) of the $24.8 billion in recommended additional taxes . irs settled another 40 percent of the recommended additional taxes without ultimately assessing the recommended additional taxes for various reasons . these reasons included taxpayer claims ; decisions in appeals or the courts ; and reductions ( i.e. , abatements ) of amounts that had initially been assessed . disputes on the final 26 percent of the additional recommended taxes had yet to be settled .