not applicable . quality of service was studied . three multicustody facilities ( minimum - to maximum - security ) for women were compared: a private prison and a state - run prison in new mexico and a federal prison in west virginia . the data analyzed for the private facility covered june 1989 through november 1989 ; data for the state facility covered june 1988 through november 1988 ; and the federal data covered december 1987 through may 1988 . are the results of these studies generalizable to correctional systems in other jurisdictions ? from these studies , what are the “lessons learned” to help guide future comparative studies of private and public prisons ? to identify relevant studies , we requested and obtained literature searches from the national criminal justice reference service and the national institute of corrections . also , within the department of justice , we contacted knowledgeable officials of the component agencies responsible for managing federal correctional facilities — the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) , u.s . marshals service , and immigration and naturalization service . similarly , to query knowledgeable state agency officials , we first contacted the director of the private corrections project at the university of florida's center for studies in criminology and law to obtain information about the number of privatized facilities in each state ( see app . iv ) . then , for each applicable state , we contacted officials at the state's corrections department and / or corrections research agency and inquired about any completed , ongoing , or planned studies comparing private and public prisons . further , we contacted the national council on crime and delinquency and various nationally recognized researchers in academia . assessment of studies we assessed each of the five relevant studies that we identified . our work in assessing the conclusions or results of each study and the generalizability of same — as well as identifying any lessons learned — can be characterized as a form of evaluation synthesis . by definition , an evaluation synthesis is a systematic procedure for organizing findings from several disparate evaluation studies . that is , the procedure addresses key questions or issues by assessing existing studies or evaluations , rather than by conducting primary data collection . in reviewing the studies , we focused on the findings and conclusions of each study and evaluated these in relation to the methodology used by the respective study . as an initial and fundamental inquiry , for instance , we focused on the similarity of the private and public facilities being compared in each study . that is , we wanted to determine ( 1 ) if the facilities were reasonably well matched in relation to design and capacity , security level , inmate demographics , and other relevant institutional characteristics and ( 2 ) whether the facilities were actually in operation and , if so , for what length of time prior to the comparative evaluation .