economy. ) ( figure notes on next page ) verifying matched cases includes developing and checking preliminary data tables to verify the accuracy of the linked data . the bea - census data link project begins when bea sends census a computer tape containing micro - level data on foreign - owned enterprises . the data tape contains key information about the enterprise , such as its name , address , and ein . the tape also includes other descriptive items for the enterprise , such as the number of its employees and its sales in dollars . census then attempts to match by computer bea's enterprise eins with eins listed in census' standard statistical establishment list ( ssel ) , a computerized list covering all u.s. companies and their establishments — about 9.5 million single and multi - unit companies . the computerized ein matching operation has three possible outcomes: ( 1 ) an enterprise links to one or more of census' establishments , ( 2 ) two or more enterprises link to one or more establishments , or ( 3 ) an enterprise does not link to any of census' establishments . for those enterprises that do not link ( outcome 3 ) , census and bea conduct further research . for those enterprises that do link ( outcome 1 or 2 ) , census and bea verify the accuracy of the matched cases . once the computerized link has been completed , census must identify those cases in which bea's enterprise did not link to any of census' establishments . this nonlinkage may have occurred because the original ein that bea provided to census for that enterprise on the data tape was incorrect — perhaps the enterprise reported the ein incorrectly to bea . whatever the reason , census tries to identify the correct ein by researching the enterprise on the ssel . if census is unable to identify the correct ein , census forwards the case to bea for further research . the research at bea often entails checking historical or archived information in various bea files to ensure that the enterprise is a valid u.s. affiliate of a foreign firm , i.e. , the enterprise is at least 10 percent foreign owned and the ein for that enterprise in bea's files is valid . if the enterprise is not a valid u.s. affiliate , the enterprise is eliminated from inclusion in the data link . if the enterprise is a valid u.s. affiliate , bea obtains the necessary information to allow the enterprise to be matched correctly to census' establishments . bea then sends this information back to census . generally , the research at bea on unmatched cases is carried on concurrently as the project moves into the reconciliation phase . for the data link covering 1992 , 243 cases were referred to bea for further research . depending on the research required , each case referred can take up to 15 days to research , according to bea officials . at this point the cases that did link — those in which a bea enterprise linked to at least one census establishment — must be reconciled .