this is a federal plan . how the post - retirement cola is determined: ad hoc at the discretion of the governing body fixed rate from year to year variable rate based on investment performance variable rate based on the consumer price index is the cola based on the “original” or “current” benefit ? are members required to contribute ? table ii.2: csrs: provisions of the civil service retirement system general design and features of plan design components defined benefit ( db ) defined contribution ( dc ) with employer contribution dc with no employer contribution social security year social security coverage was provided year original plan was established eligibility number of years to vest in db component number of years to vest in employer's contribution to dc component age and service requirements for normal unreduced benefits final average salary ( fas ) calculation does plan only include state general employees ? 5 not applicable , no employer contribution age 55 with 30 years of service , age 60 with 20 years of service , age 65 with 5 years of service highest 3 years not applicable . supplemental / auxiliary benefits are survivor benefits provided after retirement ? general design and features of plan is a “pop - up” provision included in the survivor's benefit options ? are disability benefits provided ? does the plan allow for the purchase of service credits ? what was the actual employer's contribution as a percent of covered payroll in 1996 ? was 100 percent of the employer's actuarially required contribution actually contributed in 1996 ? if no , what percent was actually contributed in 1996 ? if no , what percent was actually contributed in 1996 ? age and service requirements for normal unreduced benefits final average salary ( fas ) calculation does plan only include state general employees ? cost of living adjustments ( colas ) has the plan provided post - retirement colas in the past 5 years ? variable rate based on the consumer price index is the cola based on the “original” or “current” benefit ? are survivor benefits provided after retirement ? is a “pop - up” provision included in the survivor's benefit options ? does the plan allow for the purchase of service credits ? cost of living adjustments ( colas ) has the plan provided post - retirement colas in the past 5 years ? variable rate based on investment performance variable rate based on the consumer price index is the cola based on the “original” or “current” benefit ? if no , what percent was actually contributed in 1996 ? if no , what percent was actually contributed in 1996 ? age and service requirements for normal unreduced benefits final average salary ( fas ) calculation does plan only include state general employees ? cost of living adjustments ( colas ) has the plan provided post - retirement colas in the past 5 years ? opm responded that it had no comments . we did our review from february 1998 to march 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . all of the 50 state retirement programs had two or more of the four design components but few of them had all of the same design components as fers or csrs .