those data are not projectable . however , national data from examination's management information system showing the hours charged to nonfiler cases closed in fiscal years 1993 and 1994 also showed that gs - 11 revenue agents accounted for most of the time spent by examination on nonfiler work . specifically , of the approximately 3.6 million hours charged by revenue agents and tax auditors on those cases , about 2.4 million hours ( 66 percent ) were charged by gs - 11 revenue agents . another 491,000 hours ( 14 percent ) were charged by revenue agents above gs - 11 , and 155,000 hours ( 4 percent ) were charged by agents in grades 5 through 9 . the remaining hours were charged by tax auditors . generally , higher graded revenue agents audit more complex tax returns . for example , when not working nonfiler cases , gs - 11 and above revenue agents generally audit complex returns filed by individuals and returns filed by corporations . although it helped irs to reduce its nonfiler inventory and secure delinquent returns , the use of gs - 11 and above examination staff on nonfiler cases might have also contributed to an increase in irs' audit rate for individual returns and a decline in the audit rate for nonindividual returns . for example , the audit rate for individual returns went from 0.92 percent in fiscal year 1993 to 1.08 percent in fiscal year 1994 , an increase that irs has attributed to the nonfiler strategy . at the same time , however , the audit rate for corporate returns decreased from 3.05 percent to 2.31 percent . although other factors may have contributed to that decrease , several of the revenue agents and examination officials we interviewed in four district offices told us that if the gs - 11 and above agents had not been doing nonfiler work , they would have been doing corporate audits . examination officials in one district , for example , told us that because of the nonfiler work , the number of corporate audits done in that district decreased by about 10 percent . although examination officials , revenue agents , and tax auditors we interviewed in the four district offices we visited had several positive things to say about the nonfiler strategy and examination's role therein , a common theme expressed by many of them was that much of the nonfiler case work done by revenue agents and tax auditors could have been done by lower graded staff . in one district office , for example , that view was expressed by the chief and assistant chief of examination as well as the two branch chiefs , one group manager , three revenue agents , and three tax auditors we interviewed . our review of case files in the four districts led to a similar conclusion — that the nonfiler case work in those districts involved tasks that could be done by lower graded staff . our case file reviews indicated that with some exceptions , the work done on those cases was not so complex that it required the expertise of higher graded staff .