this approach has three levels . first , ofheo examiners are to meet and evaluate senior management , analyze strategic and business plans , determine the quality of internal and external audits , and verify records and control systems . second , the examiners are to expand the examination to include further testing , statistical sampling , and analyses of the enterprises' systems . if the second - level review raises any questions , a team of examiners is to do a detailed third - level review of these concerns . by september 1994 , oeo had planned its activities through calendar year 1995 . according to this schedule , oeo would have seven or more projects ongoing at all times — at least two examinations at each of the enterprises , along with at least three supervisory monitoring projects . oeo's director characterized this workplan as “ambitious.” table 3 summarizes oeo's workplan from july 1994 through the end of 1995 . it shows , for example , that during the first half of 1995 , oeo staff are to complete “general,” “specialty,” and books and records examinations of both enterprises . in the general examination , oeo staff will ( 1 ) examine each enterprise's risk management by assessing the adequacy of management processes to identify , measure , monitor , and control the risk exposure of the enterprise ; ( 2 ) examine a functional area of each enterprise's secondary market operations , such as its marketing or mortgage securitization ; or ( 3 ) assess the adequacy of some aspect of each enterprise's business or product lines , such as its single - or multifamily guarantee programs . the specialty examination is to cover the enterprises' electronic data processing ( edp ) . the objective of these examinations is to ensure that edp systems used by the enterprises are adequate , reliable , accurate , and operated within a secure environment . ofheo plans to test major systems to verify the data and report integrity . in the books and records examination , oeo staff are to evaluate the accounting and auditing to determine the reliability of the enterprises' financial information . oeo's small staff has not been able to keep up with its workplan . ofheo completed its first on - site examinations , focusing on the enterprises' use of off - balance sheet financial derivatives , in november 1994 . ofheo reported that the enterprises used derivatives for sound business purposes and that derivatives activities were consistent with the enterprises' objectives . oeo began its second examination of both enterprises , the corporate examinations , in october 1994 and anticipates completing those reports in april 1995 , 4 months behind its original schedule . oeo has completed one part of its planned supervisory monitoring activities ( an analysis of the enterprises' strategic and business plans ) . but two other activities that were scheduled to be done by the end of 1994 — the development of ofheo's call report and the third quarter company analysis of the enterprises — are also behind schedule . all activities planned for 1995 are also behind schedule . much has changed since then .