iii ) . in discussions with ftc officials , we confirmed that they do not examine or routinely investigate nonbank mortgage subsidiaries of holding companies . with regard to our recommendation for greater information sharing between frb , the other banking regulators , hud , and ftc during the merger application process , frb generally agreed and said it would explore ways to enhance the systematic exchange of relevant information . however , frb did not agree that it should seek information about other agencies' consumer complaints as part of the merger application review process . the reasons for this were: a 1992 memorandum of understanding between hud and the banking regulators' calls for hud to refer allegations of fair lending violations to the appropriate banking regulator , which is to take these into account in examinations and supervisory activity . hud cases involving individual or isolated grievances — and not a finding of a pattern or practice — would not likely represent the type of information that is particularly useful in frb's review of managerial resources for purposes of the bank holding company act . although the 1992 memorandum of understanding between hud and the banking regulators calls for the referral of allegations of fair lending violations to the appropriate banking regulator , it does not address the referral of these fair lending allegations to frb for consideration during the bank holding company merger application process . the fair lending allegations received by hud , ftc , and the other banking regulators could be useful to frb in its consideration of the managerial resources factor during the merger process . we acknowledge that not all consumer complaints received by other agencies would be relevant for frb to consider during the bank holding company merger process . however , an otherwise unobserved pattern or practice bearing on the managerial resources of a large and complex holding company could emerge from a review of widely collected consumer complaints . moreover , consumer complaint letters can be a useful indicator of certain types of illegal credit discrimination , such as discriminatory treatment of applicants and illegal prescreening and marketing . frb stated that the exchange of information between agencies should ( 1 ) ensure that the information is provided in a timely manner and ( 2 ) maximize the benefits of the exchange while minimizing the burden to all parties . we concur with frb's expectations regarding the exchange of information and acknowledge frb's initiative in planning to consult with the other federal agencies to identify possible ways to enhance the systematic exchange of relevant information . frb stated that it planned to take action in response to our recommendation that it provide copies of relevant comment letters received during the merger application process to the other federal agencies involved with fair lending enforcement . specifically , frb indicated that it would consult with the other agencies and was prepared to establish whatever mechanism deemed appropriate to ensure that the agencies receive public comments that they would find helpful to ongoing supervisory oversight . frb's plans are a positive first step in responding to our recommendation .