iii ) . he concurred with the report's findings and recommendation . the four components of this measure are budget , total revenue , burden , and total tax liability . budget: this is the amount of money appropriated by congress or requested by irs through treasury and the office of management and budget ( omb ) . total revenue: this is all revenue collected by irs , including revenue resulting from enforcement activities , but excluding refunds . burden: this is a “monetized” estimate of the number of burden hours placed on taxpayers to meet their tax obligations . the calculation is based on a methodology developed by arthur d. little , inc. total tax liability: this is an estimate of the amount of individual income , corporate income , and employment taxes that should have been paid in a given year , if all taxes that were legally owed had been paid . improve customer service objective: the purpose of this objective is to better serve the public , reduce taxpayer burden , and increase public confidence in the tax administration system . irs seeks to improve taxpayer access , resolve as many inquiries as possible on the first contact , and increase customer satisfaction . taxpayer burden cost ( in dollars ) for irs to collect $100: this ratio measures the private sector costs compared to the cost for irs to collect $100 in net tax revenue . net tax revenue includes all revenue collected ( income , employment , estate and gift , and excise taxes ) by irs in a fiscal year , less refunds . private sector costs cover the paperwork burden imposed on the public as a result of the federal tax reporting system administered by irs . private sector costs of the paperwork burden are based on the estimated time individual and business taxpayers spend keeping tax records , learning about tax laws , preparing tax forms , and sending tax forms to irs . taxpayer paperwork burden is converted from time to dollars by multiplying total time by the estimated value of a taxpayer's hour . initial contact resolution rate: this measures the successful resolution of all issues resulting from the taxpayer's first inquiry , telephone only . toll - free telephone level of access: this is the percentage of calls answered . the percentage is computed by comparing the number of calls attempted ( demand ) to the number answered in all components of the customer service function ( automated collection system , customer service toll - free , and the centralized inventory and distribution system ) . tax law accuracy rate for taxpayer inquiries: this measures the rate at which irs' toll - free telephone assistance program provides taxpayers accurate tax information . customer satisfaction rates: this measure was under development at the time of our review . increase compliance objective: the purpose of this objective is to encourage and assist taxpayers to voluntarily file timely and accurate returns and to pay on time and , if taxpayers do not comply , to take appropriate compliance actions . total collection percentage: this is the ratio of total collections to total estimated true tax liability .