this matter has not been resolved . in order to report more than one issue for each complaint , the service would have to modify the automated complaint information system to allow for the recording of more than one issue for a complaint . however , we have reported that part iv of form 462 for reporting statistics on bases and issues is methodologically flawed and results in an overcounting of bases and issues . we have made a recommendation to eeoc that it correct this problem , and the agency said that it would address our concerns . therefore , we believe that it would be prudent for the postal service to wait for eeoc to resolve this issue before modifying its data recording and reporting practices . in addition to the discrepancies already noted , we found that the postal service's statistical reports to eeoc for fiscal years 1996 and 1997 did not include data for complaints involving certain categories of primary issues . the form 462 , which eeoc requires agencies to complete , contains a list of issues . for its own management needs , the service supplemented eeoc's list with three additional categories of specific issues: ( 1 ) denial of worker's compensation , ( 2 ) leave , and ( 3 ) other pay . however , we found that in completing part iv of eeoc form 462 for fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , the service omitted the data about complaints in which these additional issues were cited . after we brought our observations to the attention of service officials , they provided the omitted data to eeoc . the officials explained that , for fiscal year 1998 , in lieu of including data about complaints involving the three additional issues on part iv of form 462 , they provided these data separately to eeoc . the eeo compliance and appeals manager explained that he did not want to “force fit” the data about the three issues into one of the categories listed on the form 462 , such as “other,” because the issues thereby would lose their identity and significance . he added that part iv of form 462 needs to be revised because the categories of issues listed are too broad and do not recognize emerging issues . further , we found certain underreportings of the bases and issues cited in complaints for fiscal year 1995 . after we brought the underreporting to the attention of the postal service officials , they provided corrected data to eeoc and us . service officials attributed this underreporting to difficulties associated with implementing a new complaint information system in fiscal year 1995 . both postal service management and eeoc need complete , accurate , and reliable information to deal with eeo - related workplace conflicts . discrepancies that we found in our limited review of the postal service's eeo complaint data raised questions about the completeness , accuracy , and reliability of the reported data , particularly data generated through the automated complaint information system . all but one of the reporting problems we found and their underlying causes appear to have been corrected .