, gains in knowledge and skills . five reviews criticized the primary research studies for their overreliance on verbal self - report measures . such measures are widely used , both to test for gains in knowledge about sexual abuse and to test whether children say they will use the self - protection strategies that they have learned in education programs . but self - reports may be unreliable measures of what children have learned and what they are capable of doing . some studies have found little correspondence between what children say they will do and their actual behavior . the reviews recommended supplementing verbal self - report measures with behavioral measures that could more reliably indicate how children would behave in actual encounters with an abuser . while the findings are suggestive , the reviewer stated that the study relies on self - report information with no independent confirmation of such reports , and the findings apply only to older children ( those aged 10 to 16 ) . several reviews pointed to the need for systematic data collection on whether children were more likely to disclose past or ongoing instances of abuse after exposure to an education program . a 1996 review noted that too few researchers provide information about disclosures during or subsequent to education programs , and that those who do report disclosures report only the actual number or percentage and fail to provide additional information ( eg , type of abuse , past versus ongoing , consequences of disclosure , disposition of case ) . more generally , several reviews noted the lack of standardization of outcome measures in this field . investigators have tended to develop new and unique outcome measures for each new study , making it difficult to compare findings and make overall generalizations about program effectiveness . this problem has been compounded because many studies have failed to measure or report information on the statistical properties of the testing instruments ( for example , test reliability ) . such information would enable other researchers to refine the instruments and replicate earlier results . all of the research reviews identified design weaknesses in the studies . over half the reviews noted , for at least some of the studies they reviewed , the absence of comparison groups ( against which to compare groups exposed to an education program ) or the use of comparison groups of children who differed systematically from children who were exposed to the program . this made it difficult to judge whether differences in outcomes were a result of the program or were an effect of selecting only certain kinds of children for the program . some more recent reviews noted that absent or inadequate comparison groups was more a problem in earlier studies , and that a number of well - designed studies now existed . their comments were incorporated where appropriate . we did not send a draft to any other agency or organization because we did not obtain information ( other than study citations ) from such organizations for use in this study . we did our work between october 1995 and june 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .