( see app . ii for the department of state's prioritization of money - laundering activities in specific countries , for 1995. ) to understand u.s. approaches to combating money laundering through regulation of financial institutions and u.s. bank regulators' oversight of money - laundering controls at overseas branches of u.s. banks , we interviewed frb and occ officials and examiners , including the occ's london branch examiners . we also interviewed officials from fincen , 3 large u.s. banks that have branches or subsidiaries in most of the european countries we visited , and 11 u.s. overseas financial institution branches that u.s. embassy officials recommended to us . aruba , canada , cayman islands , colombia , germany , hong kong , italy , mexico , the netherlands , nigeria , panama , singapore , switzerland , thailand , the u.k. , the united states , and venezuela argentina , brazil , costa rica , ecuador , india , japan , liechtenstein , luxembourg , the netherlands antilles , pakistan , paraguay , russia , spain , turkey , uruguay , and the united arab emirates antigua , australia , austria , the bahamas , bahrain , belgium , belize , bolivia , bulgaria , burma , the channel islands , chile , china , cyprus , france , gibraltar , greece , guatemala , hungary , israel , south korea , kuwait , lebanon , macau , madeira / azores , malaysia , montserrat , morocco , peru , the philippines , poland , st. vincent , and taiwan côte d'ivoire , cuba , denmark , the dominican republic , egypt , nepal , portugal , sri lanka , trinidad , and vanuatu ( continued ) . the financial action task force ( fatf ) recommended that each member country take these actions: 1. implement the 1988 vienna convention , which includes criminalizing drug money laundering and cooperating with other countries on money - laundering investigations ; 2. prevent financial institution secrecy laws from inhibiting the recommendations ; 3. increase multilateral cooperation in money - laundering investigations ; 4. make money laundering a crime ; 5. extend money - laundering offenses beyond narcotic trafficking into other crimes , such as bank and insurance fraud , arms trafficking , and other serious crimes ; 6. apply anti - money - laundering measures to individuals who knew or should have known that the money they received came from a criminal activity ; 7. subject corporations , not only their employees , to criminal liability if they are found guilty of money laundering ; 8. enable authorities to confiscate the proceeds or property obtained from criminal activity ; 9. apply recommendations to nonbank financial institutions , such as exchange houses , money transmitters , brokerage houses , and check - cashing services ; 10. take steps to ensure that the recommendations are implemented to cover not only banks , but also nonbank financial institutions ; and 11. consider developing a list of nonbank financial institutions dealing with cash so that members can make them subject to these recommendations .