to verify their identities . in 1994 , irs paid out $1.4 billion in refunds on returns posted to the imf invalid segment . as part of its efforts to combat refund fraud , irs revised its procedures in january 1995 to require that taxpayers provide documentation to verify their identities . in announcing that irs would delay refund claims for individuals lacking proper identification numbers , you stated that , consistent with the way financial institutions manage withdrawals of funds , irs should not permit refunds from the federal treasury without a valid taxpayer identification number . under the revised procedures , when a taxpayer's return with a refund request is posted to the imf invalid segment for the first time , irs is to freeze the refund and correspond with the taxpayer in an attempt to verify the taxpayer's identity . filers with missing or incorrect ssns who request a refund are to be required to provide a reasonable explanation for the discrepancy and proof of their identity ( such as a marriage certificate , birth certificate , earnings statement , or passport ) before the refund will be released . the requirement applies to filers whose returns are posted with temporary numbers as well as filers whose returns are posted with incorrect numbers . once a taxpayer responds satisfactorily to irs' verification notice , irs is to release the refund . previously , irs automatically issued refunds to filers with temporary numbers and did not require proof of identity from filers with incorrect numbers before releasing their refunds . irs uses the cp54b notice to verify taxpayers' identities before issuing a refund . the current version of the cp54b notice does not reflect irs' revised procedures . it does not clearly convey that persons who file with missing or incorrect numbers , including filers who were issued temporary numbers , are required to provide documentation verifying their identities . ( appendix i contains a copy of the cp54b notice annotated to show misleading or potentially confusing sections. ) a revised version of the cp54b notice has been developed that reflects irs' revised procedures but , as of july 1995 , had not been finalized . until the revised notice is available , irs national office officials told us that they plan to use the current version of the notice , followed by additional correspondence if the taxpayer does not respond in accordance with the revised procedures . this practice will increase irs' processing costs , create additional taxpayer burden , and delay the issuance of some refunds . irs expects to send out about 616,000 cp54b notices in 1995 . irs officials said that review and approval of the revised notice was taking longer than expected . as of june 21 , 1995 , the revision had been approved by the national office notice clarity unit and was being reviewed by the national automation advisory group . that group is to assign a priority for making the computer programming changes necessary to finalize the notice . if the notice is not assigned the highest priority , we are concerned , on the basis of past work , that it will not be revised in time for use during the 1996 tax - filing season , beginning in january 1996 .