established in 1993 . 15 members selected by the postmaster general . 7 members selected by the treasury secretary . committee meets quarterly . committee meets approximately bimonthly . the public makes suggestions regarding commemorative stamp themes through the mail . groups are not permitted to make presentations to the committee . the public is permitted to make presentations to the committee regarding future commemorative coin programs , but is not limited to those programs recommended by cccac . committee makes recommendations on commemorative stamp themes to the postmaster general , who decides whether to adopt or veto them . committee makes recommendations on commemorative coin themes to congress , which decides whether to adopt them . congress also receives recommendations directly from coin sponsors . committee does not allow outside groups to receive financial compensation from the sale of commemorative stamps . congress allows sponsors to receive surcharges on commemorative coin sales . csac and cccac have established some similar criteria in selecting themes for new commemorative stamp and coin programs . according to the csac criteria , only events and themes of widespread national appeal and significance will be considered for commemoration . similarly , cccac criteria specify that “istorical persons , places , events , and themes to be commemorated should have an enduring effect on the nation's history or culture” and that their scope should be national or international . according to both csac and cccac , themes should not be selected that commemorate ( 1 ) a living person , ( 2 ) a theme already selected in the past 10 years , and ( 3 ) commercial enterprises and products . further , the csac criteria indicate that stamps shall not be issued to honor cities , towns , municipalities , counties , primary or secondary schools , hospitals , libraries , or similar institutions . cccac criteria also indicate that state or regional anniversaries with little or no national significance and local institutions , such as governments , universities , and public and private schools , should not be considered . a significant difference between the two sets of criteria is that csac does not allow stamps honoring fraternal , political , sectarian , or service / charitable organizations that exist primarily to solicit and / or distribute funds , while cccac criteria do not address this issue . further , while csac criteria indicate that events of historical significance be considered only on anniversaries in multiples of 50 years , cccac criteria indicate that historical events should generally be considered for commemoration “on important or significant anniversaries.” a detailed comparison between the two sets of criteria is provided in table iv.2 . table iv.2: comparison of selection criteria for commemorative coins and stamps no living person shall be honored by portrayal on u.s. postage . no living person should be honored by commemoration on u.s. coins . no stamp shall be considered for issuance if one treating the same subject has been issued in the past 10 years . the only exceptions to the rule will be those stamps issued in recognition of traditional themes such as christmas , the u.s. flag , express mail , love , etc .