the act ( p.l . 104-208 , sept. 30 , 1996 ) and conference report providing irs' fiscal year 1997 appropriations limited irs' information technology spending to efforts that were consistent with these categories . investment decision management . this phase includes activities and documentation to determine how much should be spent and what should be developed and deployed . during this phase , business cases are rank ordered by type on an agencywide basis , investment decisions are made ( i.e. , business cases are approved and funded on the basis of investment costs and benefits ) , and investment decisions are monitored over time to determine actual costs incurred and benefits realized . system development / operations management . this phase defines , sequences , and documents activities necessary to develop , deploy , operate , and maintain systems . it consists of ( 1 ) research and development , which includes prototype development and evaluation ; ( 2 ) engineering , which includes system requirements analysis , systems design , release definition , release requirements analysis , and release system design ; ( 3 ) design and development , which includes configuration item requirements analysis , preliminary design , detailed design , code and unit testing , and integration and testing ; ( 4 ) integration , test , and deployment , which includes release integration and testing , release system acceptance testing , system piloting , and system rollout ; and ( 5 ) maintenance , which includes release design , code and unit test , and integration and test . management control and oversight . this phase spans each of the three aforementioned phases . it includes change control management ( i.e. , determining what to change and when ) , configuration management ( i.e. , capturing and maintaining records of the changes ) , performance management ( i.e. to do so , irs first analyzed existing system platforms , applications , databases , and infrastructures to identify system duplications and gaps as well as systems with “the best functionality” that should be preserved . according to irs , it then applied three criteria to define a cost effective , risk mitigated sequence within which it would introduce new or modified systems and retire existing systems . the slc shortcomings fall into three categories ( see table 2 ) . first , irs does not yet have detailed process definitions for any of the slc phases . each phase in turn is segmented into multiple releases , which consist of actual software / hardware upgrades , improvements / enhancements , and replacements as well as existing system capability retirements or deactivations . according to irs , the order of the phases is based on criteria such as irs' business priorities and a migration plan . ( see table 3 for a summary of the six phases. ) while the sequencing plan describes irs' general intentions for migrating from its current to its target systems environment , the sequencing plan does not provide the fundamental and critical detail needed to fully understand or execute this transition .