telephone assistance . many taxpayers who seek help through irs' telephone assistance program are not getting it . even with increased productivity , irs has not kept pace with the significant growth in the number of calls received . irs employees answered about one out of two calls in fiscal year 1989 but only one out of four calls in fiscal year 1994 . even with new technology , irs has been unable to provide the level of telephone service provided by the social security administration ( ssa ) and four private sector companies we contacted . we recommended that irs improve its technology to include real - time call traffic monitoring and management , using the routing capability of its telecommunications vendor and fully implementing the features of call routing technology already available ( gao / ggd - 95-86 , apr . each year , irs sends millions of notices to taxpayers on the status of their tax accounts . in 1993 , irs sent more than 60 million such notices affecting about $190 billion of taxpayer transactions . as requested by the subcommittee on oversight , house committee on way and means , we reviewed 47 commonly used notices for clarity , and we examined irs' processes for ensuring that the notices it issues convey essential information to taxpayers as clearly as possible . we identified clarity concerns with 31 of the notices . in reviewing these notices for clarity , understandability , and usefulness , we considered if more specific language , clearer references , and consistent use of terminology would enhance these documents . ( see p . improving irs notices . each year irs sends millions of notices to taxpayers concerning the status of their tax accounts . we reviewed 47 of the most commonly used notices and identified clarity concerns with 31 of them . we also found that irs' ability to improve its notices is adversely affected by limited computer programming resources and higher priority programming requests . further , the lack of a system to track the progress of proposed notice language changes limits irs' ability to oversee notice clarity improvements . we recommended changes to its current notice generation process and a new system to monitor proposed notice text revisions ( gao / ggd - 95-6 , dec. 7 , 1994 ) . ( see p . improving forms and publications . providing taxpayers with easy - to - read tax forms and publications is a difficult task for several reasons . the tax code is frequently revised , consequently many publications must also be revised annually under short time constraints . in addition , taxpayers' comprehension levels vary . generally , we found irs' process for developing and revising tax forms and publications reasonable . irs is working with us to implement these recommendations as well as those from our prior financial audits . some progress has been made in responding to problems we identified in previous reports . irs officials reaffirmed their commitment to the goals of the chief financial officer act to improve financial management and to provide stakeholders and managers with accurate and timely financial information .