additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . these reporting requirements were not affected by riegle - neal . in table 1 , we briefly describe the loan reports and the information collected from them . call reports and y - 9 reports are the primary sources of data that banks and bhcs provide to regulators . both reports contain a summary of the entity's loan portfolio categorized by type of loan ( eg , real estate or consumer ) . fdic expressed some concern with the draft report's conclusion , but did not disagree that the implementation of riegle - neal in and of itself will not cause a material loss of information . fdic pointed out that for the last decade banks have expanded their lending beyond traditional geographic boundaries and that , to the extent this trend continues , the usefulness of institution - level data will continue to erode . we concentrated our review on information that is currently collected from banks and bhcs . we did not conduct an independent analysis to identify all of the information that regulators and congress may need to execute their regulatory and oversight responsibilities . to obtain views on the effect that riegle - neal is likely to have on the usefulness of reported loan and deposit data , we held discussions with staff members at the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the federal reserve bank of dallas , and headquarters and field offices of fdic and occ . we also spoke with staff members at cbo and crs in their roles as users of data for congressional oversight . in addition , we interviewed representatives of several community organizations ( the national community reinvestment coalition , the center for community change , and the association of community organizations for reform now ) . we did not attempt to identify all users of reported loan and deposit data . call reports again provide the greatest detail about a bank's total deposits because they provide a summary of a bank's total deposits by type ( eg , demand deposits ) . , the best institution - level information is available through on - site investigation ) contradicts our previous position . we understand why fdic places more emphasis than other regulators on the effect riegle - neal may have in eroding the geographic content of call report data , given fdic's responsibility to monitor institutions that it does not directly supervise .