additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . our review of the mnb report verified its major findings . we are not making any recommendations for improving overall bank supervision in this report because the limited number of mlr reports produced so far does not provide an adequate basis for identifying improvements . as currently structured , there are reasons to question the cost - effectiveness of the mlr process , such as the limited basis it provides for making recommendations to improve bank supervision and the administrative burden and expenditures that the requirement places on the ig offices . as we found in our previous report , providing the igs with more discretion in choosing the number and timing of mlrs to initiate each year could improve the cost - effectiveness of the mlr process while preserving the congressional intent of section 38 ( k ) , which was to hold bank regulators accountable for their actions . as we stated in our previous report , congress may wish to consider whether the current mlr requirement is a cost - effective means of achieving improved bank supervision . if it determines that the requirement is not cost - effective , we suggest that congress consider amending the requirement so that the igs have more flexibility in choosing the number and timing of mlrs to initiate each year . such activities must be carefully managed and monitored to ensure that they do not pose unacceptable risks to the safety and soundness of banking institutions . the igs for the federal deposit insurance corporation , the board of governors of the federal reserve system , and the department of the treasury provided written comments on our draft report , which are reprinted in appendixes i , ii , and iii , respectively . the igs generally agreed with our findings and conclusions as well as our suggestion that congress consider amending section 38 ( k ) of fdia so that the igs have more discretion in the number , timing , and scope of mlrs to initiate each year . the igs also provided comments that were generally technical in nature and are incorporated in this report where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the inspectors general for the federal deposit insurance corporation , the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the department of the treasury , and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request .