other agencies had not conducted the studies at all . according to the omb officials responsible for monitoring cobra motor vehicle cost - comparison studies , only one agency — the internal revenue service ( irs ) — had completed an acceptable cost comparison , as of june 1994 . according to the omb officials , irs' 1991 cost comparison was acceptable because it compared the costs of operating irs' vehicle fleet , gsa's ifms , and a private sector fleet . as recommended by the task force , in 1993 omb issued uniform guidance — ( 1 ) minimum quality standards , ( 2 ) a cost - comparison handbook , and ( 3 ) a cost accounting guide — for conducting cost - comparison studies . in march 1993 , omb developed minimum quality standards for the acceptance of past agency efforts to comply with cobra requirements . also in march 1993 , omb issued interim guidance through its federal motor vehicle fleet management cost comparison handbook , which agencies were to use in conducting their cobra cost comparisons . in addition , in may 1993 omb issued additional interim guidance , titled the federal motor vehicle fleet cost accounting guide , to resolve agency questions concerning cost elements and cost accounting standards for managing motor vehicle fleets . copies will be made available to others upon request . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-2700 if you have any questions . with responsibility for about 375,000 passenger vehicles and light trucks,the federal government operates one of the largest motor vehicle fleets in the united states . the federal motor vehicle fleet provides transportation to support government activities , such as law enforcement and health care . the federal fleet costs the federal government more than $1 billion a year for vehicle acquisition , maintenance , operation , and disposal . the federal fleet represents significant budgetary expense for the government and deserves to be well managed to provide appropriate and reliable transportation at the least cost . the general services administration ( gsa ) has both a regulatory and an operational role concerning federal motor vehicle fleets . under the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , gsa is responsible for issuing governmentwide policy for federal fleet management functions . these functions are the acquisition , operation , maintenance , and disposal of motor vehicles . in addition , gsa has regulatory responsibilities , regarding ( 1 ) replacement standards for government - owned vehicles , ( 2 ) the size of passenger vehicles , and ( 3 ) the use of alternative fuels for federal vehicles . since 1954 , gsa has operated its interagency fleet management system ( ifms ) to provide vehicle fleet services to federal agencies . the ifms vehicle fleet , which gsa leases to other federal agencies , represents approximately one - third of the federal fleet . federal agencies own most of the remaining two - thirds of the fleet ; and about 7,500 vehicles , or about 2 percent of the fleet , are commercially leased from the private sector .