, enforcement sanctions . in concert with the compliance 2000 approach , irs is increasing its role as an advocate for simpler tax laws and regulations . for the employment tax deposit regulations , the answers to such questions indicate that simplification was achieved . fewer steps are now involved in determining when deposits are due . in appendix ii , we show the steps involved before and after the simplification effort . for many employers , the time required to comply should decrease since they no longer must continuously monitor their employment tax liabilities to determine when they should make deposits . employers may need to retain somewhat more information on their past employment tax liabilities to determine under the look back rule what their filing frequency will be for the forthcoming year . however , they can avoid retaining information if they rely on the notification of filing status that irs will send to employers before each calendar year . treasury officials said that at least some simplicity measures were considered as the employment tax deposit regulations were being revised . for instance , officials analyzed information to determine how many small employers would move from semiweekly depositor status to monthly depositor status at different thresholds for determining that status . officials worked to establish a threshold that moved the greatest number of small employers to the monthly depositor status while maintaining revenue neutrality in the regulatory change . on the other hand , officials cautioned against placing emphasis on developing and using measures of simplicity . their reservations included that ( 1 ) developing and using such measures would require more resources or would divert resources from regulatory efforts ; ( 2 ) it would be very difficult to develop meaningful measures ; and ( 3 ) simplicity must be balanced with other objectives , such as equity and administrability of regulations . while measuring simplicity is difficult , and balancing it against other regulatory objectives requires judgment , in our opinion judgments can be made on a more informed basis if measures of simplicity are used as reference points . to control the number of such measures developed and the associated resources required to collect and maintain the measures , officials may wish to agree on a set of key simplicity measures for any particular regulation . in the case of the employment tax deposit regulations , the number of small businesses qualifying for monthly depositor status was one such measure . another measure at least implicitly used in determining that the employment tax deposit regulations were too complex was the number of taxpayers subject to penalties each year . having used such measures in revising the employment tax deposit regulations , officials also have a means for determining the success of the revisions over time . by checking whether the number of penalties assessed falls and remains lower over time , and whether the number of monthly depositors rises to expected levels and remains there , officials would be able to judge on a more informed basis whether the revised regulations should be revisited in the future .