( see app . ii for border patrol staffing by location. ) we did not verify the validity of the data . however , during visits to selected stations , we discussed the statistical reports with border patrol officials , who said that the reports generally reflected how the agents spent their enforcement time and what types of activities the agents performed . through these discussions , we identified the specific types of work included under each activity . to obtain an understanding of these activities , we accompanied and observed border patrol agents as they performed various enforcement activities in the field . our analysis of border patrol activities enabled us to identify its activities that paralleled the activities performed by investigations or inspections . we judgmentally selected border patrol stations to visit so as to include the full range of border patrol enforcement activities and provide broad coverage of different geographic locations . we visited 15 of the 21 border patrol sector headquarters and 49 of the 145 border patrol stations . for our analysis , we grouped border patrol stations according to their distance from the nearest land border or coastline and , for those stations most proximate to the border , the specific border they were near . we grouped border patrol stations on the basis of their distance from the nearest land or coastal borders — within 25 miles of a border , from 26 to 100 miles , and over 100 miles . we refer to these as zones i , ii , and iii , respectively . we chose the 25-mile distance because ins has authority to enter private land , but not dwellings , without a warrant for the purpose of patrolling the border within 25 miles of any external boundary of the united states . we chose the 100-mile distance because ins has authority to stop individuals and search public and private conveyances for illegal aliens without a warrant anywhere within a reasonable distance from any external boundary , defined by ins as within 100 air miles . we further subdivided zone i into three geographic areas: the southwest , canadian , and coastal borders . we identified these three areas within zone i because they have different enforcement characteristics . in analyzing the enforcement work of the border patrol , we did not include the work performed at ins headquarters , regions , training facilities , special operations , and sector headquarters . these units are principally to provide support to the border patrol's stations . to identify the contributions of the border patrol to the districts' enforcement activities , we interviewed 15 ins district directors to obtain their views on how their districts would be affected if border patrol agents' enforcement activities were redirected into border enforcement at the border . we selected the 15 districts that overlapped the 15 sectors we chose to visit . to identify some factors that could affect decisions related to hiring or relocating agents to the southwest border , we analyzed the border patrol's locations and activities . on the basis of our analysis , we identified options , other than hiring agents , that could increase the time agents spend patrolling the southwest border .