additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the actual loss rate was not disclosed to us . to determine the characteristics of live loan checks , we gathered information on various aspects of individual loans , as well as on the average live loan check profile and the average borrower's profile . to do this , we interviewed officials representing three live loan check lending institutions , an industry association , and a rating agency . we also reviewed publicly available information , including published articles that reported such characteristics . although we did not independently verify these — or any — industry data , we corroborated evidence with other independent sources whenever possible . to identify the major organizations that mail live loan checks , we interviewed public and private sector officials . we selected officials to talk to , in part , on the basis of information obtained from other industry sources . for example , we talked with officials at fleet and chase . in addition , we spoke with first chicago officials about whether a live loan check program existed at that institution because officials of other banks had informed us that this institution had cancelled its live loan check program . moreover , we conducted a literature search and reviewed selected articles that reported on live loan check lenders and their activities . we also spoke to officials representing federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies . we obtained fleet's volume of live loan check lending in 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 and the expected volume in 1998 by interviewing fleet officials ; other lenders were not willing to provide volume data . we attempted to identify comprehensive , industrywide data for the volume of live loan checks by talking with officials representing an industry association , a consumer advocacy group , a rating agency , federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies , and two investment banks . in addition , we contacted officials representing another lender to corroborate information and to obtain additional volume data . to identify the benefits and risks of live loan checks for borrowers and lenders , we interviewed officials representing federal regulatory agencies and representatives from lending institutions , industry associations , and one rating agency . we reviewed articles and studies that reported benefits and risks associated with live loan check lending . we interviewed public and private sector officials , and reviewed selected federal and state regulations and laws , to gain an understanding of lender protection laws relevant to live loan checks . we also spoke with banking officials about losses associated with live loan checks . as agreed with your office , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this letter .