some have been available for years . others are new . these aids are summarized below: recruitment and relocation bonuses: federal agencies have the authority to make a lump - sum payment of up to 25 percent of basic pay to a newly appointed employee , or to an employee who must relocate in cases in which the agency determines that the position would otherwise be difficult to fill . superior qualifications appointments: agencies have the authority to set pay for new appointments or reappointments of individuals to general schedule ( gs ) positions above step 1 of the grade on the basis of the candidate's superior qualifications or the agency's special need . pay at highest previous rate: upon reemployment , transfer , reassignment , promotion , or change in type of appointment , agencies can set an employee's basic pay by taking into account the employee's previous pay rate while employed in another civilian federal position ( with certain exceptions ) . temporary and term appointments: agencies can use temporary appointments in the competitive service for positions not expected to last longer than 1 year , but which can be extended for 1 additional year . agencies can use term appointments when positions are expected to last longer than 1 year but not more than 4 years . retention allowances for individual employees: agencies have the authority to make continuing payments of up to 25 percent of basic pay if the agency determines that ( 1 ) the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee or the agency's special need for the employee's services makes it essential to retain the employee and ( 2 ) the employee would be likely to leave federal service in the absence of a retention allowance . retention allowances must be paid in accordance with the agency's previously established retention allowance plan and must be reviewed and certified annually . performance and incentive awards: agencies can provide employees a lump - sum cash award on the basis of a fully successful or better rating of record or in recognition of accomplishments that contribute to the improvement of government operations . awards based on the rating of record can be up to 10 percent of salary , or up to 20 percent for exceptional performance , provided the award does not exceed $10,000 per employee . with opm review and approval , agencies can grant awards over $10,000 , up to $25,000 . any award that would grant over $25,000 to an individual employee must be reviewed by opm for submission to the president for approval . quality step increases: agencies have the authority to increase an employee's pay by providing an additional step increase to an employee who has received the highest rating of record available in the agency's performance appraisal program . training and education costs reimbursement: agencies can pay or reimburse an employee for all or part of the necessary expenses for training and education , including the costs for college tuition . agencies may require service agreements for training of long duration or of high cost . advance payments for new appointees: agencies may advance a new hire up to two paychecks so that a new employee can meet living and other expenses .