we cannot identify you from this questionnaire . if you have any questions , please call ms. jan bogus at ( 202 ) 512-8557 or ms. annette hartenstein at ( 202 ) 512-5724 . with your help , we will be able to identify the problems that affect nih employees and recommend solutions . the results will be presented in summary form . any discussion of individual answers will not contain information that can identify you . thank you for your help . to ensure your privacy , please return the postcard separately from the questionnaire . the objective of our questionnaire survey was to obtain information on the extent and type of sexual harassment and sex discrimination that may be happening at the national institutes of health ( nih ) . this will let us know that you completed your questionnaire . for those who indicated that they believed sexual harassment was directed toward them , we inquired about what the respondent did to deal with the situation . this section asks about sexual harassment . sexual harassment involves uninvited , unwanted sexual advances , requests for sexual favors , and other comments , physical contacts , or gestures of a sexual nature . such actions may negatively affect one's career and may create an intimidating , hostile , or offensive environment . as far as you are aware , is sexual harassment currently a problem at nih and at your institute , center , or division ? ( check one box in each row. ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( n=4,161 ) b . at your institute , center , or ( n=1,477 ) . note 1: all “ns” ( number in the population ) are estimates based on appropriately weighting the sample results . note 2: for questions in the matrix format , all percentages are based on those who chose a response other than “no basis to judge.” note 3: for questions in the matrix format , the “ns” to the left of the first percentage represent the estimated size of the population who responded with a basis to judge . the “ns” to the right of the last percentage represent the estimated size of the population who responded with “no basis to judge. using mail questionnaires , we asked about the general climate at nih regarding sexual harassment and sex discrimination and specifically about the occurrence of behaviors at nih that respondents considered to be instances of sexual harassment and about the occurrence of situations at nih that respondents considered to be instances of sex discrimination . we asked a set of similar questions to see how individuals dealt with sex discrimination when it affected them . we also asked for respondents' views on nih's equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) system and asked some general questions about the respondents' work setting and background . due to the sensitive nature of the information we required , the questionnaire was anonymous . it did not contain any information that could identify an individual respondent . a postcard containing an identification number was included in the package sent to nih employees . the postcard was to be mailed back to gao separately from the questionnaire .