the fbf operates as follows . initially , as part of the president's budget preparation process , gsa estimates the rental revenue the fbf is expected to receive . the rent estimate is prepared about 18 months in advance of the fiscal year . through the appropriation process , congress establishes annual limits on how much of the fund can be expended for various activities . as revenues are received , they are deposited into the fbf , and , subsequently , gsa is to fund various projects and programs within the limits set by congress . descriptions for some of these budget activities are shown in table 1 . our first objective was to verify , to the extent practical , the amounts gsa attributed to the individual reasons for overestimation of the fbf rental revenue projections for fiscal years 1996 , 1997 , and 1998 . to do this , we developed an understanding of the rental revenue estimation process that pbs used . we ( l ) discussed with pbs program officials and staff the basic steps involved in the process used for fiscal years 1996 through 1999 ; and ( 2 ) reviewed studies of the process done by an internal pbs review team , two consulting firms , and gsa's inspector general . further , we examined documents that supplied supporting details , such as a pbs listing of buildings associated with a particular reason , and we discussed each reason for the overestimation and the amount attributed to it with pbs program officials and staff . our second objective was to determine whether pbs' corrective actions appeared to address gsa's identified reasons for the overestimation . we also determined if the corrective actions addressed the weaknesses in the estimation process that we and others identified . to do this , we interviewed pbs officials and staff , reviewed documentation associated with the actions , and observed the operation of a new management information system pbs is developing to help it estimate rental revenues , among other things . on the basis of our knowledge of the estimation system and the proposed or actual corrective actions to the system , we determined whether the corrective actions appeared to address gsa's identified reasons for the overestimation and other identified weaknesses . our third objective was to determine the budgetary impact of the overestimation on projects and programs in the fbf . to accomplish this , we developed an understanding of the process by which pbs identified sources of obligational authority that had the potential for inclusion in the fiscal year 1997 obligational reserve . specifically , through interviews with pbs officials and review of documentation they maintained about the process , we developed an understanding of how pbs became aware of the magnitude of the overestimation problem — $680.5 million — and the action those officials took to identify specific sources of obligational authority . we reviewed the process that pbs used to identify unobligated balances that could be included in the reserve . both new construction and modernization projects potentially could be included because such projects were experiencing delays that made it unlikely that they would need the obligational authority available in fiscal year 1997 .