in app . large nontaxpaying fccs and usccs filed a small percentage of all returns filed by nontaxpaying corporations , yet they accounted for most of the assets of those corporations in 1995 . specifically , large nontaxpaying fccs made up about 2 percent of all nontaxpaying fccs but accounted for 84 percent of the assets of all nontaxpaying fccs . similarly , large nontaxpaying usccs made up only about four - tenths of 1 percent of all nontaxpaying usccs , yet they accounted for 80 percent of all nontaxpaying uscc assets . also in 1995 , large nontaxpaying fccs accounted for 86 percent of the receipts generated by all nontaxpaying fccs , while large nontaxpaying usccs accounted for 48 percent of the receipts generated by all nontaxpaying usccs . ( see fig . i.1 in app . the concentration of assets and receipts in the large nontaxpaying fccs and usccs was similar during the earlier years of our study period . this concentration was not unique to nontaxpaying corporations ; taxpaying corporations were similarly concentrated . other ways to compare large fccs and usccs include examining ( 1 ) the percentage of large fccs and usccs that paid relatively little tax and ( 2 ) the taxes paid relative to gross receipts by large corporations , as shown in table 1 . in 1995 , the percentage of large fccs and usccs that paid less than $100,000 in tax was 42 percent for fccs and 40 percent for usccs . in 1995 , large fccs , as a whole , paid significantly less tax per $1,000 in gross receipts than did large usccs , despite the fact that a greater percentage of large usccs paid no tax . the reason for this is that the large fccs that paid relatively little or no tax had significantly greater average gross receipts than did the large usccs that paid little or no tax . an earlier study of the relative profitability of fccs and usccs suggested that the lower relative age of fccs partially explained their lower reported profitability . that study also showed that the reported profitability of both fccs and usccs varied across industrial sectors . from 1989 to 1993 , a greater percentage of large fccs than large usccs were new ( i.e. , incorporated for 3 years or less ) . however , as shown in figure 3 , this relationship was reversed for 1994 and 1995 , and although not statistically significant , the percentage of new large usccs exceeded the percentage of new large fccs . this change could explain , in part , why the percentage of nontaxpaying large fccs declined relative to the percentage of nontaxpaying large usccs over the same time period . the irs data that we examined for tax years 1989-95 also showed that , in each of those years , the percentage of new large corporations paying no tax exceeded the percentage of older large corporations paying no tax . this relationship held for large fccs , large usccs , and all large corporations together . ( see table i.4 in app . large fccs were more heavily concentrated in the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors and less heavily concentrated in the financial services sector than were large usccs .