guidance . the records management regulations in texas , florida , and oregon provide specific guidance to state agencies . for example , texas provides guidance on ( 1 ) standardized definitions for terms related to managing electronic records ; ( 2 ) minimum requirements for the maintenance , use , retention , storage , and destruction of electronic records ; ( 3 ) records management program administration that incorporates erm objectives into agency directives , ensures that training is provided , ensures the development and maintenance of up - to - date electronic systems documentation , and specifies the location and media on which electronic records are maintained ; ( 4 ) security of electronic records ; and ( 5 ) public access to electronic records . although some differences exist in content or approach , state code or administrative rules for florida and oregon provide equally detailed , and often closely paralleled , guidance to state agencies for managing electronic documents . electronic records retention . state agencies in texas , florida , and oklahoma retain archiving responsibility and custody of electronic records . when paper or microfilm records are no longer needed at the agency level , those of archival value are transferred to a central storage facility . in texas , erm and archiving system design are functions that are decentralized to state agencies , while florida establishes minimum electronic recordkeeping requirements for all state agency records management and archiving systems . texas has implemented an automated inventory tracking system to facilitate access to nonelectronic records maintained by the archives . florida is considering using a contractor to develop and maintain storage and access for electronic archival records , including migration and software requirements . development of a governmentwide information locator system . while oregon and oklahoma use what is basically a manual system to provide the public with access to archived records , texas and florida have developed internet - accessible government information locator systems . the texas record and information locator service is an on - line resource for accessing government information statewide — the next version will identify , describe , and locate individual state government information resources as well as print publications , individual documents , and databases available to the public on the internet . the florida government information location system provides public internet access to the location of electronic and nonelectronic public records . training . all four states sponsor organized records management training programs or workshops for state employees . enforcement of records management requirements . authority to enforce mandated records management requirements varies among the states . implementation of an automated records management software system is under way . canada's national archives takes a somewhat different approach . canada established “vision statements,” rather than specific policies , and the individual agencies maintain their own electronic records until they have no more operational need for them . at that point , records of archival value are transferred to the national archives . also , canada offers use of the internet for searching , requesting , and retrieving pertinent records . the united kingdom established broad guidelines , which are put into practice by its individual agencies or departments in a partnership arrangement with its national archives .