this has happened only once . the board generally meets once a month , although during crises it meets more often . minutes of the board's meetings are provided to those of the bank's directors who request them . the nonexecutive directors of the bank ( those who are not officials of the bank ) and the six non - bank members of the board of banking supervision also meet once a year to discuss issues of interest , including the bank's annual report and accounts and the annual report required under the banking act . in order to resolve some supervisory weaknesses that came to light after the bcci failure , procedures for involving the board of banking supervision in the bank's supervision and surveillance area's work have been strengthened . for example , internal guidance on when to report matters to the board has been tightened , and those cases about which the board's advice is specifically sought are highlighted . in general , according to bank officials , the board's advice has been very helpful and effective over the years since its establishment . while the failure of bcci has opened a public debate on the role of the bank as bank supervisor , in general the banks we interviewed , and the british bankers association , speaking for its membership , believe that the regulatory and supervisory system in the united kingdom works fairly well . the bank is perceived as a prudent , but not onerous regulator and a pragmatic supervisor . the banks appreciate that the bank operates with discretion but that it also gets the job done . although the failure of bcci dealt a blow to the reputation of the bank , banks we interviewed continue to believe that the bank is doing a better job than bank regulators in systems where supervisors are more intrusive . some representatives of the accounting firms we talked to were slightly more critical . for example , questions were raised about whether the bank was firm enough with banks experiencing problems and whether concerns about the economy might be affecting bank supervision . however , these representatives felt that the additional information being required by the bank on bank records and systems would be useful to the bank in understanding routine financial reports banks submitted to the bank ( see ch . 3 for additional discussion ) . the u.k. supervisory approach does not depend on full - scope , on - site examinations of authorized banks . accounting firms carry out on - site work at banks in their formal roles as reporting accountants appointed under the banking act to produce reports on any relevant matter , as well as their role as external auditors appointed under the companies act . the bank also has its own small staff ( review teams ) that carry out short visits to banks on an informal basis as specific needs arise . bank supervisors are provided with the reports commissioned by them from reporting accountants and the results of the visits of the bank's own review teams . these reports and the results of the review teams' visits , together with information collected directly from banks ( as described in ch .