attorneys . this program is designed to promote coordination and cooperation among federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies involved in drug enforcement in each task force region . the goal of the ocdetf program is to identify , investigate , and prosecute members of high - level drug trafficking organizations and related enterprises . in fiscal year 1998 , dea sponsored 847 , or 62 percent , and participated in 1,096 , or 81 percent , of the 1,356 ocdetf investigations that were initiated . doj reimburses dea for its expenditures on ocdetf investigations . for fiscal year 1998 , dea was reimbursed $94.4 million for the ocdetf program . the high intensity drug trafficking area ( hidta ) program is administered by ondcp . the mission of the hidta program is to coordinate drug control efforts among federal , state , and local agencies in designated areas in order to reduce drug trafficking in critical regions of the united states . at the time of our work in september 1998 , ondcp had designated 20 areas as hidtas . according to ondcp , a hidta organization typically consists of a major task force led by federal agencies , drug and money laundering task forces led by state or local agencies , a joint intelligence center and information - sharing network , and other supporting initiatives . dea receives funds from ondcp based upon its participation in the hidta program . for fiscal year 1998 , dea received $14.8 million in direct hidta funding . since it was established , dea's highest priority has been to investigate major drug trafficking organizations , both domestic and foreign , responsible for supplying illegal drugs consumed in the united states . over the years , dea has adopted various techniques for focusing its efforts on such investigations . in 1992 , dea started using an investigative approach designed to identify and target drug kingpins and their supporting infrastructures , primarily through the use of wiretaps and other types of electronic surveillance within the united states and the use of intelligence information . dea called this approach the kingpin strategy . this approach , which has led to the dismantling or disruption of major trafficking organizations , was later adopted by sod when it was established in 1995 . more recently , dea has established the regional enforcement team ( ret ) initiative to address regional , national , and international drug trafficking in small towns and rural areas within the united states . developed in 1992 , the kingpin strategy targeted major colombian cocaine and southeast and southwest asian heroin trafficking organizations . this strategy was dea's top priority and its primary enforcement approach for addressing the national priority of reducing the availability of illegal drugs in the united states . the kingpin strategy primarily targeted cocaine trafficking organizations operating out of medellin and cali , colombia , with most of its focus on one organization referred to as the cali cartel . according to dea , the heads of the colombian organizations tightly controlled all aspects of their operations and telephoned subordinates to give directions . dea concluded that this was a weakness in the operations of these organizations .