that is the point . we say early in our report that irs does not have the information readily available to estimate the frequency of such incidents . our concern is not that we found a high — or low — frequency of abuse . our concern is that the information needed to allow either us or irs to determine the frequency of such incidents and to assess the effectiveness of irs' controls to prevent such incidents over time is not presently available . we agree , and our draft report recognized , that irs has numerous information gathering efforts that collect a great deal of information related to the mistreatment of taxpayers . these include an attempt to measure taxpayer burden , defined as time , cost , and dissatisfaction , through such means as an annual report to the tax committees and periodic customer surveys . we do not agree , however , that these efforts and the management information derived from them , as presently structured , allow irs to adequately measure and track incidents of taxpayer mistreatment . irs says , for example , that it has in place definitions and an information system to track and manage cases where irs employees have violated a law , regulation , or the office of government ethics' standards of ethical conduct for employees of the executive branch . this system contains information on all cases investigated by irs' internal security division , ranging from allegations of violating travel regulations to accepting bribes . while we were able to select some cases out of the system that met our study definition of taxpayer abuse , we found it extremely time consuming and cumbersome because the system is structured to identify employee violations of policies and procedures , rather than to identify cases of abuse or taxpayer mistreatment from the taxpayer's perspective . in any event , irs has no definition of taxpayer perception of mistreatment or abuse and the system has no code or category to identify such cases . as a result , although the cases that are entered in this system may involve taxpayer mistreatment , at present no reporting or tracking of such cases can occur . in summary , irs believes it has adequate information to deal with what it believes are rare instances of taxpayer mistreatment . we do not agree that irs has adequate information for the reasons noted above . we believe , however , that irs could readily develop adequate information from its existing management information systems by developing a definition of “taxpayer mistreatment,” or such other term as irs chooses , and modifying one or more of its present systems to identify incidents with the characteristics called for by the definition . similarly , irs could develop questions for use in its customer surveys to serve as indicators of the frequency of taxpayer mistreatment and progress in preventing it . we believe irs should reconsider its decision not to implement this recommendation .