in these analyses , we controlled for those characteristics . these analyses took into account differences in offenders' characteristics across these judicial locations and the effects of these characteristics on fine and restitution orders . we looked separately at fine orders among larceny , drug , and fraud offenders and separately at restitution orders for larceny , robbery , and fraud offenders . the referent categories to which the other districts were compared . the referent categories to which the other districts were compared . one of the surprising findings in our analyses , in addition to the considerable variation in the likelihood of an offender being ordered to pay restitution and fines across circuits and districts , was the inconsistent difference across the types of offenses we considered in the effect of whether their crimes were committed before or after the mvra went into effect . among larceny and fraud offenders , those who committed offenses after mvra went into effect were less likely to be ordered to pay restitution than those whose offenses occurred before mvra , while among robbers , restitution was more likely to be ordered after mvra than before . since we were interested in knowing whether mvra had affected the extent of variation in restitution across circuits and districts , we reanalyzed the data using samples of pre - mvra cases in one set of analyses and post mvra cases in another . as table i.10 shows , mvra did not diminish the variation across circuits ( the same is true across the largest districts ) in the likelihood of an offender being ordered to pay restitution , nor did it seem to consistently alter the effects of any of the offense characteristics across the three types of offenses we reviewed . the referent categories to which the other districts were compared . the following tables provide the numbers of larceny , robbery , drug and fraud offenders who were ordered to pay fines and restitution , in each of the judicial circuits and districts in fiscal year 1997 . the numbers of offenders of certain types are quite small in many districts , so readers should be cautious about making percentage comparisons across small and large districts . the range is based on the offense level . the base offense level , which is a numerical score , is established in the guidelines for each type of crime . adjustments can be made to the base offense level for such things as offense characteristics , offender's role , the victim , obstruction of justice , and acceptance of responsibility . for example , the guideline range for fines for offense level 8 is $1,000 to $10,000 ; for offense level 38 the guideline range for fines is from $25,000 to $250,000 . there is also a criminal history category that helps the judge determine whether an offender should be sentenced higher or lower within the guideline range . , sex , race , citizenship , education , and number of dependents ) ; ( 2 ) the type of offense they committed ( i.e.