other allegations were not substantiated . written reprimand to 10-day suspension mandatory 30-day suspension to discharge written reprimand to 10-day suspension the tables of penalties do not list a penalty for a third offense of these types of misconduct . in addition to those named above , the following individuals from the general government division made important contributions to this report: ernestine burt , issue area assistant ; donna m. leiss , communications analyst ; michael o'donnell , senior evaluator ; and william trancucci , senior evaluator . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . was the attempt in 1978 with the civil service reform act to make performance management systems more “user friendly” to managers in identifying and dealing with poor performers successful ? when the reform act was passed , there was general recognition that managers rarely gave unsatisfactory ratings , because the system was viewed as time - consuming and aggravating to all parties . our “case study” at vha , our 1990 governmentwide study , and mspb's 1995 and 1997 surveys all suggest that little has changed in the 20 years since enactment of the reform act . we do not know for certain whether executives in other government agencies share the vha network directors' perceptions and also rely on an informal system to address performance . however , governmentwide opm statistics and our prior work , which showed that far less than 1 percent of employees received less than fully successful ratings , suggest that such perceptions are not limited to vha . our overall impression is that vha has taken seriously its responsibility to identify and deal with performance problems among triad members . however , our findings also suggest a problem exists . the problem is not necessarily with vha or the network directors but with the federal performance management systems . research has shown that when systems do not work , or are perceived not to work , employees find ways to work around the systems . this appears to be what is occurring at vha . the network directors have adapted and worked around a system they have deemed to be a failure . although this adaptation has apparently enabled network directors to take performance - based actions , it carries with it some significant implications for policymakers who are again considering civil service reform . performance appraisal system requirements call for honest and accurate appraisals . a system that discourages such appraisals contradicts the fundamental premise of performance management and compromises the integrity of federal personnel management . opm's strategic plan for fiscal years 1997 through 2002 calls for , among other things , continuing opm efforts to improve the capacity of managers to effectively identify and resolve performance problems . as part of this effort , opm has distributed instructional materials to federal managers on how to identify and resolve performance problems . these are important efforts that may help alter managers' existing perceptions that the formal performance management systems are not helpful in this regard .