, the master ncoa file . this file contains more than 110 million permanent change - of - address records . it covers the most recent 36-month period based on the move dates that customers report . ( see app . the postal service did not terminate the license of any of the 10 licensees who failed successive process audits during 1992 . in fact , these licensees continued to provide ncoa services with address - matching software that had failed repeatedly to meet the performance standards for accuracy required by the licensing agreement . for example , four licensees failed an initial audit in may 1992 , and then failed two follow - up audits , before finally passing an audit conducted in march 1993 . however , these same licensees were allowed to continue providing ncoa services during the 10-month period in which their software failed to meet the service's minimum standard for accuracy . the ncoa program manager explained that the pattern of repeated audit failures resulted from the increased thoroughness , coverage , and focus on software accuracy of the new automated process audit as compared with earlier process audits . he acknowledged that program oversight had not been carried out as strictly as it could have been because program officials did not want to terminate licensees from the program , which was the only option available under the licensing agreement at that time . the program manager believed that the postal service correctly opted to work with the licensees to resolve the software deficiencies identified in the 1992 audits . he indicated that , among other things , most of the software performance errors involved failures to make any matches rather than making inappropriate matches . he also said that the program office staff responded promptly to ensure that licensees corrected software weaknesses identified in the audits , which may have affected compliance with federal privacy laws . during 1993 , the postal service audited the 10 licensees who failed all audits conducted during 1992 . each of these 10 licensees passed the 1993 audit . the ncoa program manager explained that other licensees were not audited during 1993 because , starting in about march of that year , the entire master ncoa file was redesigned , and licensees had to change their software to accommodate this redesign . further , the ncoa program office had a contract with one of its ncoa licensees for computer support to build and maintain the master ncoa file . the program office brought this function in - house in october 1993 . consequently , according to the program manager , all program staff who would have done the licensee audits were instead used to support this transition and maintain the ncoa file . we were unable to completely evaluate this oversight activity because the ncoa program office did not have historical records of any advertisements either submitted or reviewed . however , the information that we were able to obtain indicated that the program office was not effectively overseeing licensees' advertising activities .