product design and development . services to support the creation , enhancement , or marketing of a manufacturer's product . environmental or energy assessment . assessment of hazardous materials , discharge , waste products , energy use , and other environmental effects within a manufacturing operation . we chose these four assistance categories because they share important characteristics . they are types of assistance that mep typically offer clients , so our survey potentially could include clients from most mep . also , the four types of assistance are defined in a similar way by most mep , according to mep officials . other mep services ( such as worker training and strategic business planning ) may vary considerably from one program to another . finally , we selected types of assistance that were directed at clients' manufacturing operations . mep clients receiving operations - related assistance were able to tell us ( 1 ) how they expected the assistance would affect their operations and / or performance and ( 2 ) whether or not these expectations were met . other types of mep assistance — examples are material engineering , electronic data exchange , and computer upgrading — have effects on manufacturers' operations that are less visible and less easily measured . as a result , manufacturers may have difficulty determining the expected and actual impact of these types of services on their business operations and performance . we designed four questionnaires , each focusing on one assistance category . in designing our survey questions , we obtained input from national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and mep officials , mep evaluation experts , and managers at manufacturing facilities . we also reviewed client surveys that mep used . each questionnaire contained identical questions to obtain background information about the respondent and to get respondents' views on the impact of mep services on their business performance and the factors affecting the impact of mep services . however , the four surveys also had unique questions asking about the expected and actual outcomes of the assistance , because each type of assistance focuses on a different aspect of manufacturers' operations . we tailored these questions to ask about the kind of impacts that reasonably could be expected to result from the particular kind of assistance received . as part of our survey development , we tested all four surveys with manufacturers who had received mep assistance in texas , iowa , new york , and kansas . we chose those states in order to cover diverse areas of the country where mep are located . we also interviewed eight manufacturers who had received mep services and were given tours of their manufacturing facilities in maryland , georgia , north carolina , and south carolina . we visited these southern states because mep directors had agreed to arrange for us to meet selected clients . we asked the manufacturers about their experiences with mep services and the impact of those services on their business performance . our final surveys initially were mailed to a total of 843 manufacturers from february 1995 through march 1995 . follow - up mailings were made through may 1995 .