american society is very mobile . according to the u.s. census bureau , between 15 and 20 percent of americans move annually . at that rate , as many as 49 million people may move yearly . keeping up with address changes for such a mobile society presents irs with a formidable task . current addresses are critical to irs because it mails hundreds of millions of pieces of correspondence to taxpayers yearly . irs does not have precise information on the volume of mail it sends taxpayers annually that is returned undeliverable . however , from time to time various irs study groups have made estimates of the undeliverable mail volume . estimates made by these groups indicated that undeliverable mail rose from 6.5 million pieces in 1986 to as much as 15 million pieces in 1992 . because irs often sends more than one notice to a taxpayer , the number of taxpayers affected by undeliverable mail was probably less than these estimates , but the exact number is unknown . the volume of irs' undeliverable mail may continue to rise if its accounts receivable inventory continues to grow as it has done for years . this is because the volume of mail irs sends to taxpayers pertaining to their tax cases is directly related to the number of delinquent accounts in the receivables inventory . virtually all delinquent accounts are sent notices , and some of this mail may be returned to irs as undeliverable . according to irs , most undeliverable mail has three principal causes . taxpayers move and leave no forwarding addresses with either the postal service or irs . when this occurs , the taxpayers may ultimately bear responsibility for the fact that their mail was delayed or undelivered , but irs still has to process the undeliverable mail . the postal service may not deliver or forward mail , and mail is returned to irs . this happens even though postal service policy states that all first - class mail , which most irs notices are , is to be forwarded for up to 1 year when a valid forwarding address is on file . irs incorrectly records taxpayers' addresses in its databases . of the three principal causes , irs can completely control only the one dealing with how its staff records taxpayers' addresses in its databases . as discussed later in this report , irs could do more to encourage taxpayers to provide it with address changes even though there is no statute that requires taxpayers to do so . to some extent , irs is depending on tsm to eliminate some of the errors associated with transcribing taxpayers' addresses in the future . the taxpayer ombudsman has also recommended adopting procedures to help ensure that taxpayers' addresses are accurately updated in irs' databases . such procedures could help address the problems irs has disclosed in this area . according to a 1991 irs internal audit report , irs incorrectly input 450,000 new addresses to the master file when tax returns were filed in 1988 . this resulted in approximately 300,000 undeliverable notices , which included balance due notices totaling $49 million . it is very important that irs' mail reach the intended parties promptly .