ii ) . for example , tennessee's statute covers a broad range of positions or work settings involving interaction with children , while virginia's statutes cover only selected school districts and juvenile residential facilities . for the period july 1995 through june 1996 , these notices resulted in 53 mandatory revocations , i.e. , the individuals were convicted of a specified criminal offense involving drugs or sex . what effects have these states' laws and related fees had on volunteerism ? for instance , have the laws and fees discouraged volunteers from participating in child care programs at nonprofit entities ? have selected state agencies and other organizations found national background checks a useful screening tool ? more specifically , for selected job or position categories in selected jurisdictions , how often have fingerprint - based background checks identified individuals with criminal histories ? what is the status of the integrated automated fingerprint identification system ( iafis ) being developed by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and what are the selected states' plans for using the system when it becomes available ? initially , we identified and reviewed relevant child care - related statutes enacted by each of the five states . also , we identified the fbi's and the selected states' fees for background checks . we compared these fees to the actual costs of such checks , as reported by the fbi and the respective state agencies ; however , we did not independently verify the accuracy of these amounts . to determine the effects ( if any ) of these laws and related fees on volunteerism , we reviewed applicable studies and interviewed officials of 3 national and 20 local nonprofit youth - serving organizations . regarding the usefulness of national checks , we obtained views from officials at relevant national , state , and local organizations . also , for at least one job or position category in each of the five states , we analyzed available statistics on the number and the results of national fingerprint - based background checks of applicants . to determine the status of iafis , we interviewed fbi officials and reviewed documentation regarding the system's schedule and progress . also , we contacted responsible officials in each of the five states to determine their plans for interfacing with iafis . we did our work from march to october 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . because our work covered only selected child care organizations and / or positions and selected locations within five states , our findings ( 1 ) should not be considered representative of statewide conditions in the selected states and ( 2 ) are not projectable to other states . appendix i provides further details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . over 87 million children in the united states participate in activities provided by child - and youth - serving organizations each year . many of these organizations have formalized and structured environments , such as schools , which children are required to attend . others are voluntary , extracurricular activities , such as clubs and sports activities .