however , such advertising had its limitations . menominee officials were contacted by telephone . to obtain an indication of the task the advertising contractor faces in developing an effective promotional campaign , we observed focus group sessions the contractor scheduled with different population groups as part of its market research at the dress rehearsal sites . to examine the bureau's efforts to implement its sampling and statistical estimation methodology , we reviewed bureau documents related to sampling and estimation , interviewed bureau officials who are responsible for drawing the sample for the dress rehearsal , and reviewed the bureau's methodology for drawing the sample . we conducted our audit work at the south carolina and sacramento dress rehearsal sites ; the bureau's charlotte and seattle regional offices ; as well as in washington , d.c. , and dallas , tx , between september 1997 and february 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of commerce or his designee . on march 18 , 1998 , the acting director , bureau of the census , provided us with comments on the draft report . these comments are presented and evaluated in chapter 6 and reprinted in appendix i . a quality address list — one that is complete and accurate — and precise maps are the fundamental building blocks of a successful census . accurate addresses are essential for delivering questionnaires , avoiding unnecessary and expensive follow - up efforts at vacant or nonexistent residences , and establishing a universe of households for sampling and statistical estimation . accurate maps are critical for counting the correct portions of the population in their correct locations — the cornerstone of congressional reapportionment and redistricting . for the 2000 census , the bureau estimates that it needs to identify and locate 118 million housing units and to create a database of addresses , known as the master address file ( maf ) . to build the maf , the bureau originally planned , in part , to ( 1 ) use addresses provided by the postal service , ( 2 ) merge these addresses with the address file the bureau created during the 1990 census , ( 3 ) conduct limited checks of the accuracy of selected addresses , and ( 4 ) send the addresses to local governments for verification . however , the bureau's experience during the dress rehearsal shows that its procedures for developing an accurate maf and maps have weaknesses that , despite the bureau's recent improvement efforts , may not necessarily result in a maf or maps of sufficient accuracy to ensure all households receive a census questionnaire . because of these procedural weaknesses , the bureau is “reengineering” how it builds the maf by physically verifying all addresses and by encouraging earlier local government reviews of address lists and maps created from the postal service and the bureau's 1990 address file . although this reengineered approach may address several problems , the bureau will not be testing this new approach before the 2000 census .