this report responds to your request . we will provide copies of this report to the honorable charles b. rangel , ranking minority member of the house committee on ways and means ; the honorable kenneth s. apfel , chairman of the social security administration ; the honorable arthur levitt , chairman of the securities and exchange commission ; the honorable alexis m. herman , the secretary of the department of labor ; the honorable robert e. rubin , the secretary of the treasury ; and other interested committees and organizations . copies will be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions , please call me ( 202 ) 512-8678 . major contributors are acknowledged in appendix ii . social security forms the foundation for our retirement income system . in 1998 , it provided approximately $264 billion in annual benefits to 31 million workers and their dependents . however , the social security program is facing significant future financial challenges as a result of profound demographic changes , including the aging of the baby boom generation and increased life expectancy . in response , different groups and individuals have advanced numerous proposals that have called for the creation of some sort of mandatory or voluntary individual accounts . to better understand the potential implications of individual accounts , the chairman of the house committee on ways and means asked gao to determine how individual accounts could affect private capital and annuities markets as well as national savings , the potential risks and returns to individuals , and the disclosure and educational information needed for public understanding and use of an individual account investment program . the social security program is not in long - term actuarial balance . that is , social security revenues are not expected to be sufficient to pay all benefit obligations from 1999 to 2073 . without a change in the current program , excess cash revenues from payroll and income taxes are expected to begin to decline substantially around 2008 . based on the social security trustees latest “best estimate” projections , in 2014 the combined oasdi program will experience a negative cash flow that will accelerate in subsequent years . in addition , the combined oasdi trust funds are expected to be exhausted in 2034 , and the estimated annual tax income will be enough to pay approximately 70 percent of benefits . every year , social security's board of trustees estimates the financial status of the program for the next 75 years using three sets of economic and demographic assumptions about the future . according to the trustees' intermediate set of these assumptions ( or best estimate ) , the nation's social security program will face both solvency and sustainability problems in the years ahead unless corrective actions are taken . over the next 75 years , social security's total shortfall is projected to be about $3 trillion in 1998 dollars . social security's long - term financing problem is primarily caused by the aging of the u.s. population . as the baby boom generation retires , labor force growth is expected to slow dramatically . beyond 2030 , the overall population is expected to continue aging due to relatively low birth rates and increasing longevity .