iv. ) we asked the 19 agencies several questions on how useful or burdensome they found faca requirements . nine agencies said it would provide little or no help or only some help . appendix iv contains a copy of the questionnaire that we sent to agencies with the number of agencies responding to each item . one intended purpose of faca is to open government to the public . we asked the advisory committee members and the agencies that we surveyed a series of different questions about public participation . we asked committee members questions about ( 1 ) public access to committee meetings ; and ( 2 ) public input in general to their committees ( that is , without regard to whether it was by letter , in person at meetings , or by other means ) . the answers we received often depended on whether respondents were members of peer review panels or general advisory committees . those answers indicated that peer review panels were less likely to obtain public access and input than were general advisory committees . the nature of their work may explain why peer review panels do not obtain public input as much as general advisory committees do . about 27 percent of the respondents said that all of their committee meetings were open to the public , and 37 percent said that all meetings were closed to the public . another 19 percent noted that some meetings or portions of meetings were open and others were closed . finally , 17 percent of the respondents were not sure what access the public had to their committee meetings . most of those whose committees held closed or partially closed meetings agreed with their committees' reasons for closing those meetings to the public . two reasons frequently cited were discussions involving personal privacy issues and discussions involving trade secrets . according to gsa data , advisory committees frequently hold closed meetings . agencies reported to gsa that about 58 percent of the 5,700 advisory committee meetings held in fiscal year 1997 were either closed or partially closed . advisory committee meetings can be closed to the public if the president or the agency head to which the advisory committee reports determines that the meeting may be closed in accordance with provisions of the government in the sunshine act ( 5 u.s.c . 552b ( c ) ) . the provisions provide for closed meetings to protect , for example , matters that need to be kept secret in the interest of national security or foreign policy ; trade secrets ; and information of a personal nature , the disclosure of which would constitute an invasion of privacy . respondents who were members of peer review panels — which frequently deal with such proprietary and sensitive information — were much less likely to say their committee meetings were totally open to the public and much more likely to say their meetings were totally closed to the public . about 2 percent of the panelists said their meetings were always open to the public . about 64 percent said their meetings were always closed to the public .