iv ) . the acting director concurred that greater or more diligent management oversight is needed to ensure that civil penalty cases are processed in an expeditious , yet thorough manner . to address the timeliness issue , the acting director noted that fincen has taken or has plans to take definitive steps , such as working with ocre staff to identify individual training needs ; assigning two non - ocre employees the tasks of analyzing open civil penalty referrals , highlighting cases that warrant immediate attention , and providing oversight to ensure that progress continues on those referrals ; and developing civil penalty referral procedures that include time lines and due dates . the acting director commented that fincen plans to establish strict time lines for the initial assessment of civil penalty referrals , where such guidelines are practicable and predictable . there may be several reasons for this trend . regarding recent years , for example , fincen officials mentioned staff inexperience and personnel departures as being reasons . based upon workload and related statistics , what was treasury's performance in processing civil penalty cases during calendar years 1992 through 1997 ? what is the status of fincen's efforts to develop and issue a final regulation delegating the authority to assess civil penalties for bsa violations to the federal banking regulatory agencies , as required by the mlsa ? in addressing these questions , we interviewed cognizant fincen officials and reviewed relevant documentation on fincen's policies and procedures for processing civil penalty cases . also , we reviewed civil penalty case inventory and processing timeliness data for calendar years 1985 through 1997 . further , to determine the status of the delegation of civil penalty authority , we interviewed treasury and fincen officials to obtain their views on ( 1 ) when a final regulation is expected to be issued and ( 2 ) if applicable , whether any substantive or procedural issues must be resolved before a final rule can be promulgated . we performed our work from december 1997 to may 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the acting director , fincen . a reprint of fincen's written comments can be found in appendix iv , and our evaluation of those comments follows our recommendation . the bsa and its implementing regulations , in general , require financial institutions to maintain certain records and to file certain reports ( eg , currency transaction reports ) that are useful in criminal , tax , or regulatory investigations , such as money laundering cases . failure to file bsa reports can result in criminal and / or civil penalties , depending on the nature of the violation . criminal investigations are the responsibility of irs' criminal investigation division . civil penalties are currently assessed by fincen , and the agency is to send each referral to irs for review before any administrative or civil enforcement action is taken . treasury has issued guidelines to assist regulatory agencies in determining which bsa violations warrant referral to treasury for consideration of criminal and / or civil penalties .