ii. ) the validity of conclusions about treatment effectiveness is greatly affected by which data sources are used to measure outcome . given that research has indicated that sex offenses are underreported , that a single data source is likely to be incomplete , and that some data sources are less reliable than others , the fewer and less reliable the data sources on which recidivism measures are based , the greater the likelihood that recidivism rates will be underestimated . nearly three - fourths of the research reviews pointed out the problem of studies relying on too few data sources to measure recidivism . the reviews criticized studies that relied solely on either official records or offender self - reports to determine whether program participants had reoffended . they stated that both official records and self - reports are likely to contain measurement error . for example , both arrest and conviction records are likely to yield underestimates of recidivism if sex offenses are underreported . using a comparison group helps answer such questions as ( 1 ) what would recidivism rates have been without treatment and ( 2 ) what factors , other than the treatment program alone , may have affected recidivism ? for example , such studies may find that treatment volunteers , those with significant community ties , and / or older offenders may have lower recidivism rates , even without treatment , than other types of offenders . without a comparable no - treatment group of offenders against which to benchmark the results of the treatment group , it is difficult to know how much of an impact , if any , the treatment program had on recidivism . the reviews found that , in the absence of comparison groups , researchers sometimes compared the recidivism rates obtained in their study against those obtained in other studies . however , explanations other than treatment and study characteristics could have accounted for different recidivism rates in these studies . these include differences in sex offense reporting rates , apprehension levels , and prosecutorial policies across different jurisdictions and study periods . research has shown that sex crimes are underreported and that the longer the follow - up period , the more accurate the assessment of recidivism . one reviewer noted that “recidivism rates are most meaningful if they cover at least a five - year period , postincarceration” ( becker , 1994 ) , while another suggested that “studies that follow up offenders for periods of as short as 5 years or less may be producing substantial underestimates of true rates of recidivism” ( finkelhor , 1986 ) . although we cannot be precise about the average length of follow - up because the research reviews did not report it in a systematic fashion , it appears that many of the studies covered in the reviews involved follow - up periods of less than 5 years . not only can follow - up periods be too short to accurately measure recidivism rates , reviewers also found it difficult to compare the outcomes of different studies because the studies varied in the amount of time they tracked offenders after treatment and no statistical analyses were performed to account for the differences .