as you requested , we are reporting on the u.s . postal service's controls over express mail corporate accounts ( emca ) . these accounts allow customers to deposit money with the service for using as needed to pay for express mail delivery services . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . although service officials said that the number of active emca varies daily , service records show that , during the month of february 1996 , an average of about 113,000 emcas existed nationwide . when opening emcas , customers are to be given a six - digit emca number , and these numbers are to be included on mailing labels affixed to the express mail packages . customers can drop the package in a collection box designated for express mail or take the package to a post office , mail - processing plant , or other places where the service accepts express mail . postmasters , clerks , or other service employees accepting express mail at post offices and mail - processing plants are to electronically scan a preprinted barcode on the express mail label , which enters the label's unique identifying number into an automated system for tracking purposes . the employees are to weigh the package , verify that the customer calculated the correct postage , and take steps as required to ensure the correct postage is collected . these steps are to be done for all express mail , whether an emca is used for payment or not . for those express mail packages involving an emca , employees accepting the package are to determine if the emca number on the package is invalid by manually comparing the number against a list of emca numbers that the service has determined to be invalid . when acceptance data are not recorded , the service has incomplete data to report on - time delivery rates for express mail . the service lost unknown amounts of revenue because some customers had included emca numbers on express mail packages , but service employees did not record any acceptance data . we scanned some express mail labels in the three selected districts and noted that all three had received some express mail packages from emca customers without recording acceptance data . in all three districts , the practice was to not follow up when customers used emcas ; therefore , no express mail acceptance data were recorded . postal service officials in the three districts and at headquarters did not know the extent of emca revenue losses associated with the failure to record express mail acceptance data . we identified two postal service actions under way that could help to improve emca controls and thereby reduce related revenue losses and provide needed emca data .