i , ques . 3 ) , we multiplied each of the 36 sampled banks that gave us this answer by a weight , ranging from 1 to 336 , depending on which size stratum each was drawn from . because we surveyed only a sample of banks , these estimates have a sampling error , which is a measure of the precision with which the estimated value approximates the actual value . sampling errors are calculated at the 95 percent confidence level for each weighted estimate made and are reported in the text . see page 9 . denise callahan , evaluator - in - charge grace sakoda , evaluator may lee , evaluator gerhard c. brostrom , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . fewer than half said that intrusion detection software was in place . problems involving transactions that were lost by the bank or by the vendor operating the bank's on - line banking system reportedly occurred less frequently than unauthorized access attempts . fourteen of the 93 banks ( 15 percent ) indicated that on - line banking transactions have been lost ( see table 4 ) . officials reported a variety of reasons for these losses , such as customers not knowing how to use their on - line banking software and system failures . one bank official told us that lost transactions had led to a financial loss , and two others reported reduced customer confidence in the banks' on - line systems as a consequence . to help prevent losses of on - line banking transactions , federal deposit insurance corporation guidelines and security experts recommend that audit logs and reports be generated and subsequently routinely reviewed . monitoring these reports can provide bank officials with an indication of problems requiring their attention , according to security experts . as shown in table 5 , 79 of the 93 banks ( 85 percent ) reported that audit reports were both generated and routinely monitored .