activities . therefore , data do not exist that would help explain the reasons for the differences . table 4 shows the total , mean , and median expenses for organizations using each of the three lobbying definitions that reported having $10,000 or more in lobbying expenses from july to december 1997 . table 4 includes only data on organizations reporting lobbying expenses of $10,000 or more , because organizations with less than $10,000 in expenses check a box on the lda reporting form and do not include an amount for their expenses . because , as shown in table 3 , many more of these organizations used the lda definition than used either of the irc definitions , it follows that the largest total amount of all expenses reported was under the lda definition . because the differences among the three lobbying definitions can significantly affect who registers and what they report under lda , the current statutory provisions do not always complement lda's purpose . as discussed earlier , allowing organizations to use an irc definition for lda purposes can result in organizations ( 1 ) not registering under lda , ( 2 ) disclosing information that may not be comparable , and ( 3 ) disclosing information that is unrelated to lda's purpose or that falls short of what lda envisions . options for revising the statutory framework exist ; lda requires us to consider one option , harmonizing the definitions ; and we identified two other options on the basis of our analysis . those options are eliminating the current authorization for businesses and tax - exempt organizations to use the irc lobbying definitions for lda reporting and requiring organizations that use an irc lobbying definition to include only expenses related to federal lobbying covered by that irc definition when the organizations register and report under lda . the options address , in varying degrees , the effects of the differences on registration and reporting , but all have countervailing effects that must be balanced in determining what , if any , change should be made . in addition to charging us with analyzing the differences among the three lobbying definitions and the impact of those differences on organizations' registration and reporting of their lobbying efforts , lda charges us with reporting any changes that we may recommend to harmonize those definitions . harmonization implies the adoption of a common definition that would be used for lda's registration and reporting purposes and for the tax reporting purposes currently served by the irc definitions . 4911 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) yes26 u.s.c . 4911 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) yes26 u.s.c . 4911 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) yes26 u.s.c . 4911 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) yes 2 u.s.c . 1602 ( 8 ) ( a ) ( i ) & ( 3 ) ( e ) yes 2 u.s.c . 1602 ( 8 ) ( a ) ( i ) & ( 3 ) ( f ) yes 2 u.s.c . 1602 ( 8 ) ( a ) ( i ) & ( 3 ) ( c ) yes 2 u.s.c .