( see app . i for a list of these 19 proposed rules. ) the agencies did not convene panels for any of these proposed rules because they certified that the rules would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities . sba's chief counsel for advocacy agreed with osha's certifications that neither of its two proposed rules required an advocacy review panel . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . their comments are discussed near the end of this letter . we reviewed a total of 19 notices of proposed rulemaking that epa and osha published ( 17 and 2 notices , respectively ) during the first year's implementation of sbrefa's advocacy review panel requirements . however , the chief counsel said that epa should have convened advocacy review panels for 2 of its 17 proposed rules — the national ambient air quality standards for ozone and for particulate matter . epa's certification of these two rules was based on epa's interpretation of the term “impact” under the rfa . epa concluded that the term refers to the impact of a proposed rule on small entities subject to the rule's requirements because the purpose of a regulatory flexibility analysis is to consider ways of easing a rule's requirements as they will apply to small entities . according to epa , that purpose could not be served in the case of rules such as these national ambient air quality standards , which do not themselves impose requirements that apply to small entities . because , according to epa , the only choice it has in promulgating the national ambient air quality standards is the level of the standard and not its implementation , epa stated that there is nothing it can do in setting these standards to tailor state implementation measures as they apply to small entities . epa said that any effect on small entities would occur only when states specifically determine how they will implement these rules . in a november 18 , 1996 , letter to the epa administrator , sba's chief counsel for advocacy said that epa should have convened advocacy review panels for the ozone and particulate matter rules . he said that the promulgation of these proposed rules cannot be separated from their implementation , and that certain effects on small entities flow “inexorably” from the standards that these proposed rules would establish . also , 6 of the 13 small entity representatives we interviewed who provided comments to an unofficial advocacy review panel on a draft implementation strategy related to these 2 rules said that they thought epa should have convened panels for these standards . subsequently , epa and sba's office of advocacy agreed to add five additional representatives to the panel process .