these decisions are at the discretion of the president . numerous redesignations have subsequently been made , as discussed on page 58 . in addition , 19 u.s.c. , subsection 2464 ( c ) ( 3 ) , states that gsp benefits can be reinstated ( a waiver can be granted ) for items subject to cnl restrictions . waivers can be granted for parties that submit a petition during the annual review process . for items subject to reduced and regular cnl , a petitioned waiver can be granted for either just the lower , more restrictive limits , or for both the lower and upper limits . a waiver will remain in effect until the president determines that it is no longer warranted due to changed circumstances . in deciding whether to grant a petition for a cnl waiver , the president shall give “great weight” to accessibility to the bdc's markets for u.s. goods and services , as well as the extent to which the bdc provides reasonable and effective protection of u.s. intellectual property rights . a cnl waiver may also be granted when total u.s. imports of a product are small , or de minimis . in 1992 , the level of imports for a particular good to become eligible for a de minimis waiver was $11.8 million . all cnl waivers are automatically granted for items that were not produced in the united states on january 3 , 1985 , and for all items shipped from the 35 bdcs that have been designated as least developed countries by ustr ( see p. 26 for a listing ) . in addition to the legislative prohibition of eligibility for certain items , there are other reasons for limited use of the gsp program that are not captured in data . it is possible that gsp is not used as much as it might be because exporters simply are not familiar with gsp , particularly in countries that are not large users of the program . for example , a u.s. government official in turkey , as well as a turkish government official , said that the turkish government does an inadequate job of informing turkish exporters about the opportunities provided by the gsp program . a business representative in brazil said that smaller firms in that country do not even know that the program exists . in addition , some u.s. government officials and gsp experts we interviewed told us that they believe an important limitation on gsp participation is that many bdcs cannot produce and export items that are eligible under the program . this conclusion led to varying opinions by these officials on the appropriate country focus of the gsp program . some u.s. government officials said that there is little that the united states can do to increase use of the program for many countries . they explained that the united states should realize that domination of the program by the few countries that can produce and export is to be expected . a former gsp director pointed out that too many people mistakenly view the gsp program as a traditional aid program , believing that if the u.s. government removes benefits from some countries , it can allocate more to other countries .