iii. ) the revenue impact of nonfiling abroad cannot be estimated , primarily because the prevalence of nonfiling and the income levels of the nonfilers are unknown . the legislative history indicates that the treasury report was mandated because of past difficulties in determining when a u.s. citizen had committed an expatriating act with a tax avoidance purpose and thus must continue to pay u.s. taxes on their worldwide income . the impact could be relatively small or substantial , depending on the assumptions used in the analysis . irs has not collected complete information on the country of residence and has not obtained occupation data on passport applicants residing abroad.the data irs has received has been limited to the applicant's name , mailing address , date of birth , and ssn if the applicant provided one . the applicant's country of residence is currently not required on passport applications . according to state department and irs officials , country of residence can be obtained in some cases from mailing addresses on passport applications , primarily when a u.s. citizen residing abroad applies for a passport renewal , or when u.s. citizens born abroad apply for passports , although applicants are not required to cite a foreign address even in these cases . passport application forms do not contain a field for capturing the country of residence of those applying for a passport in this country and intending to live or work abroad . passport applications do contain a field for the applicant's occupation , but irs has not obtained this information routinely or prescribed that applicants provide it . according to state department officials , the cost of capturing occupation data would include data transcription costs of about 6 cents per record and other costs to revise the computer programs used to store and retrieve the data . state department officials also believe that the passport application form would need to be revised to capture the country of residence and to provide additional instructions to the applicant . the officials said that they have not estimated the cost of modifying the relevant computer programs or revising the application form . irs officials noted that certain irs computer programs would also need to be modified to process the additional data , and , based on a preliminary estimate , this could require the equivalent of about 2 staff years at the gs - 12 / 13 level and $10,000 for related equipment and software upgrades . irs proposed regulations on section 6039e in 1993 that would have required applicants to provide their country of residence , address within the country of residence , occupation , and other information . the office of chief counsel is working to finalize the regulations in 1998 . an official in irs' office of chief counsel said that one reason the proposed regulations were not finalized earlier is that section 6039e already provides irs with the authority to prescribe the information required from passport applicants without specifying the requirements in regulations . in the 1960s and 1970s , u.s. citizens residing abroad and applying for passports or registering at u.s. consular posts abroad were asked to complete an irs form 3966: identification of u.s. citizen residing abroad .