4 of this report. ) although officials from several companies said they believed their lists contained 75 to 90 percent of the regulations applicable to them , most of the companies' officials acknowledged that their lists were incomplete . the companies' lists also varied in the level of detail they provided . users of studies of regulatory costs need to be aware of the inherent difficulties and assumptions involved in producing such measures . to this point , this report has attempted to assess the impact of federal regulations on selected businesses by focusing on aggregates — the total number of regulations applicable to a company and the aggregate burden ( cost and other ) of those regulations . another way to understand the impact of regulations is to examine the concerns those businesses have about the particular regulations that comprise that aggregate . in a june 1994 study , we used this type of approach to obtain comments on a defined set of federal regulations . employer and union representatives in selected businesses were asked about their experiences in dealing with 26 statutes and 1 executive order on workplace regulation , including the ada , the equal pay act , and the service contract act . in summary , both groups generally supported the need for workplace regulations but voiced concerns about the operation of the overall regulatory process . if so , how did the researcher determine what businesses would have spent in the absence of regulations ? • what financial records were used to substantiate the cost figures , and what assumptions guided the collection of the data ? for example , many of the employers said that certain paperwork requirements had questionable value . these employers also said that the regulatory approach used by many agencies was largely adversarial , characterized by poor communication , unfair and inconsistent enforcement , and vague laws and regulations . both employers and union representatives called for agencies' providing a more service - oriented approach to workplace regulation ; improving information access and educational assistance to employers , workers , and unions ; and permitting more input into agency standard - setting and enforcement efforts . in this study , we asked officials representing the 15 participating companies to identify the specific federal regulations that they considered most problematic for their organizations . we also asked those officials what government ( congress or federal agencies ) and businesses could do to address either the problems they identified or the federal regulatory process in general . in our instructions to the companies , we defined “problematic regulations” as any federal program , regulation , or law that the officials viewed as causing their companies the greatest difficulty . we said a regulation could be considered problematic for a variety of reasons , such as being too costly , too vague , unnecessary , or duplicative . we developed written summaries of each of the companies' concerns and verified the accuracy of those summaries with company officials . we then sent the verified summaries to the appropriate regulatory agencies for their review and comments .