( fig . 1 shows the percentage of time that ins devoted to its enforcement programs in fiscal year 1998. ) the number of employer investigations ins is able to conduct each year covers only a fraction of the estimated number of employers who may have unauthorized aliens . as previously noted , the results from ins' inspection of a random sample of the nation's 6.5 million employers in fiscal year 1997 indicated that about 195,000 employers had employed unauthorized aliens . labor did not provide comments . the employment verification process can be easily thwarted by fraud . large numbers of unauthorized aliens have either fraudulently used valid documents that belong to others or presented counterfeit documents as evidence of employment eligibility . as a result , unauthorized aliens have been able to circumvent the current employment verification process , thereby making it difficult for employers who are willing to comply with the law by hiring only authorized workers to do so . various studies have pointed out that fraudulent documents are largely responsible for the ineffectiveness of the employment verification process . for example , we reported in 1990 that the prevalence of fraudulent documents threatened to undermine the employment verification process and the system needed improvement . in its 1997 report to congress , the commission on immigration reform reiterated its 1994 conclusion that the single most important step that could be taken to reduce unlawful migration was the development of a more effective system for verifying work authorization . it noted that the widespread availability of fraudulent documents makes it easy for unauthorized aliens to obtain jobs . similarly , ins has noted that the proliferation of inexpensive fraudulent documents makes it almost impossible for employers to ensure employment to only authorized workers . labor's concern with preserving the integrity of its mission - related investigations has prevented labor investigators from carrying out all of the provisions of the memorandum with ins . for example , although the agreement calls for labor to “make prompt referrals of employers suspected of knowingly hiring unauthorized aliens,” labor field officials told us that they do not conduct any investigative activities to determine whether employees may be unauthorized . the labor field operation handbook states that the role of labor investigators does “not include investigating beyond the records ( eg , interviewing employees for i - 9 purposes ) .” instead , labor's assistance to ins has primarily been in the form of reviewing employers' form i - 9 paperwork and providing the results to ins . even in this area , labor has decreased its activity , although not because of any conflict in mission . the percentage of inspections in which labor investigators did not determine whether employers were in compliance with form i - 9 paperwork requirements increased from 13 percent of labor inspections in fiscal year 1990 to 26 percent in fiscal year 1998 . according to labor officials , the increase has been due , in part , to the shortened time that investigators spend at worksites . in many cases , these officials stated , investigators complete their inspections and leave worksites within 3 days .