hiring freeze in effect . flight hours shifted from border interdiction to foreign counterdrug operations and other law enforcement support . increased number of p - 3 and citation aircraft were dedicated to the program's south american operations . twenty - four - hour maintenance of aircraft ended at all branches . domestic border interdiction response was reduced from 24 hours per day to 16 hours per day at four air branches . aviation program was developing government performance and results act ( gpra ) measures that program officials say will more accurately measure effectiveness . jan montgomery , assistant general counsel the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . all other cancellations we categorized as not resource dependent . customs officials agreed with this approach . to determine the adequacy of the performance measures customs uses to judge the results of its aviation program efforts , we interviewed officials from customs and other federal agencies involved in drug control and interdiction and reviewed relevant documents provided by these agencies . we reviewed the ondcp national drug control strategy and customs documents showing the results of the aviation program over the past 6 fiscal years . to obtain information on customs aviation program performance measures for its antidrug activities , we interviewed officials responsible for the customs aviation program and reviewed key agency documents such as customs aviation program performance plans developed for implementing the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) p.l . we compared the customs aviation program performance measurement plans with gpra requirements to determine whether they conform to the principles of the act . we did our audit work between april and august 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since the establishment of the customs aviation program in 1969 , its basic mandate to use air assets to counter the drug smuggling threat has not changed . the program was established to reduce the level of drug smuggling ; increase smugglers' risk and cost ; and improve the detection and apprehension of drug smuggling by aircraft , boats , and vehicles .