the target of certification . product profession process facility or organization who does the certification . federal government state or local governments joint commissions private sector , professional , or trade organizations self - certification the origin or basis of the certification requirement . statutory requirements agency regulatory actions international agreements industry consensus or nonconsensus requirements procurement actions the degree of compulsion on those being certified . voluntary mandatory required for program participation whether other certifications are accepted or recognized . only the specified certification is accepted other certifications accepted or recognized according to nist officials , the risk associated with a particular regulatory action or procurement can be an important factor influencing choices within these various dimensions . if the perceived risk is low , for instance , an agency might determine that certification is voluntary and accept a manufacturer's self - certification . however , if the risk associated with failure to meet standards is serious , the agency might choose to make certification mandatory and accept certification from only a federally recognized laboratory . appendix i describes a number of specific agency certification programs and requirements that illustrate these kinds of differences . some of the requirements differ on multiple dimensions . for example , the national marine fisheries service within the department of commerce has a program for the inspection and certification of seafood products and processing operations . the seafood inspection program is a voluntary program carried out pursuant to the agricultural marketing act of 1946 , as amended ; involves inspection by licensed federal and state agents ; and provides certification recognized by other federal , state , and foreign government agencies as well as some private and international organizations . in contrast , a provision in an nih procurement solicitation stated that a prospective contractor's supervisors responsible for inspection of the agency's biohazard cabinets “must be nsf accredited biohazard cabinet field certifiers.” this provision is based on an industry consensus standard , targets professional competence , involves accreditation by a private sector third party , represents a mandatory requirement for prospective contractors , and recognizes only one source for the certification . federal procurement law establishes some legal boundaries on the certification requirements used in federal procurement . in addition , agency officials pointed out that their general procedures and practices for rulemaking and procurement can serve a useful role in notifying the public and soliciting feedback on proposed certification requirements . however , there is little in the way of general policies , procedures , or guidance governing how agencies should establish certification requirements or select certification bodies , except at the level of some individual agency programs . agency officials told us that they primarily viewed certification as an industry or professional concern rather than as a federal issue , and therefore they tended to rely on the “industry standard” or “nationally recognized” requirements . nist has prepared draft guidance for federal agencies on conformity assessment activities , including certification . this guidance is currently under review at omb , and nist expects to publish it for public comment later this year .