the proposals are described below . a flat tax would levy a single - rate wage tax on individuals and a single - rate cash - flow tax on businesses . an unlimited savings allowance ( usa ) tax would provide for a three - bracket individual income tax , with a full deduction for income saved rather than consumed . on the business side , a single rate would apply to income from both corporate and non - corporate businesses , with an immediate deduction for capital investment and purchases of inventory . a simplified income tax would broaden the tax base , lower the tax rate , and eliminate most current deductions and credits . a value added tax ( vat ) , a consumption tax , would be collected at each stage of the production process . a retail sales tax , a consumption tax , would be collected at the retail level in the form of a sales tax . under the vat and retail sales tax proposals , individuals would bear taxes as they consume goods and services , but , unless they were sole proprietors , they would not file tax returns . therefore , the nonbusiness ( eg , individuals who are not sole proprietors ) portion of the tcmp ( about 18 percent of the sample ) has no relevancy for these two types of taxes . the flat tax , the usa tax , and the simplified income tax would require returns for individual taxpayers who do not own businesses . thus , tcmp data should have some relevancy in evaluating these alternative tax systems . table i.1 shows the tcmp data elements for individuals that could be relevant to policymakers and tax administrators in developing and administering the flat tax , usa tax , and simplified tax systems . the tcmp data elements are essentially the same as the line items found on the form 1040 , individual income tax return . the “yes” in the columns in table i.1 indicates that the tcmp element would be relevant for evaluating the proposals . those columns in table i.1 that do not contain “yes” indicate that tcmp data collected for these elements would not be relevant for that particular tax system . the sample sizes shown in table i.1 are the number of individual returns irs plans to audit in the tcmp . wages , salaries , and tips taxable refunds or credits of state and local income taxes capital gain or ( loss ) income from rental real estate , partnerships , s corporationsira deductions for self and spouse one - half of self employment taxkeogh retirement plan and sep deductionpenalty on early withdrawal of savings state and local income taxes ( continued ) child and dependent care expenses credit for the elderly or disabled social security tax on tip income tax on qualified retirement plans ( table notes on next page ) . as indicated in table i.1 , some of the tcmp individual tax elements should be relevant for evaluating the flat tax proposal .