iv ) . he expressed disagreement with our definition of random audit . he said random audit involves random selection for audit in which every taxpayer in the filing population would have an equal chance of being selected . he also said the six projects discussed in our report are not random audits . we did not attempt to evaluate these surveys or plans . to identify whether irs had any alternatives to random audits , we first interviewed irs officials and collected irs data about the objectives of each project using random selection . next , we reviewed our prior reports as well as a price waterhouse report on compliance data and the trade - offs with alternative sampling strategies . we interviewed irs officials and researched the literature to see whether we could find any other data sources that would meet irs objectives . we did not attempt to evaluate the worthiness of irs objectives . our work was done at irs' national office in washington , d.c. , the georgia district office , atlanta service center , and southeast regional office between march and november 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments from the irs commissioner on a draft of this report and these comments are discussed at the end of this report . between fiscal years 1994 and 1996 , according to irs data , audits increased nationwide as well as in georgia . during this period , irs did not randomly select any taxpayers from the population of all taxpayers for audit . irs did identify six subpopulations with known or suspected noncompliance from which it randomly selected taxpayers for audit . compared with the overall number of audits , irs did very few random audits during this period — both across the nation and in georgia . similarly , very few of the audits of irs employees involved random selection . table 1 shows that the total number of nationwide audits increased from 1994 to 1996 . during that time , the number of audits done in georgia also increased ( from 45,451 to 55,446 ) . both of these increases resulted from a change in emphasis in the types of audits . irs increased the number of service center correspondence audits and decreased the number of district office audits ; correspondence audits can be done more quickly than audits at a district office . during the 3 years , irs did not randomly select any taxpayers from the population of all taxpayers for audit . according to irs data , only those belonging to one of the six project subpopulations were eligible for being randomly selected . irs chose these six subpopulations nonrandomly on the basis of historically high noncompliance rates or other evidence of suspected high noncompliance rates . these subpopulations represent small segments of the population of taxpayers and include taxpayers in a specific occupation , industry , geographic area , or economic activity ; or with specific characteristics , such as being eic recipients . table 2 shows the number of random audits across the six project subpopulations for the nation and georgia during fiscal years 1994 through 1996 . compared with all its audits , irs rarely did random audits .