ii ) . in response to our recommendation that irs provide customer service efforts earlier in the filing season , irs said that it plans to publicize eic awareness events early in the 1999 filing season and to hold eic awareness activities beginning in january 1999 . qualifying child errors . how precise were the reported overclaim estimates ? we also reviewed available data on irs' design of the tax year 1997 eic compliance study to see how , if at all , that study addressed problems we identified with the tax year 1994 study . to determine the primary sources of eic noncompliance on tax year 1994 returns , we analyzed the tax year 1994 study dataset as provided by irs and modified through ota editing programs . all data are estimates based on the study sample . accordingly , we calculated confidence intervals at the 95 percent confidence level to indicate the precision of the estimates . unless otherwise noted , the confidence intervals for percentages are 5 percentage points or less ; for other statistics , the intervals are 10 percent or less of the reported value . to determine whether recent irs compliance efforts addressed the primary sources of noncompliance , we reviewed irs documents to identify the scope of eic - related activities and related implementation plans ; interviewed officials responsible for designing and implementing eic - related activities at irs' national office , its brookhaven , cincinnati , and fresno service centers , and its northern california district office ; and obtained available data on the results of eic programs . we did our work from september 1997 through may 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . was data entry into the final database verified ? was the database checked for internal consistency , outliers , and invalid codes ? we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of internal revenue and the secretary of the treasury , or their designees . the commissioner of internal revenue and treasury deputy assistant secretary ( tax analysis ) responded in letters dated july 2 , 1998 , and june 29 , 1998 , respectively . their comments are summarized at the end of this letter and are reprinted in appendixes i and ii . on july 1 , 1998 , we met with irs officials , including the deputy chief of operations , the acting assistant commissioner for customer service , and the assistant commissioner for research / statistics of income , to discuss the commissioner's comments . in addition , irs and ota provided technical comments on our draft . we made changes to the report in response to the comments where appropriate . irs found that of $17.2 billion in eic claimed during the january 15 to april 21 , 1995 , study period , taxpayers overclaimed $4.4 billion , or 25.8 percent of total eic claimed . to determine whether this $4.4 billion overclaim estimate is reasonably accurate , we evaluated irs' study methodology . our evaluation was based on the extent to which irs used generally accepted social science standards for a research project of this kind .