therefore , it was not changed . ( see app . iv for a list of the selected experts. ) we surveyed 10 housing measurement experts . the questionnaire we sent to these experts contained a historical synopsis of housing cost measurement in the cpi , including brief descriptions of the concerns that stimulated bls' adoption of the rental equivalence method in the 1980s and an overview discussion of the rental equivalence method in terms of measuring the cost of living . we asked the selected housing experts if the rental equivalence method adequately addressed the concerns expressed by critics about the use of the asset - price approach and if any concerns emerged as a result of using the rental equivalence method . in addition , we asked them if the adoption of the rental equivalence method made the cpi either more or less suitable for use as a measure of cost of living . ( see app . v for a copy of the information and questionnaire sent to each expert. ) we interviewed 10 medical measurement experts . before holding the interviews , we sent a letter to these experts in which we provided a background paper that identified and briefly described measurement issues that may result from cost shifting among medical care payers . this material was provided to the experts prior to our interviews as a reference point from which to begin our in - person interviews . at the interviews , we asked the experts about the influence of cost shifting on the medical care component . we also asked the experts to provide advantages and disadvantages of changing the current measurement of medical care costs to an approach that more closely approximates a cost - of - living measure . ( see app . v for a copy of the information sent to and the questions asked of each expert. ) we did our work in baltimore , md ; boston , ma ; chicago , il ; philadelphia , pa ; richmond , va ; and washington , d.c. , between july 1995 and january 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the acting director of omb and the secretary of labor , or their designees . the comments are summarized and addressed in chapter 4 . a more detailed account of our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . in the 1980s , bls began using the rental equivalence method of measuring homeowners' costs . recognized experts that we surveyed viewed the change that bls made as making the cpi more suitable as a measure of the cost of living . they noted , however , that some new issues have emerged as a result of using the rental equivalence method . although the new method may have made the cpi more suitable as a cost - of - living measure , bls officials said this was not their objective . rather , they made the change to better measure housing costs within the cpi's structure of measuring price changes of a fixed market basket of goods and services .