( app . ii provides fletc and fbi excerpts from nine training scenarios in which the use of force was used and the rationale for whether the force used was appropriate. ) thereafter , each agency employed a building - block approach that integrates the use - of - force / deadly force issues into other segments of the training in which the use of force could be a relevant issue , such as physical control techniques , arrests , and on search and seizure training . each of the agencies employed training techniques , such as practical exercises using role - playing , simunitions exercises , and firearms judgment exercises that use realistic video scenarios requiring shoot or not - to - shoot decisions . furthermore , each agency trained its new agents in recognizing the perceived level of threat they face and in responding to it with an appropriate level of force . fbi training officials stated that dea and fbi have similar use - of - force training programs for new agents . one official noted that although the exact language of their policies might be somewhat different ( the treasury and justice policies applicable to dea and fbi were revised in october 1995 and are now generally uniform for dea and fbi ) , dea and fbi interpret and apply their use - of - force policies almost identically in training programs . this official said that he instructs on legal issues for the use - of - force policy course for fbi's new agents and has taught dea's new agents as well and that he had also provided training assistance at fletc . even after the training of new agents is completed and agents are provided full special agent responsibilities , they are to be frequently exposed to the use - of - force and deadly force policies . atf policy requires that these policies be reiterated during the planning process for tactical operations and quarterly during firearms requalification training . for over a decade , atf policy has required that for every search warrant obtained , a plan is to be developed to execute the warrant and that all persons participating in the warrant are to be briefed on the plan . moreover , the policy requires that every person participating in the plan , especially those who are not treasury enforcement officers , are to be advised of treasury's policy on the use of firearms . a january 27 , 1995 , atf policy brief stated that due to the increase in violence encountered by agents during the execution of search warrants , arrest warrants , and undercover operations , special agents planning to execute such operations are required to prepare an operational plan . the atf guidance for operational plans stated that “the use of a well written operational plan , in concert with a thorough briefing , substantially enhances the safety of the special agents , public , and suspects.” atf policy requires that all enforcement officers involved in the operation be provided a copy of the operational plan . among the issues to be discussed at the operational plan briefing is atf's firearms policy on the use of deadly force .