ins is reviewing these cases for potential revocation . to provide quality assurance that ins' decisions during the review were unbiased , eoir reviewed a statistically valid sample of 557 alien case files from the universe of 16,858 aliens . our analysis showed that eoir's and ins' overall judgments produced generally similar conclusions about the results — that is , the proportion of naturalization cases found to be proper , to require further action , and to be presumptively ineligible . however , for 72 of the cases that ins review adjudicators had judged were properly naturalized , eoir staff judged that further action was required to decide whether the initial adjudications were proper or the aliens were presumptively ineligible . at the time of our review , ins initially was not planning any further action to judge if the naturalization decisions for the 72 cases were appropriate , thus leaving unresolved questions about the soundness of ins' decisions in these cases . after we discussed the 72 cases with an ins attorney involved with reviewing the cases for potential revocation , he said that these cases are being reviewed with the other 6,323 cases . the overall approach kpmg employed to monitor ins' judgments followed accepted social science standards . the standards kpmg used included ( 1 ) establishing procedures to ensure the appropriate collection and review of fbi criminal history records and the review of related alien case files , ( 2 ) promoting consistency in the judgments of ins adjudicators by providing training and using a standardized worksheet , and ( 3 ) identifying recurring adjudicator errors so that corrective action could be taken . in addition , kpmg's report disclosed limitations in the study procedures followed and discussed conditions that may have affected the accuracy and completeness of ins' review . kpmg concluded that the 79-percent agreement rate between ins and eoir reviewers was the most that could be expected . although kpmg did not disclose its basis for this conclusion , it seems reasonable to us that providing the eoir staff with training similar to that provided to ins' review adjudicators might have helped to reduce any differences in how the two groups reached their decisions . on february 19 , 1998 , we met with officials from jmd , ins , eoir , and kpmg who represented those organizations responsible for the data discussed in our report and provided the views of those organizations . the officials represented the director of the management and planning staff , jmd ; the director , eoir ; the commissioner , ins ; and the principal , kpmg . these officials agreed with our draft report , including its conclusions , and provided clarifying suggestions , which we included in this final report where appropriate . our draft report contained a recommendation that the commissioner of ins ensure that its office of general counsel follow through with its plans to analyze the 72 cases along with the other 6,323 cases that ins is reviewing for potential revocation . during our discussion with the officials , they said that ins is now taking action to review these 72 case files . accordingly , we deleted the recommendation from this report .