additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we did not verify whether agencies reported all of their user fees . to obtain information on the fourth objective , we reviewed the cfo annual reports for fiscal years 1995 through 1997 and requested information from the 24 agencies on whether they reported the results of reviews in the cfo reports during fiscal years 1993 and 1994 . to determine whether agencies were more likely to review fees if the fees were authorized to be used to cover agencies' expenses compared to when they were not , we obtained information from each of the agencies on whether they had legislative authority to use fees they collect . we then compared the number of reviews of fees that agencies were allowed to keep with the number of reviews of those that they were not allowed to keep . we reviewed relevant laws and regulations pertaining to user fees , including the cfo act of 1990 , the ioaa and other user fee authorizing legislation , and omb circular a - 25 . we also reviewed omb bulletins 94-01 and 97-01 , form and content of agency financial statements , to determine whether they contained user fee reporting requirements . we met with omb officials to obtain additional information on omb's user fee review and reporting requirements . in some cases , agencies said they did not formally conduct “biennial fee reviews” but instead periodically , generally annually , conducted fee rate updates that met the key requirements of a biennial review . in these instances , we considered the rate updates as user fee reviews . ssa said that it had not reviewed its eight fees because the majority of its fees were either legislatively set or were based on the actual computation of the full cost to provide the service . according to an agency official , ssa was currently conducting a review of two of its fees and stated that four additional fees will be reviewed in conjunction with the agency's comprehensive evaluation of its fee charging policy . of the 94 fees not reviewed , 42 were set by legislation . the 42 fees represent about 37 percent of the 114 fees set by legislation and about 45 percent of the fees that agencies had not reviewed . several agencies reported that they had not reviewed the fees set by legislation because they believed the fees were either not subject to the user fee review requirements or could not be changed unless legislation was amended . all of the 31 fees were in effect long enough to have had biennial reviews . fifteen of the 24 cfo agencies had not reviewed 94 user fees at all during the 5-year period . these 94 fees were about 17 percent of the total 546 fees . the agencies provided various reasons for not conducting the reviews . for example , the department of the treasury's u.s. customs service reported that it had not reviewed its nine fees ( reported as totaling over $1 billion in fiscal year 1996 ) because of insufficient cost data .