1997 ) , pp . fasab volume 1 original statements: statements of federal financial accounting concepts and standards , statement of federal financial accounting standards no . 4 , managerial cost accounting standards ( gao / aimd - 21.1.1 , mar . 1997 ) , pp . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . some of gsa's specific performance goals are crosscutting in nature . for example , according to the plan , three of the performance goals under the goal to “promote responsible asset management” involve “collaboration among many federal agencies brought together by gsa” and “measurement of the results of policy initiatives will require collection of other agencies' costs.” however , although the discussion of some of the efforts contain references to coordination with other federal agencies , the plan does not discuss how gsa will coordinate these efforts . in another example , gsa's performance goal to improve access to quality child care for all federal employees does not explain exactly how gsa is coordinating with the federal community for this wide - reaching goal . in the excel - at - customer - service section , gsa generally describes what it is doing to better understand its customers' needs . these actions include face - to - face meetings with customers or their agency representatives and working with interagency groups and councils . however , it is difficult to relate these actions to the specific crosscutting aspects of the goals in this section of the plan . gsa's performance plan does not explicitly discuss the strategies — how it will use its operational processes , skills , and technologies — and resources ( human , capital , information , or other resources ) that will be needed to achieve its goals . without this discussion , decisionmakers cannot determine if gsa has a sound approach for achieving its goals and using its resources wisely . the performance plan also lacks an adequate explanation of how it will coordinate its crosscutting functions with the federal community . in addition , it often does not contain meaningful discussions on the strategies and resources gsa plans to use to meet its goals and achieve intended results and on the questions surrounding data reliability . we recognize that this is the first performance plan developed under the results act , and , as such , there is a large learning process in understanding what constitutes a good plan . however , this and future plans can be significantly improved if they follow the criteria set forth in the results act and related guidance more closely . we recommend that the gsa administrator take steps to ensure that gsa's fiscal year 2000 performance plan ( 1 ) conforms with the criteria in the results act and related omb guidance and ( 2 ) gives decisionmakers a better framework for gauging gsa's performance .