4124 does not apply to services . fpi's officials established prices for many of the 20 products we reviewed in accordance with the may 1995 pricing policy and procedures that were in effect at the time the product prices were determined . specifically , three of the four product divisions we reviewed demonstrated that they followed fpi's policy and procedures when they set prices for 13 of 20 products reviewed . our review of the pricing files for three electronic components , seven textile products , and three systems furniture workstations showed that the respective product divisions had sufficiently documented their pricing methodologies to demonstrate that fpi's pricing policy and procedures had been followed . however , for the seven remaining products — four ergonomic chairs and three pieces of dorm and quarters furniture — there was insufficient documentation to show that the fourth product division — furniture — followed fpi's pricing policy and procedures when it set prices for these products . we found that in practice , fpi officials sometimes used a combination of the pricing methods outlined in fpi's procedures . for example , both the textiles and electronics divisions established product prices that were based on a combination of manufacturing cost analysis and price negotiations with the prospective customers . specifically , for the seven textile products and three electronic products , fpi officials first developed a unit cost estimate , which they said documented the direct and indirect costs associated with making each of the products . in developing the unit cost estimates , fpi officials reviewed previous contract files and databases to obtain current prices for the raw materials that were necessary to manufacture the textile and electronic products . after fpi's costs to manufacture the products had been determined , senior managers in the textiles and electronics divisions added on profit and thereby established fpi's initial price quotes . after fpi developed and submitted its price quotes in these cases to dla , it generally entered into price negotiations with dla on the textile and electronic products . to illustrate this situation , fpi's price for one textile product , a fragmentation vest , resulted from extended negotiations with dla . in september 1996 , fpi submitted its initial price quote of $402.30 , but dla rejected this price and recommended contract negotiations with fpi to establish a fair and reasonable price . fpi countered with several offers that dla also rejected . then , in december 1996 , after several rounds of price negotiations , dla officials decided that its current market price for the fragmentation vest was $349.40 . fpi agreed to this price and entered into a contract with dla that same month . the senior manager from the metals division told us that fpi's final selling price for systems furniture is determined only after a detailed analysis of the prospective customer's needs has been completed . further , the selling price is sometimes negotiated and may include a discount from fpi's initially offered price . for example , the social security administration , fpi's largest customer for systems furniture , is currently receiving a 3-percent discount on all purchases of systems furniture .