procedures . ( provide the title and home function of the individual to whom the person reports. ) employee reports to irs managementadvocate office managementfunctional managementno response total "irs management" means the head of an irs office or his or her designee . ( provide the person's current grade level. ) percentage of staff 5.3 5.1 7.5 8.3 2.0 18.3 0.2 18.7 15.2 8.9 8.3 2.2 0.2 100.2 "grade" means the level of classification an employee has under a position classification system ( i.e. , referring to the duties , tasks , and functions he or she performs ) . permanent or detailed ? ( indicate whether the person is assigned to the taxpayer advocate's office on a permanent or detailed basis. ) assignment basis permanent detailed otherno response total "other" includes interim and temporary assignments . full - time or part - time ? ( indicate whether the person is a full - time or part - time irs employee. ) percent of time spent on advocate office work ? ( estimate the percentage of time the person does work related to the advocate's office , including problem solving day cases . response should be 100 percent , unless the person also does work for another office or function. ) percentage of time spent on advocate office work1-24 25-49 50-74 75-99 100 total "advocate office work" includes work related to prp . years at irs ? ( provide the number of years the person has worked at irs . do not include other government experience. ) years in prp ? ( provide the number of years the person has done prp work. ) prior irs function ( s ) ? ( check all that apply. ) ( indicate the irs operating function ( s ) where the person worked before coming to the taxpayer advocate's office. ) how acquired by the advocate's office ? ( check one. ) ( indicate how the person obtained a position in the advocate's office. ) how position obtained competed volunteered assigned detailed otherno response total "other" includes methods not in the categories above , such as reassignments resulting from irs' reorganization and hardship transfers . grade when entered prp ? ( provide the person's grade level when he or she entered prp. ) report to ? evaluated by ? ( provide the title and home function of the individual who evaluates the person's performance. ) employee evaluated by irs managementadvocate office managementfunctional managementno response total "irs management" means the head of an irs office or his or her designee . cases sent to irs by the senate finance committee . "other" includes types of work not in the categories above , such as program management and program support . training completed ? ( check all that apply. ) ( indicate the type of training that the person has completed for his or her current position. ) percentage of staff 35.2 44.5 41.5 48.4 "prp course for current position" includes training for the positions of advocate , analyst , and prp specialist . standards for doing prp casework . annual training to update advocate office and prp staff on current issues and new laws affecting prp . "intelligent query" is a software package for generating specialized reports using the promis database .