additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . doj has also announced additional programs . the guidelines also stipulate that federal grant funds awarded under the cops fast and cops ahead programs cannot exceed 75 percent of the total salary and benefits of each officer up to a maximum of $75,000 per officer for a 3-year period . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . next , we asked respondents to indicate the most important reason for not applying . we also allowed respondents to identify any other reasons that affected their jurisdiction's decision . the estimated 62 percent included about 40 percent ( plus or minus 12 percent ) of nonapplicants who said uncertainty about the jurisdiction's ability to meet the requirement for continued officer funding after the 3-year grant period was the most important reason for not applying . an additional 18 percent cited the 25-percent local match requirement as the most important reason in their decision ; 4 percent cited other financial reasons . an additional 8 percent said the jurisdiction did not apply either because of a lack of information on the grants or because of problems meeting the application deadlines , 3 percent mentioned local political or management decisions , and 4 percent cited various other reasons . in addition , some respondents cited the inadequacy of the $25,000 per year per officer grant to cover the full cost of new officers . according to doj's bureau of justice statistics , average starting salaries for entry level officers range from $18,710 to $26,560 , with average operating expenditures per officer ranging from $31,500 to $63,400 . table 5 summarizes the results of the importance ratings . we reviewed a random sample of 207 cops fast approved applications and found that approximately 84 percent ( plus or minus 5 percent ) of these jurisdictions — serving populations of less than 50,000 — cited property crimes most frequently among their top five ranked public safety issues ( from the categories listed on the application form ) , with almost half of the jurisdictions ranking it as their first or second most important concern . in addition , we estimated that at least half the jurisdictions ranked the following public safety issues among their top five: domestic violence , alcohol - related crimes , drug crimes , vandalism , and violent crimes against persons . table 6 shows the rank order of the public safety issues . on september 13 , 1995 , we received written comments from the director of doj's office of community oriented policing services on a draft of this report . he said that the popularity of the cops grant programs continues to expand and provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated where appropriate . he also provided some updated information on the progress of the programs since our audit work was completed . the director's written comments are reproduced in full in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees and members and to the attorney general .