rev . rul . 67-284 states that “income tax statutes do not tax indian tribes . the tribe is not a taxable entity.” any income earned by the tribe is not subject to income tax , regardless of whether the business activity is inside or outside of indian - owned lands . the senate finance committee report on legislation that later became the tribal tax act recognized irs' position that sections 1 and 11 of the internal revenue code do not reach indian tribes as set forth in rev . rul . 67-284 and stated that the proposed legislation did not amend this treatment . federally chartered tribal corporations are not subject to federal income taxation . irs has determined that federally chartered tribal corporations organized under ira section 17 are not subject to federal income taxation , regardless of where the income is earned . in rev . rul . 81-295 , irs found that a federally chartered indian tribal corporation has the same tax status as the tribe and is not taxable . the revenue ruling described a particular federally chartered indian tribe . the tribe was formally organized under a constitution and bylaws pursuant to ira section 16 . in addition , at the time of formal organization , the tribal members had ratified a corporate charter as permitted by ira section 17 . the secretary of the interior had approved the tribe's constitution and bylaws and the corporation's charter . this principle was affirmed in rev . rul . further , in rev . rul . 94-65 , irs concluded that a tribal corporation organized under the oklahoma indian welfare act section 3 is not subject to federal income taxation on the income earned in the conduct of commercial business in or outside of indian - owned lands . state - chartered tribal corporations are subject to federal income tax . irs has determined that a corporation organized by an indian tribe under state law is subject to federal income tax regardless of the location of the activities that generate the income . in rev . rul . 94-16 , irs reasoned that a corporation organized by an indian tribe under state law is not the same as an indian tribal corporation organized under ira section 17 and does not share the same tax status as the tribe for federal income tax purposes . wholly - owned tribal law corporations generally have not been subject to administrative attempts to impose income taxes . although irs has addressed the tax status of federally recognized indian tribes and federally chartered corporations , it has not issued a published ruling on the tax status of wholly - owned corporations chartered under tribal law . many indian tribal governments have organized wholly - owned tribal corporations to conduct business operations rather than obtain a state or federal charter . although irs has not issued published rulings , irs officials are not aware of any administrative attempt to date to impose federal income taxes on wholly - owned tribal corporations . payment of other federal taxes . irs has determined that indian tribal governments have no inherent exemption from excise taxes , but section 7871 of the code provides them with a limited exemption . in rev . rul .