i for details. ) the heightened standards required additional improvements to exchange audit trails . additional copies are $2 each . as of october 28 , 1995 , when the standards took effect , the electronic trading terminals that exchanges had begun to develop that might bring some exchanges into compliance with them were not fully operational , and significant delays were envisioned . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . both cbt and cme agreed to implement almost all of cftc's audit trail recommendations or offered alternatives . cbt declined to implement two of cftc's recommendations based on tests it conducted . cbt said these tests indicated that the recommendations disrupted trading , would increase trade processing costs , or would not improve audit trail accuracy . cbt also offered cftc an acceptable alternative for one recommendation . cme declined to implement one recommendation but informed cftc that it would continue to evaluate the recommendation . the exchange said it based its decision on tests it conducted that indicated the recommendation disrupted trading and would increase trade processing costs . cme also offered cftc an acceptable alternative for one recommendation . ( see app . i for details on the exchanges' responses to cftc's recommendations. ) the cftc recommendation that both cbt and cme declined to implement , based on their tests , was the requirement that floor traders manually record the execution time for the first and either sixth or last trade on every trading card . as discussed on page 4 , these two exchanges use computer - based algorithms to impute trade times after the fact , rather than requiring floor traders or brokers to record the times that personal or customer trades are executed . cbt reported that its own separate tests showed that adding manual times to trading cards disrupted trading , increased clearing firms' trade processing costs , and resulted in less accurate computer - imputed times because traders were unable to record accurate times during hectic trading . cme reported that traders involved in its separate test had indicated that recording these times disrupted trading . however , cme's tests did not show a reduction in audit trail accuracy . nonetheless , the exchange expressed concern that this requirement would increase trade processing costs for clearing firms and could result in delays in execution of customer orders or degrade overall market efficiency .