state did not implement these suggestions . in november 1999 , the chairman of acca's international committee again wrote the department of state to request that state initiate a “…broad review of u.s. policy towards the international exchange of documents and parcels” and to urge it “to adopt , as soon as possible , open and transparent procedures for developing u.s. policy toward the international exchange of documents and parcels.” acca stated that , to the maximum extent possible , a full record of all proposals , comments , and proceedings should be publicly available on the internet . other related stakeholder comments included those from a dma official who told us that , in his opinion , dma should not make comments on upu matters unless it was willing to make them part of the public record , which could include posting them to the internet . a more complete and readily accessible public record would inform interested parties of matters under consideration as u.s. policy is developed . a more readily accessible public record of stakeholder positions on u.s. policy relating to the upu could also help interested parties understand the basis for u.s. policy as well as facilitating input as the department of state continues to develop policies and positions on upu matters . options , which are not all mutually exclusive , for state to develop a more complete and accessible public record include the following: implementing the faca process: as we previously noted , faca requires notification of advisory committee meetings in the federal register and documentation , including detailed minutes of the proceedings of committee meetings , as well as annual status reports to congress through a formal reporting process . using a notice and comment process to provide a structured process for obtaining public input: federal agencies have used the federal register and the internet to solicit comments that were to become part of the public record . for example , ustr , a small agency that takes the lead in representing the united states in international trade negotiations in the wto , solicited comments before the 1999 wto ministerial meetings in the federal register and posted this solicitation on its internet site . the department of commerce has also solicited comments in the federal register and on the internet , and posted comments it received on the internet . making input , minutes , and / or proceedings of public meetings available in reading rooms , upon request , or on the internet: for example , ustr made comments it received before the 1999 wto ministerial meetings available to the public in a reading room . the department of commerce made a transcript of some advisory committee meetings available on the internet . also , among other things , the department of commerce has used the internet to broadcast a voice transmission of a meeting to obtain stakeholder input . as we noted earlier in this report , faca was enacted to ensure that the proceedings of advisory committees to federal agencies are as open as possible to the public and that congress is kept informed of the committees' activities .