the studies are listed in appendix i . including all relevant provisions of the code may change the estimates of the research credit's effectiveness . the estimates in several of the studies were highly sensitive to assumptions made about the data and taxpayer behavior . for example , one study's estimate of the responsiveness of spending to tax incentives was reduced by half when more firms were included in the sample studied or the assumptions were changed on how taxpayers allocate research and development expenses between domestic and foreign sources . other studies that differed in terms of how they measured the tax incentive produced significantly different estimates of the spending stimulated by the credit . this sensitivity to the assumptions made by the authors leads us to conclude that much uncertainty remains about the effect of the credit on research spending . the estimates presented in the most recent studies do not provide all the information needed to evaluate the effectiveness of the latest version of the credit . the amount of spending stimulated per dollar of revenue cost depends on how the design of the credit affects the incentive to increase research spending and on how the design affects the revenue cost . only one of the recent studies estimated the effectiveness of the credit for years after its redesign in 1989 , and the author of that study is not confident of her results for the post - 1989 period . some reviewers have implied that the recent studies' estimates of the responsiveness of research spending to price reductions — the price elasticity of spending — are equivalent to the amount of research spending stimulated by the credit per dollar of revenue cost . they said that using an empirical estimate that a 1-percent reduction in the price of r&d will lead to a 1-percent increase in research spending implies that one dollar of credit will lead to one dollar of additional spending . however , these may not be equivalent estimates because the amount of research spending stimulated by the credit per dollar of revenue depends on the design of the credit as well as the responsiveness of spending to price reductions . for example , the credit's effect on spending and revenue cost will depend on whether it is designed as a flat credit , which applies to total research spending , or as an incremental credit , which applies only to spending that exceeds a base amount . for the same responsiveness of spending to price reductions , a flat credit with a 10 percent rate should stimulate roughly the same amount of spending as an incremental credit with the same rate because both credits provide the same 10 percent effective reduction in the price of research . however , the flat credit would allow a company to earn a credit equal to 10 percent of its total qualified research spending , while the incremental credit would give the company a credit equal only to 10 percent of the difference between its current qualified spending and some base spending amount . this benefit to companies is equivalent to a reduction in the price of research .