than oil ) . for many amt payers , amt led to a large percentage increase in taxes owed . to determine whether amt led to only very small tax changes or to large tax changes for amt payers , we calculated the percentage increase in tax from amt . for amt taxpayers who had no regular tax liability , amt was 100 percent of the taxes paid . these two goals can conflict with each other . at various times , reports that individuals and corporations were able to pay no tax through the direct use of tax preferences and through interactions of preferences and other features of the tax code led to concerns that the ability - to - pay goal was not being met . these concerns led congress to set limits on preferences in the regular tax code and to create amt . the idea of amt was originally developed by the treasury department in 1969 . treasury studies found that some high income individuals paid little or no tax , and that many high income individuals paid tax at a lower rate than individuals with lower income . in response to these findings , treasury proposed establishing a minimum tax for individuals . the tax reform act of 1969 included an add - on minimum tax for both noncorporate and corporate taxpayers on certain tax preferences . a 10-percent tax was levied on the corporate minimum tax base , which was the sum of corporate tax preferences minus a $30,000 exemption amount and a corporation's regular tax liability . levied in addition to the taxpayer's regular tax liability , this was an add - on rather than an alternative tax . the tax reform act of 1976 added preferences and changed the exemption amount . in 1978 , concerns about the effectiveness of the individual amt led to changes . in contrast to an add - on minimum tax , the tax introduced in 1978 developed the amt concept of levying a tax on an alternative income base when the liability under the alternative base is greater than the regular tax liability . from 1978 to 1982 , individuals were subject to both amt and the add - on minimum tax . in 1982 , the add - on tax for individuals was repealed and the amt base broadened . throughout this period , the corporate add - on tax was essentially unchanged . in its 1984 tax reform proposal , the treasury department proposed changing business taxes , including the corporate income tax , so that the tax base more closely approximated the real economic income of businesses . in addition to several important structural changes , treasury recommended eliminating over 45 existing tax preferences and limiting many others . in particular , treasury proposed eliminating most of the preferences in the regular tax that were included in the add - on tax . treasury concluded that a minimum tax or an add - on tax would not be necessary if the preferences in the tax code were eliminated directly . in contrast to the treasury department proposal , the administration's 1985 tax reform proposal recommended that the corporate add - on minimum tax be replaced with an amt .