we also interviewed sec officials . to determine whether nasdaq followed its listing and maintenance requirements with regard to comparator , we reviewed nasd and nasdaq manuals ; nasdaq , nasdr , and sec documents and court papers ; and sec filings . we also interviewed nasdaq and sec officials . to identify the actions nasdaq has taken since may 1996 , we reviewed nasdaq documents and sec filings . how does nasdaq monitor the effectiveness of its policies on granting exceptions to its listing and maintenance requirements ? national securities exchanges and registered securities associations , along with registered clearing agencies and the municipal securities rulemaking board , are collectively termed self - regulatory organizations ( sros ) under section 3 ( a ) ( 26 ) of the securities exchange act of 1934 ( exchange act ) . nasd is the sro of the securities industry responsible for regulating the over - the - counter ( otc ) securities market and the products traded in it . nasd's responsibilities are contained in section 15a of the exchange act , and it operates subject to sec oversight . nasd has responsibility for ensuring that its members comply with federal securities laws and nasd rules . it is the largest sro in the united states , with a membership that includes virtually every broker / dealer in the nation that does a securities business with the public . through its subsidiaries , nasd regulation , inc. ( nasdr ) and the nasdaq stock market , inc. ( nasdaq ) , nasd develops rules and regulations , conducts regulatory reviews of members' business activities , and designs and operates marketplace services and facilities . nasd helps to establish and coordinate the policy agendas of its two subsidiaries and oversees their effectiveness . it has delegated to nasdaq the obligation to develop , operate , and maintain systems , services , and products for the securities markets that nasd operates . it has also delegated to nasdaq responsibility for formulating regulatory policies and listing criteria applicable to the markets it operates . the nasdaq stock market began operation in 1971 as the first electronic , screen - based stock market for nonexchange listed securities . nasdaq enables securities firms to execute transactions for investors and for themselves in an environment of real - time trade reporting and automated market surveillance . as of december 1997 , more than 6,200 securities were traded on nasdaq , representing approximately 5,500 companies . in addition to its screen - based operations , nasdaq is distinguished from stock exchanges by its use of multiple market makers — independent dealers who openly compete with one another for investors' orders in each nasdaq security . nasdaq has two tiers: the nasdaq national market , where approximately 4,200 of nasdaq's larger companies are listed and traded ; and the nasdaq smallcap market , where approximately 1,300 smaller , emerging growth companies are traded . before a company's stock can be traded on the nasdaq stock market , the company must be admitted to nasdaq . upon request , the company receives written notice of the applicable nasdaq qualifications requirements .