we examined those reforms that had been reported as being successful . we reviewed current literature on public management and interviewed state management authorities at the government accounting standards board , the national governors' association , the national academy of public administration , and the national conference of state legislatures . to obtain further information on states for inclusion in this report , we reviewed the annual “the state of the states” report issued by financial world magazine , a number of state strategic plans , state planning and budgeting documents , and our prior report summarizing selected states' experiences with performance budgeting . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we looked for states that had sought to increase their focus on program results through initiatives similar to the key components of gpra , such as strategic planning , performance measurement and reporting , and performance budgeting . we selected florida , minnesota , north carolina , oregon , texas , and virginia for our review because they were implementing some or all of these reforms . to identify state governments' experiences , we asked state officials to guide us to agencies and programs that had begun to implement management reforms . to identify successes that may be applicable for federal agencies' gpra implementation , we looked for reforms similar to the key components of gpra that were reported to result in improvements for the agencies or programs so that we could focus on what aspects of management reforms were successful and why . we interviewed state executive and legislative branch officials , agency administrators and managers , and service delivery and audit staff . we also interviewed public interest group officials and private industry leaders to obtain an external perspective on selected state reforms . we reviewed state and agency documents , such as state and agency strategic plans , human resource management plans , and information management plans . we also reviewed pertinent state legislation , budget documents , performance reports , audit reports , customer surveys , and training materials . because our objective was to identify the relevant experiences of the state governments we selected , we relied on the states' own evaluations and assessment of their reforms .