i for a reprint of those comments. ) the administrator said that oira staff were not surprised by and agreed with several of the issues raised in the draft report . for example , she said that she was not surprised that there may not be a “one - to - one equivalence” between agencies' files and oira files because of differences in executive order 12866 requirements between the agencies and oira . she said that oira's database indicated that no changes were made to about 40 percent of the regulatory actions in the four agencies , which she suggested was why documentation did not exist in about 40 percent of the actions that we reviewed ( because , as she confirmed , the order itself does not require documentation of no changes ) . the other agencies provided the following comments . on october 30 , 1997 , epa's director of the office of regulatory management and evaluation told us that he believed the draft report was factually correct for epa rules and highlighted the need for improved agency compliance with the docketing requirements of executive order 12866 . he said that epa will re - examine the content and implementation of its initial guidance and will issue new guidance or implementation methods to improve compliance with the requirements . also on october 30 , 1997 , we discussed the draft report with dot officials , including the assistant general counsel for regulation and enforcement . the assistant general counsel suggested that we make several changes in the final report . first , she said that oira disagreed with the draft report's recommendation that oira issue guidance to agencies on how to organize their rulemaking dockets to best facilitate public access and disclosure . she said agencies have developed their own methods of organizing their rulemaking dockets and “it is not the role of omb to advise other agencies on general matters of administrative practice.” second , she said that omb interprets some of the transparency requirements in the order differently than we did . we believe that the order requires agencies to document oira - suggested changes whenever they occur . the administrator said that the order requires agencies to document only oira - suggested changes made during the formal period of oira's review , not any changes made at oira's suggestion before that period . third , the administrator said that she believes that the requirement that agencies document the changes made at the suggestion of oira is “counterproductive,” and that it is irrelevant who gets the “credit” for suggesting changes . specifically , he said the report should more clearly state that executive order 12866 does not require agencies to document instances where no changes were made to rules during oira review , and that the absence of documentation of changes made to a rule does not mean that an agency had not complied with the order's transparency requirements ; note that the november 1996 guidance he issued regarding certification of compliance with the executive order applied only to ost and was suggested guidance for the rest of dot ; and reflect the extent of dot's efforts to develop best practices for improving transparency of regulatory decisionmaking , particularly in the area of automation .