these responsibilities are not insignificant . congress imposed them to help ensure that federal advisory committees are needed , that the committees are properly managed , and that congress is kept informed of the committees' activities in a timely manner . although we recognize that gsa believes it does not have the expertise or program knowledge to determine whether federal advisory committees are needed , it has the authority to ask agencies to provide justification for their recommendations . for example , gsa could follow up with agencies to determine why committees have not met before accepting agencies' recommendations that the committees be continued . the committee management secretariat intends to ask congress to move to a later date the reporting deadline for the president's annual report to congress on the activities of federal advisory committees . the secretariat's view and proposed action do not relieve it of its responsibilities under faca , and the secretariat has not fulfilled those responsibilities . we recommend that the administrator of gsa direct the committee management secretariat to fully carry out the responsibilities assigned to it by faca in a timely and accurate manner . in particular , the secretariat should ( 1 ) consult with the agencies to ensure that the charters and justification letters for federal advisory committees contain the information required by law or regulation , ( 2 ) follow up with agencies when their annual reports contain information that raises questions about whether committees should be continued , and ( 3 ) ensure that agencies file the required follow - up reports to congress on presidential advisory committee recommendations . the secretariat should also make the necessary arrangements with agencies to submit its annual report to the president on time or follow through with its intention to ask congress to move the reporting date . gsa and omb provided comments on a draft of this report . in an april 27 , 1998 , letter ( see app . ii ) , the gsa administrator said the associate gsa administrator for governmentwide policy will ensure that the committee management secretariat takes immediate and appropriate action to implement our recommendation . the administrator also said gsa will continue to improve its oversight of advisory committees by ( 1 ) proposing amendments to faca to address some of the issues addressed by our report ; ( 2 ) proposing new governmentwide regulations relating to faca in june 1998 ; and ( 3 ) finalizing its new internet - based reporting system by the end of fiscal year 1998 , which will allow agencies to electronically transmit data to gsa . on may 13 , 1998 , an omb official responsible for advisory committee matters said that we had conducted a thorough review of gsa's oversight responsibilities in meeting faca's procedural requirements , and that gsa appeared to have undertaken some corrective actions that will address many of our concerns and had scheduled other corrective actions during 1998 . the omb official said they would work with gsa to ensure the success of the gsa efforts . the gsa administrator and the omb official made additional comments , which we address here and as appropriate in appendix ii for gsa .