no changes had been made to the opm strategic plan . accelerated information technology solutions for a modernized retirement system are designed , developed , and implemented . financial management policies and procedures are not documented correctly ( oig ) financial policies and procedures are documented as planned . by mid - fiscal year , complete and distribute an internal financial management manual that will document the policies and procedures used in processing and recording financial transactions . management challenges there are inadequate controls over the accuracy of annuity payments ( oig ) debt collection and the accounts receivable processing systems are weak ( oig ) applicable goals and measures in the fiscal year 2000 annual performance plan increase accuracy rates for processing new annuity and survivor benefit claims over fiscal year 1999 levels as follows: 96 percent for civil service retirement system annuity claims ; 95 percent for federal employees retirement system annuity claims ; and 99.9 percent overall accuracy from annuity roll audit . accounts receivable delinquency of 2 percent ( compared with the fiscal year 1999 goal of 5 percent ) . inadequate internal controls related to the accuracy and completeness of payroll withholdings and information provided by other agencies ( oig ) achieved timeliness of at least 99 percent of collections ( compared with the fiscal year 1999 goal of 95 percent ) . fiscal year 2000 annual financial statements for all three - benefit programs , published in fiscal year 2001 , receive “unqualified” opinions . enhanced oversight is needed for financial management of the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) ( oig ) the audit report on the benefit programs' fiscal year 2000 financial statements , published in fiscal year 2001 , describe no new material weaknesses in internal controls . none specific to fehbp , but the above goals and indicators apply to fehbp financial statements . unreconciled discrepancies between opm's general ledger accounts and treasury records ( oig ) reconcile cash account differences with treasury within 30 days ( same as fiscal year 1999 goal ) . material weaknesses in accounts payable processing and reporting ( oig ) improved responsiveness and on - time compliance for financial reporting to omb and treasury . ( no measure for “improved.” ) all material weaknesses are resolved and the financial management system , the employee benefits system , and internal controls are improved . achieve timeliness of at least 98 percent for payments . inadequate controls over investments ( oig ) all material weaknesses are eliminated . improved audit results from independent public accountant , ig , and gao . fiscal year 2000 trust fund annual financial statements receive unqualified audit opinions from an independent auditor . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .