we used the information on nongovernment physicians . other medical specialties received less . also , multiyear special pay was not available for all specialists ; for example , in fiscal year 1996 , anesthesiologists and physicians in the pediatric and internal medicine subspecialties were not eligible to sign agreements for multiyear special pay under title 37 . incentive special pay: physicians who sign an agreement to remain on active duty for at least 1 year and who are fully qualified in medical specialties designated as critical and practice in that specialty a substantial portion of the time or who meet other criteria related to their assignment may be authorized to receive up to $36,000 in incentive special pay . physicians must be in pay grade o - 6 and below to receive this pay , which is a lump - sum payment at the beginning of the 12-month period . the flag officer review board annually determines the authorized amount of incentive special pay for each specialty . federal physicians serve in a variety of categories and medical specialties , depending on the mission of the employing federal agency and the needs of the population served . the following sections describe , by pay authority , the roles that these physicians fill in their employing agencies . federal regulations related to pcas ( 5 c.f.r 595 ) require heads of agencies to establish , as a minimum , the following separate categories of physicians for purposes of determining if there are significant recruitment and retention problems . category 1: positions primarily involved in the practice of medicine or direct service to patients in hospitals , clinics , public health programs , diagnostic centers , and similar settings . category 2: positions primarily involved in the conduct of medical research and experimental work or the identification of causes or sources of diseases or disease outbreaks . category 3: positions primarily involved in the evaluation of physical fitness or the provision of initial treatment of on - the - job illness or injury . category 4: positions not described above , including positions involving disability evaluation and rating , training , or the administration of patient care or medical research and experimental programs . pcas may be paid only to physicians serving in positions in categories determined by the agency to have significant recruitment and retention problems . table ii.3 shows , for the agencies with the most physicians being paid under title 5 , the number of physicians in each category and the number receiving pcas . table ii.3: number of physicians by category and number receiving pcas ( fiscal year 1996 ) ( direct care providers ) ( researchers ) ( fitness examiners ) disability examiners ) in addition to hhs physicians who were paid under title 5 , some physicians in hhs were eligible for special payments under title 38 . in fiscal year 1996 , hhs provided physicians' special payments under title 38 to 294 physicians . most of these physicians were employed in the food and drug administration ( fda ) , indian health service ( ihs ) , and nih .