, noncitizens ) . ins provides information relevant to flow . enter the united states each year ? ” the commission on immigration reform ( 1994 ) also issued a call for new methods to be developed to meet some of the difficult challenges in immigration statistics , such as estimating the flow of illegal immigrants into the united states . the resident foreign - born population is defined here as all persons who were born abroad ( to parents who were not u.s. citizens ) and who now either ( 1 ) are in a permanent legal status ( naturalized citizen , legal permanent resident , refugee , person granted asylum ) or ( 2 ) if in a temporary legal status or here illegally , remain in this country for over a year . the requirement for remaining more than a year is based on the u.n. definition . four basic demographic concepts ( categories of statistics ) are crucial to understanding information on the foreign - born population: • the inflow — or in this report , flow — refers to the movement of foreign - born persons into the united states and , as explained below , their transition into specific legal statuses . • the size of the foreign - born population in the united states ( sometimes referred to as “stock” ) is the total number of foreign - born persons residing here at any given time , including those who have naturalized . • net change in the size of the foreign - born population over a specific period of time can be calculated using a demographic balancing equation , accounting for flow , deaths , and emigration ( see bogue et al. , 1993 ; pollard et al. the foreign - born population increases when the flow of new residents into the country exceeds the number who emigrate or die . • emigration refers to persons moving out of the united states to take up residence in a foreign country . in this report , we are concerned with the emigration of only foreign - born persons — not the emigration of persons born in the united states . the foreign - born population may be subdivided into groups , such as those defined by the various legal immigration statuses: legal permanent residents , refugees and asylees , those legally permitted to reside here on a temporary basis , illegal immigrants , and naturalized citizens . virtually all laws and policies on immigration differentiate foreign - born persons according to their legal status . thus , from a policy perspective , legal status is critical information . consistent with this view , in 1994 , the u.s. commission on immigration reform , commenting on the need to improve estimates of the costs and benefits of legal and illegal immigration , stated that confusion results from grouping together illegal immigrants , legal immigrants , and refugees . in considering the process of immigration flow , we recognized that transitions from one immigration status to another must be considered . persons who enter the united states in one immigration status often adjust or change to a different status , and statistics have been reported on this process . such transitions are a form of “flow” ( i.e.