additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . irs' initial expenditure plan is consistent with these recommendations . specifically , of the $35.1 million being requested , irs plans to use approximately $14.6 million for initiatives relating to completing the blueprint . for example , irs plans to develop a 5-year “core business systems” modernization strategy that leverages new it and recognizes irs' recent organizational restructuring and business process reengineering efforts prompted by the irs restructuring and reform act of 1998 . the result is intended to be a revised , business risk - based sequencing plan that defines the general timing , cost , and benefits of new modernization projects over the next 3 to 5 years . in addition , irs plans to spend about $11.6 million to develop the management and engineering capability to build and implement modernized systems . specifically , irs has designated about $2.2 million for prime and other contractor support to help irs implement mature program management practices that are to ( 1 ) strengthen irs' ability to manage and control modernization initiatives and ( 2 ) ready irs for an evaluation by sei against relevant software / system acquisition capability maturity model requirements . irs' initial expenditure plan lays the foundation for successful systems modernization ; satisfies , for this $35 million increment , the conditions that the congress placed on the use of itia funds ; and is consistent with our past recommendations . irs' stated intention is to fully implement this expenditure plan and to submit to the congress for approval future expenditure plans that incrementally build on this modernization foundation . such an incremental approach to investing in modernized systems is an effective way to minimize the inherent risk in large , complex , multiyear modernization programs . the next step for irs is to effectively implement the plan and fulfill its commitment to incrementally request and expend future modernization funds . a key factor in implementing its plans will be irs' success in establishing mature and disciplined measurement and tracking capabilities so that it can effectively analyze progress against incremental goals , deliverables , and benefit expectations and reliably report this information to congressional decisionmakers . by including this information in future expenditure plans submitted to the congress , irs can strengthen modernization management and oversight .