( reform 1 ) . rtc established a management decision and audit follow - up process that encompasses all efforts to address findings , implement accepted recommendations , and verify completion of corrective actions . the oversight board established the audit committee on september 20 , 1994 . three members have been appointed to the committee . on november 10 , 1994 , the oversight board adopted a charter for the audit committee that defined its duties and responsibilities . the committee has the following duties: monitor rtc's internal controls ; monitor the audit findings and recommendations of rtc's ig and gao , as well as rtc's responses to the findings and recommendations ; maintain a close working relationship with the ig and the comptroller regularly report findings and recommendations to rtc and the oversight monitor rtc's financial operations and report any incipient problems identified to rtc and the oversight board ; and meet at least quarterly . since the establishment of its charter , the audit committee has held two meetings , one in november 1994 and one in january 1995 . at the november meeting , the chairman identified three areas for priority attention by the committee: ( 1 ) ensuring that rtc and the ig continue to have an active audit program ; ( 2 ) reviewing transition issues , such as asset valuation , staffing , and reserves ; and ( 3 ) evaluating rtc procedures as they are changed during rtc's final year of operation . fdic and rtc should work together to plan for the future of the professional liability program . this planning needs to address how fdic will assume responsibility for the rtc professional liability cases . analyze and address current and future operational and staffing needs of the professional liability program . keep professional liability attorneys informed of agencies' plans and decisions concerning the professional liability program to help decrease the level of uncertainty surrounding the program . schedule periodic management reviews of the loan portfolio sales process to ensure that national sales center and field office staff are setting reserve prices based on the characteristics of the loan portfolios offered for sale . table i.1: progress in implementing the management reforms since the interim report was issued in june 1994 this is the reform number from the rtc completion act . ( see apps . iii through vi. ) our objectives , as set forth in the rtc completion act , were to determine ( 1 ) the manner in which rtc and the oversight board were implementing the 21 management reforms mandated by the act and ( 2 ) the progress being made by rtc and the oversight board toward achieving full compliance . the act required that we issue an interim report with our preliminary findings 6 months after the rtc completion act became law in december 1993 , and a final report . to accomplish these two objectives , we reviewed rtc's management reform status reports to identify actions taken to implement the reforms' requirements . after identifying the actions , we interviewed responsible rtc officials and oversight board staff to obtain information on the status and progress being made in implementing them .