marshals service . also , the treasury department enforcement components we reviewed were the bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms ( atf ) ; u.s. customs service ; internal revenue service ( irs ) ; and u.s. secret service . to reiterate , even though the presidential directive does not apply to the postal inspection service , the capitol police , and the federal courts , you asked that we obtain data , when available , on the number of firearms issued or used by these organizations and determine if they have voluntarily initiated safety lock programs . in conducting our review , we interviewed knowledgeable officials at the headquarters of each selected agency . we also obtained and reviewed copies of applicable documents , such as safety lock procurement records , implementation policies and guidance , and training manual updates . however , the scope of our work did not constitute a full compliance audit in that we did not visit field offices of the law enforcement agencies to verify that safety locks had been issued . we performed our work from june 1998 to september 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( 2 ) how have selected federal law enforcement organizations implemented the presidential directive ? as you further requested , even though the directive applies only to executive branch organizations , we focused our work on each federal civilian department or agency that has 1,000 or more law enforcement officers . these departments or agencies are three executive branch organizations that are subject to the presidential directive — the department of justice and the department of the treasury , each of which has several components that individually employ over 1,000 law enforcement officers ; and the national park service , whose rangers and police officers may carry firearms ; postal inspection service , which is a law enforcement component of the u.s . postal service , an independent establishment of the executive branch ; in the legislative branch , the u.s. capitol police , which provides protective services for members of congress and other law enforcement services within the u.s. capitol buildings and grounds ; and in the judicial branch , federal district courts that employ probation and pretrial service officers who may be authorized to carry firearms . collectively , these organizations account for about 92 percent of the total number of federal civilian law enforcement officers who have authority to make arrests and carry firearms , according to a 1996 bureau of justice statistics survey . as table i.1 in appendix i shows , the justice department enforcement components we reviewed were the bureau of prisons , drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , and u.s . appendix i presents more details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . in his march 5 , 1997 , directive to heads of executive departments and agencies , president clinton noted that firearms claim the lives of children daily and were the fourth leading cause of accidental deaths among children ages 5 to 14 .