we have reported the following . irs' software development activities are inconsistent and poorly controlled . unless irs improves its software development capability , it is unlikely to build tsm timely or economically , and systems are unlikely to perform as intended . first , the amounts of total revenue ( reported to be $1.4 trillion for fiscal year 1995 ) and tax refunds ( reported to be $122 billion for fiscal year 1995 ) cannot be verified or reconciled to accounting records maintained for individual taxpayers in the aggregate . second , the amounts reported for various types of taxes collected ( social security , income , and excise taxes , for example ) cannot be substantiated . as a short - term resolution for these two issues , irs has developed software programs that it believes will capture , from its revenue financial management system , the detailed revenue and refund transactions that would support reported amounts in its future financial statements until longer term system fixes can be made to achieve more reliable reporting of these amounts . in addition , irs plans call for completing documentation of its revenue financial management system , which is critical to aid in identifying better interim solutions for reporting revenues and refunds and provide better insights on the longer term system fixes needed to enable irs to readily and reliably provide the underlying support for its reported revenue and refund amounts . third , the reliability of reported estimates for fiscal year 1995 of $113 billion for valid accounts receivable and of $46 billion for collectible accounts receivable cannot be determined . irs initially plans to continue efforts to determine a means of using its current revenue financial management system's coding to identify its accounts receivables . irs' efforts are focused on correcting known current coding errors through reviewing 100 percent of all receivables over $10 million . in addition , irs plans to ensure more accurate input and processing of transactions that underpin accounts receivables by intensifying training efforts and improving internal control policies and procedures . fourth , a significant portion of irs' reported $3 billion in nonpayroll operating expenses cannot be verified . irs believes the core issue for correcting its receipt and acceptance problems relate to properly accounting for transactions with other federal agencies . irs , gao , and a contractor are working together to determine the root causes of and develop solutions to the issue . fifth , the amounts irs reported as appropriations available for expenditure for operations cannot be reconciled fully with treasury's central accounting records showing these amounts , and hundreds of millions of dollars in differences have been identified . irs believes that it has completed the reconciliation of its fund balance with treasury accounts except for irs' suspense accounts that contained reconciling items that were more than 6 months old . however , irs is still in the process of making the necessary adjustments required to its general ledger and the related treasury records to complete this effort . we plan to review irs' reconciliation of outstanding differences and verify the accuracy of adjustments as they are made .