we did not verify the survey results . legislation has been introduced ( h.r . 2491 ) to delay the tax on diesel fuel for recreational boating for 2 years while a solution is worked out . such a solution might either allow recreational boaters to use dyed fuel and require the retailer to collect the excise tax , or exempt the recreational boating community from the tax altogether . allowing recreational boaters to use dyed fuel and requiring retailers to collect and remit the tax would both impose a burden on the retailers and present irs with the difficult task of monitoring retailers' compliance . however , under this scenario , the potential for evasion might be limited largely to inaccurate collection or remittance of the tax by retailers . some alaskan residents asked irs to exempt their state from the diesel - dyeing requirements . the requesters explained that alaska is exempt from the clean air act of 1990 requirement that high sulfur diesel be dyed , and they indicated that 90 percent of all diesel used in the state was used for nontaxable purposes . the alaska income and excise audit department provided us with data that showed that over 90 percent of all diesel fuel used in the state in fiscal year 1994 was used for tax - exempt purposes . legislation would be required to exempt alaska from obra 1993 diesel - dyeing requirements . in july 1995 , the deputy assistant secretary of the treasury said that the department supports exempting alaska from the diesel - dyeing requirement . should congress grant this request for exemption from the dyeing requirement for diesel used for off - highway purposes , there would be a potential for evasion of a modest amount of federal excise taxes in alaska , a potential that would not exist in other states . during fiscal year 1994 , alaska used over 61 million gallons of diesel fuel for on - highway purposes . thus , the potential to evade some portion of the $14.6 million in federal diesel fuel excise taxes paid in alaska would exist . in addition to the potential for some evasion of diesel fuel taxes within alaska itself , an irs official said that potential for interstate evasion existed as well . one possible evasion tactic consists of loading clear , untaxed diesel fuel instead of water as ballast in barges returning to the mainland united states . the irs official said that irs would work with the coast guard and customs to prevent such evasions . intercity bus companies have been concerned that the diesel - dyeing requirements may adversely affect both their ability to comply with epa regulations and their operating costs . irs requires that any diesel fuel on which the full federal tax rate of 24.4 cents per gallon has not been paid be dyed when it is removed from a terminal . the requirement does not differentiate between high and low sulfur fuels . however , intercity buses are required by epa regulation to use low sulfur diesel fuel on the highway . intercity buses also qualify for a reduced diesel tax rate of 7.4 cents per gallon .