to date , oira has not done so . we also continue to believe that agencies will not be motivated to improve their performance in reducing paperwork burden by oira's practice of setting agency - specific goals after 10 months of the fiscal year have passed at a level that the agencies expect to reach within the next 2 months . the acting administrator's statement regarding omb's inability to disapprove an agency's proposed information collection simply because it may cause the agency to exceed its burden - reduction goal does not address our intended point . the pra requires oira to set both governmentwide and agency specific burden - reduction goals . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . information collection is one method by which agencies carry out their missions . for example , irs needs to collect information from taxpayers and their employers to know the amount of taxes owed . epa and osha must collect information to know whether the intent of such statutes as the clean air act and the occupational safety and health act are being achieved . the results act may require agencies to collect information that they had not previously collected in order to demonstrate their effectiveness . however , the results act may also help agencies eliminate certain paperwork requirements and keep the amount of paperwork as low as possible by focusing agencies' information collection actions on only those collections needed to accomplish their missions . the objectives of our review were to assess how oira has implemented three of its information collection responsibilities under the pra: we looked at how oira reviews and controls paperwork , including ( 1 ) reviewing and approving agencies' information collection requests ; ( 2 ) establishing and overseeing guidance for estimating information collection burden ; ( 3 ) setting annual governmentwide goals for the reduction of that burden by at least 10 percent in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , 5 percent during the next 4 fiscal years , and setting annual agency goals that reduce paperwork to the “maximum practicable opportunity” ; and ( 4 ) conducting pilot projects to test alternative policies and procedures to minimize information collection burden . we examined oira's development and oversight of federal irm policies , including developing and maintaining a governmentwide irm plan and periodically reviewing selected agency irm activities to determine their ability to improve agencies' performance and accomplish agencies' missions . we looked at whether oira is keeping congress and congressional committees fully and currently informed about major activities under the act . to determine what actions oira had taken in these areas , we analyzed oira's reports to congress and other documents since the act passed in 1995 ; and we interviewed several oira officials and staff members , including the acting administrator . we then compared our understanding of oira's actions in these areas with the pra's requirements and its legislative history .