, its cost . for most taxpayers , the only way to file electronically is through a tax return preparer or electronic filing transmitter at a cost of from $15 to $40 . this cost is in addition to any costs associated with preparing the return . in january 1993 , we reported that electronic filing appealed primarily to taxpayers who most needed their refunds and that other taxpayers due refunds were unwilling to pay the going fees for that benefit . electronic filing benefits taxpayers . the benefits include receipt of their refunds several weeks sooner than if they had filed paper returns and greater assurance that ( 1 ) irs has received their returns , ( 2 ) the returns are mathematically accurate , and ( 3 ) information on the returns has been accurately posted to the taxpayers' accounts in irs' records . compared with irs' current procedures for processing paper returns , electronic filing has several benefits for irs . these benefits include reduced costs of processing , storing , and retrieving returns and faster , more accurate processing of returns and refunds . also , with electronic filing , irs gets 100 percent of the return information in its computers compared with the approximate 40 percent irs inputs from paper returns . as part of its future business vision , irs plans to capture 100 percent of the information on paper returns using new scanning technology . however , the cost of scanning the data from paper returns will most likely be higher than the cost of obtaining it electronically because ( 1 ) manual labor will still be required to prepare the paper documents for scanning and ( 2 ) irs test indicate that scanning cannot always correctly read the information on paper returns , thus requiring rework and manual intervention . therefore , electronic filing would continue to provide a more efficient way of obtaining tax return data than having taxpayers submit paper returns . our objectives were to assess ( 1 ) irs' progress in achieving its electronic filing goal , ( 2 ) the availability of data needed to develop an electronic filing strategy , and ( 3 ) the implications for irs if it does not reach its electronic filing goal and reduce its reliance on paper . that information may help irs identify effective steps to make electronic filing more attractive to those taxpayers and tax return preparers who are now put off by its cost . if the growth and impact of electronic filing fall short of expectations , irs' paper - processing workload will increase . more paper means more errors , which , in turn , would create a need for more taxpayer contacts . the taxpayer prepares the return on a computer and then converts it to paper for mailing to irs , which then employs a labor intensive , error prone process to input that information back into a computer . irs has completed a draft strategy for increasing the number of taxpayers filing from home computers . part of the strategy focuses on eliminating the fees these taxpayers incur for having a third party transmit their returns to irs .