we will continue to work with irs in doing so . additionally , some of irs' corrective actions are longer term and involve reprogramming software for irs' antiquated systems and developing new systems . the recommendations we have outlined provide a road map for bringing greatly strengthened management to irs' operations . irs needs to fully implement these actions in order to fulfill any business strategy it and the congress decide upon to provide efficient and effective taxpayer services into the next century . but , bringing these actions to fruition and making financial and information management improvements a reality , will require intense follow through and sustained oversight by irs top management , treasury , omb , and the congress . this will be especially important , as we have not always observed the close oversight and strong follow through within the executive branch that it will take to overcome the substantial problems irs has experienced in effectively carrying out its business vision , successfully developing tsm , and obtaining an opinion on its financial statements . foremost , irs and treasury must concentrate on the specific actions we have outlined . we are encouraged that treasury is taking a more active role in overseeing irs' efforts to improve its business operations . a joint treasury - irs modernization management board , chaired by the deputy secretary of the treasury , has been established as the primary review and decision body for modernization and tsm policy and strategic direction . the board will review irs' strategic plans , investment decisions , and progress against implementation plans . the eight - member board includes ( 1 ) from treasury , the assistant secretary for management and cfo , the assistant secretary ( tax policy ) , the deputy assistant secretary ( departmental finance and management ) , and the deputy assistant secretary ( information systems ) and ( 2 ) from irs , the commissioner , the deputy commissioner , the associate commissioner for modernization , and the chief information officer . advisory board members include the treasury inspector general and the irs chief of taxpayer service / compliance and the irs chief management and administration . for the board to succeed , it will be essential for it to have independent sources of information on irs' efforts and progress to effectively oversee and track the cost and schedule of all tsm projects . for its part , omb should emphasize reviewing , in particular , the investment of the billions of dollars that the government will spend in developing tsm , the use of technology in irs' changing business environment , and the steps irs plans to take to improve its financial management . the cfo act and the information technology management reform act give omb important leadership responsibilities in these areas . this consolidation effort will continue through 2002 . the consolidated centers would , for example , absorb the functions of toll - free taxpayer assistance sites , which answer calls about tax law and procedures , taxpayer accounts , and notices that taxpayers receive from irs . irs' customer service vision emphasizes use of the telephone to interact with taxpayers .