( see figs . since the late 1970s , the united states and other countries have sought to limit government support for export financing , particularly through oecd . a financing arrangement in which the supplier ( exporter ) extends credit to the buyer in the importing country . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the act requires the u.k. treasury to approve every guarantee that ecgd gives . however , ecgd officials indicated that in practice , it delegates this authority to ecgd for the vast majority of its transactions . for certain contentious transactions , ecgd is to first consult with the u.k. treasury and other u.k. government departments . ecgd is also to seek advice on its operations from the export guarantees advisory council , a statutory body consisting of senior - level representatives from the banking , commercial , and industrial sectors appointed by the secretary of state for trade and industry . ecgd offers insurance to exporters against nonpayment from foreign buyers , guarantees to banks providing export loans , reinsurance to private insurers for certain short - term transactions , interest rate support to banks for export loans , and overseas investment insurance . ecgd offers u.k. exporters insurance for medium - and long - term supplier credits through its “specific guarantee” facility . specific guarantees are restricted to u.k. companies or foreign companies carrying on business in the u.k. that export u.k. goods and services . ecgd's specific guarantee policies cover exporters against a range of defined commercial and political risks . normally , ecgd limits cover to 90 percent of the amount financed but may raise it to 100 percent after a period of satisfactory contractual performance by both the exporter and buyer . as a supplement to buyer credits that ecgd guarantees , exporters can also use specific guarantees to cover the prefinancing period . ecgd previously also offered short - term policies for exporters . however , it sold off this business to the private credit insurance company ncm in 1991 . as discussed in the following section , ecgd continues to reinsure some of these policies . ecgd provides guarantees to banks for export - related buyer credits , lines of credit , and supplier credits .