sffas no . 4 , which was issued in final in july 1995 , sets forth managerial cost accounting concepts and standards to be followed in the federal government . in addressing the selection of a costing methodology , sffas no . 4 notes that its standard does not require the use of a particular type of costing system or costing methodology . instead , sffas no . 4 notes that agency and program managements are in the best position to select the type of costing system that would meet their needs . however , the standard requires that whatever system is adopted should be appropriate to the agency's operating environment and should be used consistently . sffas no . 4 also notes that several costing methodologies have been successful in the private sector and in some government entities . among those discussed was activity - based costing ( abc ) — the costing methodology selected by ins for its fee study . according to sffas no . 4 , abc focuses on the activities of a production cycle , on the basis of the premises that an output requires activities to produce , and activities consume resources . abc's major processes are to ( 1 ) identify the activities performed to produce outputs , ( 2 ) assign or map resources required to carry out the activities , ( 3 ) identify the outputs for which the activities are performed , and ( 4 ) assign activity costs to the outputs . in 1995 , ins established a team to develop and conduct a study to determine what , if any , changes were needed to the iefa fee schedule . ins had previously revised its user fees in 1994 . starting in the spring of 1996 , the fee study team was comprised of ins personnel and contracted technical staff from mcneil technologies , inc. , and coopers & lybrand l.l.p . ins identified which fees should be revised by studying all types of applications with an annual adjudicated volume of 10,000 or more ( 26 large - volume applications ) . ins chose large - volume applications so it could perform random sampling to statistically project the study's results to the universe of similar applications . ins applied the abc methodology to determine its costs to provide immigration adjudication and naturalization services . on the basis of the fee study , ins concluded that the 26 large - volume application fees needed to be increased to reflect the full processing costs . ins also proposed increases for the types of applications with annual adjudicated volumes below 10,000 ( 4 small - volume applications ) . for these four application types , ins determined that the processing activities were similar to certain large - volume applications and , on the basis of these similarities , established the new fees . using the abc methodology , ins developed processing models for the large - volume applications to be studied . on the basis of interviews and observations at ins service centers and district offices , the study team identified the activities that made up the application process and diagrammed the flow of applications from receipt through their adjudication process .