additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . it does not separate the pendency for which pto is responsible from the pendency created by the applicant . we calculated the pendency attributable to the applicants in one area — the time taken to respond to questions raised or requests for additional information by pto during examination . these responses accounted for an average of 3.6 months of the 20.2 months total pendency for fiscal year 1994 . subsequent to our analysis , pto made its own analysis of other areas where the applicant caused delays and computed an additional 3.8 months for fiscal year 1994 . while we did not verify pto's computations , adding the applicants' delays that pto identified to those we computed would result in about 7.4 months of the 20.2-month average pendency for fiscal year 1994 being attributable to the applicants themselves . as a result of our findings , we recommended in our report that pto compute and report patent pendency statistics that will separately identify issued patents , abandoned applications , and applications under examination . in commenting on our recommendations , the department of commerce said that more was needed than just an expansion of the pendency statistics now in use . it said that by fiscal year 2003 , pto's goal is to complete the examination of each new patent application within 12 months . the department said that pto would continue to report pendency as it had in the past until new procedures associated with this new 12-month goal are implemented . we agree that pto needs to track and report pendency when its new examination policy is put into effect . however , because this new policy may not take effect for several years , we believe that pto needs to begin reporting pendency statistics in the interim as we recommended . furthermore , we believe this change is needed regardless of pto's organizational placement . in analyzing the commitment of pto's resources to various functions , we found that pto has consistently committed most of its resources to the patent process . in fiscal year 1995 , about three - fourths of pto's funding — all of which now is generated by fees — and staff were devoted to the patent process . other major activities in pto include the trademark process , the agency's executive direction and administration , and the dissemination of information . pto's annual obligations have increased steadily in recent years .