we did not evaluate the differences between these estimates . however , according to a november 15 , 1993 , letter from the cbo director to the then house minority leader , cbo's estimate differed from omb's “ . with respect to the costs associated with severance benefits and relocation . while the administration assumes that agency baseline budgets are large enough to absorb these costs , cbo assumes that the costs would reduce the potential savings . the administration also estimates larger savings in employee overhead costs.” according to cbo , due to the differences in the consideration of offsetting costs , omb's estimate for the 5-year budget period ( fiscal years 1994 through 1998 ) exceeded cbo's estimate by $324 million . omb provided documentation showing that , in fiscal year 1996 and again in fiscal year 1997 , omb factored “up - front” costs of $40 million into the estimates it reported . the responsible omb branch chief stated that although he did not recall what the up - front costs for this recommendation specifically encompassed , these costs typically consist of buyouts ( i.e. , financial incentives of up to $25,000 for employees who voluntarily leave the federal government ) , lease breakage costs , and moving expenses . according to omb , consistent with its normal budget practices , omb examiners generally did not retain documentation for npr savings estimates . the budget examiners were unable to document estimates for four of the six recommendations we reviewed , constituting $21.8 billion in savings claims . instead , the omb examiners attempted to reconstruct how they thought the savings had been estimated through approximating rather than replicating savings estimates . omb did , however , provide documentation on the estimated savings for two of the six recommendations we reviewed . these recommendations were to reorganize usda ( with estimated savings of $770 million ) and to redirect the doe laboratories' priorities ( with estimated savings of $6.996 billion ) . even when documentation for the npr savings estimates was available , omb could not always provide complete information about how the estimates were calculated . these comments are discussed at the end of this letter . omb generally did not distinguish between npr's and other contributions for the agency - specific recommendations we reviewed . npr attempted to build on prior management reforms and operated in an atmosphere where other factors , such as agencies' ongoing reforms as well as the political environment , also influenced actions taken to address npr's recommendations . the relationship between the recommendations we reviewed and the savings claimed was not clear because omb attributed a broad range of changes to npr . savings estimated from the recommendation to reinvent nasa illustrate how omb attributed a broad range of changes to npr and did not distinguish npr's contribution from other factors . to estimate savings for that recommendation , omb consolidated seven somewhat related recommendations into one savings estimate of $8.519 billion . omb estimated savings by totaling expected reductions to nasa's entire budget for fiscal years 1996 through 2000 .