this requirement is written directly into the cra . these safety and soundness ratings are confidential . in 1991 , fdicia further amended cra to require public discussion of data underlying the regulators' assessment of an institution's cra performance in the public cra evaluation . the housing and community development act of 1992 amended cra to require that the regulators consider activities and investment involving minority - and women - owned financial institutions and low - income credit unions in assessing the cra performance of institutions cooperating in these efforts . in addition , we reviewed the legislative history of the cra to discern its original intent and to see how amendments have changed the law over time . we also collected data from each of the regulators relevant to various aspects of their cra enforcement . in addition to regulatory officials , we judgmentally selected and interviewed other parties who were located in the areas where we did our work and who are concerned with or active in cra compliance issues , including bankers , community groups , trade groups , consultants , representatives of the secondary markets , and officials from other federal agencies , including justice . we also collected data from each of these groups and from justice regarding cra examinations and enforcement . in addition to our interviews , we reviewed testimonies and speeches by representatives of the groups described above from a large number of congressional hearings and other forums that have taken place since enactment of cra . statements in this report representing the views of the affected parties reflect all of the sources described above . to identify the major problems in implementing cra , determine to what extent the regulatory reforms would address these problems , and identify challenges the regulators would face in ensuring the success of the reforms , we reviewed in detail compliance examinations at 40 banks and thrifts located in 4 regions , including the northeast , midwest , west , and south central parts of the united states . at each of the 40 institutions , to the extent possible , we completed a case study using standardized data collection instruments to gather the impressions and experiences of the bankers and examiners . for our case studies , we judgmentally selected institutions that included a variety of asset sizes ; business types ; and a mix of rural , suburban , and urban institutions . we selected institutions regulated by each of the four regulators and attempted to select institutions with a variety of good and bad cra ratings . however , we found that institutions that received low cra ratings from their last compliance examination were less willing to participate in the case studies than those that had fared better . while 11 of the institutions had received a “needs to improve” rating on their last cra examination , none had received a “substantial noncompliance.” the institutions we studied included 10 from each of the four regions ; 6 were examined by frb , 13 by fdic , 9 by occ , and 12 by ots .