below , we respond to each of these positions . the commission's summation of our work is inaccurate in certain crucial respects . we never predicted that ramsey pricing would ultimately lower rates for all classes of mail , as the commission asserts . we do not believe that these criticisms are warranted . it is important to understand that our objective was to report to congress on the implications of a greater or lesser reliance on demand pricing for setting postal rates , recognizing the need for balance with the pursuit of other goals . we recognize , nonetheless , that the use of different pricing techniques alone will not guarantee financial stability . as we have pointed out in this report , unless significant progress is also made in , for example , controlling labor costs and improving labor relations , the service may still be unable to compete effectively , regardless of ratemaking changes . finally , the commission said that our report noted “with approval” the postal service proposal for a rate increase . in fact , we merely cited the service's view that its proposal regarding cost allocations for first - class letters and third - class bulk mail were more in line with ramsey pricing . it was not our purpose to approve or disapprove of any specific proposal . also , as previously indicated , the debate surrounding cost allocations in prior rate cases has focused primarily on first - class and third - class mail and not on priority mail and express mail , which the commission has chosen to emphasize . in its fourth point , the commission argues that the conditions necessary for ramsey pricing to achieve economically efficient consumption patterns are not present . regarding the commission's arguments in this area , we have several observations . first , although monopoly ratepayers may perceive that they are paying a disproportionate share of fixed costs under demand - based pricing schemes , we believe that over the longer term their rates would likely increase less under a demand - based pricing scheme than under other schemes , for the reasons we stated in our 1992 report . this view has been supported by others who have studied postal economics . with regard to the commission's argument that ramsey pricing is viewed by many as unfair to competitors , we repeat that we do not advocate the use of demand - based pricing , and certainly not ramsey pricing , to the exclusion of all other considerations . to respond to concerns about fairness to competitors , the commission would be free to use this factor in its deliberations , since it is included in the criteria specified in the 1970 act . further , the issue of fairness to competitors involves considerations that go far beyond ratesetting , into such areas as the existence and magnitude of the postal monopoly , and hence are beyond the scope of either our 1992 report or this report . as noted in this report , we are reviewing aspects of the postal monopoly and plan to report on that review later . we agree with the commission about the importance of measuring costs properly .