state income tax ? degree of conformity to federal income tax adjusted gross income ( agi ) federal taxable income ( fti ) only interest and dividends are taxed ( continued ) state income tax ? the development of materials and the provision of customer service by all functions . irs and a state revenue agency opened a “new business assistance center” to inform new business owners of their federal and state tax responsibilities and how to comply . the receipt and processing of tax returns , payments , and information documents , both paper and electronic . to prevent erroneous earned income credit refunds , a state obtained a list from irs of taxpayers with freezes on their accounts that they used to determine whether to also freeze a taxpayer's account . account adjustments to tax , penalties , and interest , including amended returns , taxpayer requests , claims , and service - initiated changes . in one state , after irs audits a taxpayer's return , it informs the taxpayer that any changes to federal tax liability may affect state tax liability and the taxpayer may be required to file an amended state tax return . the matching of information documents against tax returns and accounts to identify nonfilers . irs obtained state tax filing records to identify taxpayers filing a state income tax return but not a federal income tax return . the selection and examination of income , excise , employment , employee plans / exempt organizations ( ep / eo ) , and estate and gift returns to determine tax liability ( including appellate review ) . also includes ep / eo determinations . irs and a state conducted a joint sweep of auto dealerships to determine whether they were filing irs form 8300s and reporting state sales tax for cash sales over $10,000 . includes all efforts to secure payment of tax liabilities . in some states , if a taxpayer owes both the irs and state revenue agency , the taxpayer can go to either irs or the state revenue agency and set up an installment agreement to resolve both accounts . encompasses all civil and criminal investigative activities . two irs districts and a state department of revenue have a project to identify and conduct joint investigations of individuals who are filing fraudulent tax returns electronically . the development and maintenance of information systems , including telecommunications , systems security and privacy , and systems standards . a state department of revenue provides one irs district with all information the state receives on fuel sales , purchases , licenses , and distributors' reports . using this information , the district created an automated database to promote and monitor compliance in the motor fuel industry . financial , human resource , and asset management . in several states , irs and the state revenue office share training resources . for example , an irs district trained state revenue employees on federal corporate tax laws . ( table notes on next page ) . ronald w. jones , evaluator - in - charge troy d. thompson , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .