attorneys . generally , the department concurred with the substance of the draft report . justice provided technical comments and also made suggestions for possible expansion of our discussion related to various topics in the draft report . these technical comments and suggestions have been incorporated in this report where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee ; the senate finance committee ; the house ways and means committee ; the subcommittee on treasury , postal service , general government , and civil service ( senate appropriations committee ) ; and the subcommittee on treasury , postal service , and general government ( house appropriations committee ) ; the secretary of the treasury ; the acting director , fincen ; the director , office of management and budget ; the attorney general ; and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8777 . this report focuses on the financial crimes enforcement network's ( fincen ) products and services in support of law enforcement . specifically , this report discusses ( 1 ) trends in the types and quantities of products and services provided by fincen to the law enforcement community ; ( 2 ) the extent to which fincen's products and services have been considered useful by the law enforcement community in identifying , developing , or prosecuting money laundering and other financial crime cases ; ( 3 ) the extent to which fincen evaluates the states' compliance with applicable controls over access to and use of information when state law enforcement officials directly access fincen's resources ; and ( 4 ) fincen's efforts to obtain approval from the internal revenue service ( irs ) to provide irs form 8300 information ( report of cash payments over $10,000 received in a trade or business ) to the law enforcement community . to determine the trends in and usefulness of fincen's products and services , we focused on five principal types of support provided by fincen: ( 1 ) tactical products in support of agencies' ongoing investigations ; ( 2 ) strategic products designed to address longer - term or more broadly scoped topics ; ( 3 ) artificial intelligence products designed to provide investigative leads ; ( 4 ) a “platform concept,” whereby federal agency officials can access databases and do their own research using fincen resources ; and ( 5 ) “project gateway,” which provides state agencies with remote , on - line access to financial and some commercial data . the scope of our work did not include a review of the suspicious activity reporting system , which is administered by fincen . to determine the trends in the types of support provided by fincen to the law enforcement community , we obtained a description of fincen's primary products and services , including the date when each type of product or service first became available .