we do not agree . we considered irs' modernization plans and schedules in making our assessment , and we cited specific examples in our report where reassignments occurred well before sites were to be closed or implementation of a new system was to begin . irs did not provide any information to contradict the scheduling information cited in our report and noted in its comments that the information in our report was generally factual . irs also commented on the relationship between redeployment and the hiring initiative , under which congress authorized thousands of new compliance and customer - service positions . according to irs , that initiative provided an opportunity to redeploy many employees who were in noncontinuing positions and that if it “had not used these new positions for redeployment , and instead filled them with external hires , the number of employees still occupying non - continuing positions when the transition was scheduled to occur would have been much larger.” we recognize that the timing of the hiring initiative was partly responsible for increased training requirements and reduced productivity , since over 4,000 additional jobs were made available to redeployment - eligible employees in fiscal year 1995 — well before large - scale employee displacement was expected . nevertheless , we still believe that irs would have experienced less disruption in fiscal years 1994 and 1995 had redeployment procedures focused on finding new jobs for employees as their displacement became imminent and allowed irs to redeploy employees with related experience before those without such experience . more importantly , we believe that the lessons learned from irs' early redeployment experience will help it establish procedures aimed at minimizing disruption in the future , when there is no guarantee of additional hiring initiatives . in its comments on our draft report , nteu said that the report is “flawed in its design , particularly with regard to its first stated objective , and that it fails to present any data to support the majority of the conclusions that are reached.” as an example , nteu cited our conclusion that the redeployment procedures led to premature reassignments and operational inefficiencies . we disagree . our conclusion about premature reassignments was based on an analysis of staffing and reassignment data for irs service centers and for acs and tps sites ; discussions with irs officials and with service center and district office supervisors who lost redeployed employees ; and reviews of irs' modernization and site closure plans . in our opinion , the results of that work , which are discussed on pages 16 to 21 , provide a sufficient basis for concluding that the redeployment procedures led to premature reassignments . we reached our conclusion about operational inefficiencies after interviewing officials and supervisors in many of the affected organizational units and reviewing various documentation including several internal irs reports and studies . again , we believe that the results of our work , which are discussed on pages 21 to 30 , provide sufficient data to support our conclusion . nteu also said that to draw such a conclusion we would need to present some comparative analysis of the operational impact of the redeployment understanding versus some alternative selection procedure , such as the traditional competitive selection process .