statistical policy directive no . 3 provides guidance to federal statistical agencies on the compilation , release , and evaluation of principal federal economic indicators . the directive establishes the authority of the agencies to release statistical information without prior clearance or policy interpretations . procedures established by this directive were designed to ensure that key economic data that are the basis for government and private sector actions and plans are released promptly and on a regular schedule , that no one benefits from “inside” access to the data before they are available to the public , and that there is public confidence in the integrity of the data . also , the directive does not limit the authority of the agencies over the scope , content , and frequency of economic data collected , compiled , or published . a bill was introduced in congress but was not enacted . we did not include the other four nas guidelines that are of a more subjective nature . the original request for this review specified evaluating census , bls , and nchs . with the agreement of the requesters , we added bea to the review because of its key responsibilities for providing economic data . the requesters also asked us to provide information on omb's role in coordinating and overseeing the statistical activities of those agencies that constitute the federal statistical system . our first objective was to determine to what extent the four statistical agencies followed the seven nas guidelines that we used for comparison . specifically , we examined whether the four agencies ( 1 ) had clearly defined and well - accepted missions , ( 2 ) cooperated with data users , ( 3 ) had established procedures for the fair treatment of data providers , ( 4 ) were open about the data provided to users , ( 5 ) widely disseminated the data , ( 6 ) coordinated with other statistical agencies , and ( 7 ) had a strong measure of independence . to understand the context for these guidelines , we interviewed cnstat officials to document the procedures they used in preparing and issuing the guidelines . we also interviewed executive branch officials and other knowledgeable experts about the nas guidelines ; reviewed relevant literature , such as other nas publications and reports about the federal statistical system ; and compared the nas guidelines to comparable international guidelines for statistical agencies . to determine agency compliance with the selected nas guidelines , we interviewed officials from each of the four agencies and omb and asked them to provide documents to demonstrate their compliance . these documents included information on missions , activities , and resource history ; legal basis for agency organization and operations ; data dissemination ; cooperation with data users ; and coordination / contacts with other governmental organizations and professional societies . in general , our criterion for compliance with a guideline was whether agencies had such documentation . we relied upon interviews and other sources of data to ensure that we adequately understood the context of this documentation . the agencies also provided us with background briefing books , descriptions of statistical programs and publications , agency orders and operational procedures , budget documents , and other documentation .