all of the states responded . for those states that indicated there was a requirement , we conducted telephone interviews with regulatory and law enforcement personnel . we interviewed officials and observed operations at the state facility in sacramento , california , that processes data for that state's office of the attorney general . we chose this one state operation to visit because of its proximity to san francisco , california , where we were reviewing irs district operations . in order to determine the extent to which suspicious transaction reports are used to initiate investigations by irs' criminal investigation division ( cid ) , we used data provided us from a management information system at irs headquarters . we visited or contacted by telephone a total of 10 cid district offices . the san francisco office was selected because of its recognized role as an innovator in using suspicious transaction reports . the other district offices were judgmentally selected so as to include offices that had initiated a relatively high percentage of cases based on suspicious transaction reports as well as those that had initiated a low percentage . we provided a draft of this report to the american bankers association , treasury's financial crimes enforcement network , and irs . their comments are discussed on pages 37 and 38 and reproduced in full in appendixes i , ii , and iii . we did our review from april through december 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . over the past several years , different forms have been developed for financial institutions to use in reporting transactions that might involve money laundering . each of these forms has evolved from a recognized need , but the forms differ as to the amount and detail of the information provided and where the form is filed . because of the concurrent development and implementation of the forms , the reports overlap one another . consequently , the same suspicious activity may be reported two or more times , on two or more different forms , and to several different agencies . this chapter describes how suspicious transactions are reported and to whom they are reported . chapter 3 discusses how the various reports are used by different law enforcement agencies . as previously discussed , financial institutions are required to report certain transactions that exceed $10,000 on a currency transaction report ( ctr ) . beginning in 1990 , ctrs have also been used by some institutions to identify suspicious transactions . although this means of identifying suspicious transactions produces the largest volume of reports , most financial institutions do not use the ctr form to report suspicious transactions . comptroller of the currency regulation 12 c.f.r . section 21.11 and corresponding regulations issued by the other bank regulatory agencies now require financial institutions to report suspected money laundering . nonetheless , there was still concern over the possibility of civil suits because of reporting suspicious transactions . in 1992 , under the annunzio - wylie anti - money laundering act ( p.l . 102-550 ) , financial institutions and their employees reporting suspicious transactions were given broadened immunity from civil liability under any state or federal law or regulation , such as the right to financial privacy act .