( ch . 2 discusses the regulatory framework for otc derivatives , mbs , and structured notes in greater detail. ) in addition to working individually , the federal financial market regulators also work collectively to address issues relating to the financial markets . the heads of the department of the treasury , cftc , the federal reserve , and sec comprise the president's working group on financial markets . staffs from occ and other regulatory agencies also participate in this group's activities . the working group was established after the 1987 market crash to address issues concerning the competitiveness , integrity , and efficiency of the financial markets , and it is chaired by the secretary of the treasury . the working group meets periodically to share information and to coordinate regulatory policies and activities , and it also meets on those matters relating to otc derivatives . to address congressional concerns associated with sales practices for otc derivatives , mbs , and structured notes , our objectives were to analyze ( 1 ) the federal sales practice requirements applicable to these products and the dealers marketing them ; ( 2 ) the extent of end - user satisfaction with sales practices , product use , and related disputes and the costs of these disputes ; ( 3 ) the views of end - users and dealers on the nature of their relationship and responsibilities ; ( 4 ) the actions dealers and end - users have taken to reduce the potential for sales practice disputes ; and ( 5 ) the actions regulators have taken to address sales practice issues . to analyze federal sales practice requirements applicable to these products and the dealers marketing them , we reviewed federal laws and regulations related to sales practices and discussed them with federal financial market regulators . we also reviewed the proposed and final rule issued jointly by the three federal bank regulators regarding bank sales of government securities , which include mbs and structured notes issued by gses . in addition , we reviewed the sales practice guidance provided by federal bank regulators for their examiners and the dealers they oversee . to analyze the extent of end - user satisfaction with sales practices involving otc derivatives , mbs , and structured notes , we sent questionnaires to the financial officers of nearly 2,400 randomly selected u.s. organizations in 1995 . using the best information we could identify , we constructed a universe of over 49,000 public - sector and private - sector u.s. organizations that might be using these products , including not only the largest organizations , which were determined on the basis of financial or other measures of size , but also the smaller organizations in each industry . our sample was drawn from 19 populations of such organizations . some of these 19 populations were divided into 2 or more strata on the basis of an appropriate measure of organization size — such as assets , revenues , student enrollment , or census counts . our questionnaire requested data on the use of these products within the 12 months preceding the survey .