operating budgets . the united states has generally moved away from appropriations for items of expense , such as salaries , equipment , and travel , and toward appropriations for organizations and programs . however , agencies may be asked by congressional committees to account for deviations from their budget requests , which typically are expressed in terms of items of expense . budgetary flexibility . appropriations acts or other statutes may specify an amount or percentage of funds that an agency may transfer between appropriations accounts without requiring further congressional action . similarly , within an appropriations account , agencies generally may reprogram a percentage or amount of funds from one item of expense , such as salaries , to another , such as computer equipment , without obtaining congressional approval . carry - forward of unspent budgeted funds . all executive departments are authorized to charge user fees to provide a wide variety of common administrative services and retain those fees in revolving funds to pay for operating expenses . these funds are allowed to charge for the direct costs of service provision and to also collect certain indirect costs , such as equipment depreciation . very few discretionary appropriations accounts — budget accounts that receive budgetary resources through appropriations acts — contain annual funding only . to better meet the needs of program managers , most discretionary accounts contain some multiyear or no - year funding authority , thus allowing carry - over of budgetary resources across fiscal years , and subsequent obligation , without further congressional action . market - type mechanisms . all fund receipts are typically available until spent and do not expire at the end of a fiscal year . also , omb circular a - 76 seeks to promote efficiency by encouraging competition between the federal workforce and the private sector for providing commercial services needed by government agencies . in light of the four countries' experiences with similar reforms , u.s. agencies may wish to reexamine these existing u.s. provisions as they consider proposals for waivers from administrative requirements as provided for under gpra . the four countries sought to give line management greater flexibility to recruit , assign , and pay staff . to accomplish this , the countries simplified personnel rules and devolved personnel authority from central personnel agencies to departments and from central personnel functions within departments to line managers . this devolution was accompanied by a shift in the role of central personnel agencies away from regulating and controlling all personnel actions and toward promulgating simplified human resource management principles and monitoring adherence to those principles . also , within departments , the function of central personnel managers shifted from controlling personnel decisions to providing human resource management services to line managers . to improve line management's control over human resources , the four countries simplified their civil service systems and replaced elaborate , uniform personnel rules with simpler , broader personnel principles . for example , according to a 1991 government paper on canada's public service 2000 reforms , canada's human resource reforms emphasized creating a simpler personnel system that provided managers with greater flexibility .