v ) . beginning in 1993 , both congress and the administration agreed that federal employment levels should be cut as a means of reducing federal costs and controlling deficits . through a series of executive orders and legislation , goals were established for reducing federal staffing levels . two driving forces in the reductions were the federal workforce restructuring act of 1994 and the national performance review . within nasa , the human space flight program experienced the greatest percentage of downsizing , and from the program's centers , we focused on ksc because of its high profile as the space shuttle launch and recovery site and because of public concerns that had been expressed about shuttle safety . we selected opm's investigations service because many of its functions had been privatized . to determine what actions were taken to maintain performance in the selected components as a result of downsizing , the results of these actions on performance , the effects of downsizing on customer satisfaction , and lessons learned , we interviewed officials from the parent agencies , components , unions , and employee associations . we also interviewed a small number of randomly selected bor and ksc employees who were not represented by unions to obtain their views on agency performance during downsizing . we reviewed streamlining , performance , and customer service plans ; where available , we examined performance and customer satisfaction measurement data . we did not evaluate the performance or customer satisfaction measures used by the components or verify their performance measurement or customer satisfaction scores . because of limited customer satisfaction data at the office of housing , bor , and the investigations service , we interviewed a small number of randomly selected customers to determine their satisfaction with performance during downsizing . the lessons learned by components reflect the judgment of component officials . we did not independently assess how well these lessons were followed during components' actual downsizing experiences . the results of our work are limited to the components reviewed and cannot be projected to the entire agency or governmentwide . our work was performed at the headquarters of the parent agencies and components in washington , d.c. ; at the ksc in florida ; and at bor's reclamation service center in denver , co. we also interviewed bor employees , ksc employees , hud customers , bor customers , and opm customers in various locations throughout the united states . we performed our work between october 1996 and november 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we asked hud , doi , gsa , nasa , and opm to provide comments on a draft of this report . the comments provided are discussed at the end of this letter . nearly all organizational components in each agency were affected , some more than others . the downsizing of components at the five parent agencies we reviewed ranged from around 2 percent to 100 percent . in addition , the effect of each component's downsizing on the parent agency's total reductions varied .