additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . das has issued pcrs on jbt and tbsd . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . in our discussions , a treasury ig official said that pcrs provide information that could be useful in doing mlr reports . the official also said it may make sense for the igs to wait until das has issued pcrs before initiating mlrs . if the igs initiated mlrs after pcrs , this could allow the igs to avoid duplicating the work of the das investigators and it would allow the igs to plan the scope of their mlr audit work on the basis of information contained in the pcrs . however , federal reserve and fdic ig officials said that there is no significant relationship between mlrs and the das investigations . the officials said that das investigations are more narrowly focused than mlrs and , therefore , have limited use . for example , federal reserve ig officials pointed out that pcrs , unlike mlr reports , do not assess the quality of bank supervision . ig officials also said that they consult with fdic das investigators during the course of mlrs to obtain information . finally , the fdic and federal reserve officials said that pcrs were often not available until months after a bank failure . for example , the jbt pcr was completed nearly 4 months after the failure , and the tbsd pcr was completed about 7 months after the failure . the limited benefits may have been outweighed by the costs associated with producing the mlr reports , which include ig personnel and financial expenditures ; temporary disruptions in ig office operations ; and potential duplication of effort among the igs and fdic das . however , if the igs had more flexibility to determine the number and timing of mlrs to perform each year , they could ( 1 ) have more flexibility to utilize their resources , particularly in years when there are numerous bank failures ; ( 2 ) potentially take advantage of pcrs issued by das ; and ( 3 ) do broader analysis of the overall quality of bank supervision . a more flexible approach could still maintain the original intent of section 38 ( k ) , which was to hold the bank regulators accountable for their actions . thus , congress may wish to consider whether the currently required approach remains the best available . similarly , we believe that requiring us to perform annual reviews of mlrs may no longer add sufficient value to the mlr or bank supervisory processes to warrant continuation .