they also can be used to complement each other . some market participants — primarily banks and other financial firms acting as dealers — use exchange - traded futures to hedge the risk related to their otc derivatives positions . we modified the report accordingly . as a former cftc chairman noted , the exchange - traded futures market has grown closer to the swaps market as it has expanded to remain competitive . we amended the offset definition to make it consistent with cftc's definition and discussed the way that otc derivatives are terminated in a later section of the report . these fundamental questions provide a framework for systematically determining the appropriate regulation for exchange - traded futures and otc derivatives , including their markets and market participants . moreover , answers to these questions would also provide a basis for considering an array of options for amending the cea . these options include ( 1 ) expanding the act's jurisdiction to cover specified swaps and other otc derivatives but tailoring their regulation to the circumstances under which they trade and other appropriate factors ; ( 2 ) excluding swaps and other specified otc derivatives from the act's jurisdiction and providing for their oversight , as appropriate , by other federal regulators ; and ( 3 ) tailoring the level of regulation for exchange - traded futures to the nature of the market participants and / or other appropriate factors . swaps and other otc derivatives involve institutions and activities in which federal bank regulators and sec have traditionally had a supervisory or oversight role , while futures trading and futures market regulation have fallen under the cftc's exclusive jurisdiction . as a result , any policy questions raised by the ongoing development of the otc derivatives and exchange - traded futures markets cross traditional jurisdictional lines and involve not only cftc but also federal bank regulators and sec . the cooperative efforts of these agencies , working with the department of the treasury and the financial industry , will be required to address such questions . as discussed , the president's working group on financial markets provides one forum through which to coordinate interagency activities and address policy questions that cross jurisdictional lines . as we concluded in our may 1994 otc derivatives report , the u.s. financial regulatory structure has not kept pace with the dramatic and rapid changes in the domestic and global financial markets . we noted that one issue needing to be addressed is how the u.s. regulatory system should be restructured to better reflect the realities of today's rapidly evolving global financial markets . our conclusion was based partly on the finding that the development of new types of financial derivatives and their use by a variety of once separate industries , such as banking , futures , insurance , and securities , have made it more difficult to regulate them effectively under the current u.s. regulatory structure . the potential legal and regulatory issues raised by the evolving otc derivatives and exchange - traded futures markets under the cea further illustrate such difficulty and reinforce the need to examine the existing u.s. regulatory structure .