ii ) . a july 1996 proposal to revise the rating system used by the regulators also reflects the increased emphasis on evaluating an institution's risk exposure and the quality of its risk management systems . efforts by the regulators to improve federal oversight through examinations focused on risk management , along with the accounting and corporate governance provisions of fdicia , could help provide early warning signals of potential safety - and - soundness problems . however , whether this potential for earlier detection will be translated into corrective action is subject to some question because the regulators still have a great deal of discretion under section 39 , as amended . although the section 38 capital standards appear to have played some role in strengthening the condition of the banks and thrifts , other factors have also contributed to this improvement , including lower interest rates and an improving economy . despite the apparently sound financial condition of the bank and thrift industry , the possibility cannot be ruled out that the current strong performance of the bank and thrift industry is masking management problems or excessive risk - taking that is not being addressed by regulators . for example , the financial press reported in november 1995 and march 1996 that delinquent consumer loans , such as credit card loans , grew considerably during these years and that this growth was partially attributed to lower credit standards . whether the regulators are more successful in detecting risk management problems and then taking the requisite corrective actions may not be fully known until another downturn in the economy affects the bank and thrift industry . in 1991 , congress enacted fdicia , in part , because of concerns that the exercise of regulatory discretion during the 1980s did not adequately protect the safety and soundness of the banking system or minimize insurance fund losses . fdicia's prompt regulatory action provisions were originally enacted to limit regulatory discretion in key areas and to mandate regulatory responses against financial institutions with safety - and - soundness problems . the implementation of section 38 has provided capital categories and mandated actions that regulators should take if banks or thrifts fall into specific categories . however , section 39 , as amended , appears to leave regulatory discretion largely unchanged from what existed before the passage of fdicia . sections 38 and 39 provide regulators with additional enforcement tools that they can use to obtain corrective action or close institutions with serious capital deficiencies and / or safety - and - soundness problems . these provisions include the enforcement tool that allows regulators to remove bank officials believed to be the cause of the institution's problems as well as other actions intended to stop the institution from engaging in risky practices . moreover , section 38 appears to have encouraged institutions to raise additional equity capital and should help prevent capital - deficient institutions from compounding losses . despite such benefits , severely troubled institutions may not be subject to mandatory restrictions and supervisory actions under section 38 due to its reliance on capital as the basis for regulatory intervention .