( see app . iii for a more detailed discussion of the data elements that contained the highest rates of error. ) however , the results of our comparison between the data in the official personnel folders and the cpdf differ somewhat from those of our questionnaire . for example , the results of the questionnaire showed education level to have a 26.7 percent error rate and rating of record to have a 4.7 percent error rate . the results of the comparison showed education level to have a 23.0 percent error rate and rating of record to have a 15.9 percent error rate . although we did not try to determine the reason for these differences , two reasons appear most likely . first , the results of the questionnaire are generalizable governmentwide , although the results of the comparison are not because the sample of the comparison is not generalizable . second , the information in the employees' official personnel folders might not be current . in particular , employees may not have informed their personnel offices of additional education completed , so this information may not be in the official personnel folder . thus , the information in the official personnel folder might match the cpdf , but neither would be current . in its measurements of historical accuracy of cpdf data , opm has reported results broadly consistent with ours . that is , opm has found that most data elements it reviewed were 99 percent or more accurate but has found high error rates for rating of record and education level . there were no inaccuracies for 12 of the data elements . for another five data elements , our comparison showed error rates of less than 1 percent . the remaining nine data elements had error rates greater than 1 percent . for the legal authority code data element , we could not determine the error rate because some employees had no transactions for fiscal year 1996 . table 2.2 shows the results of our comparison . concerning the most error - prone data elements , our review of employees' official personnel folders and agency records showed results similar to those of our questionnaire — education level and rating of record were the most error - prone data elements . table 2.3 groups by percent of errors the error rates identified by our two methods for measuring cpdf status and dynamics file data accuracy and opm's measurement of the historical accuracy of fiscal year 1994 cpdf status file data . the table shows that between the two methods we used to measure cpdf data accuracy ( although variation existed in the accuracy of some data elements ) at least 63 percent of cpdf data elements were 99 percent or more accurate . although opm's and our results were broadly consistent , there are important differences between opm's methodology and ours . first , we sent our questionnaire to a generalizable sample of current federal employees and reviewed a random sample of official personnel files of current federal employees . in contrast , opm reviewed centrally located records of former employees . second , opm's methodology in comparing cpdf data with those in employees' official personnel folders differed from ours .