case 1 . in this case , epa awarded a $23 million contract in february 1993 for the study of the economic and environmental impacts of the clean air act's provisions regulating acid rain . in august 1992 , before the contract award , program officials who reviewed the contractor's proposal discovered the potential for a conflict and expressed their concern . the contractor had several contracts with electric utilities and a coal company . these industries have been identified as prime contributors to acid rain . the officials believed that such industry ties could possibly impair the contractor's objectivity in evaluating the clean air act's provisions regulating acid rain . also , two of the contractor's subsidiaries had contracts with third parties that could cause potential conflicts of interest . one subsidiary had contracts of its own with electric utilities . the other subsidiary owned the licensing rights of various technologies that the contractor was to evaluate under the epa contract . the contractor acknowledged in a september 1992 letter to the pre - award contracting officer that the appearance of a conflict existed . the contractor pointed out that “the electric utility industry is the principal constituent of the acid rain program's regulated community , and the mere fact of providing professional services under contract both to the regulated community and to the community of regulators can create the appearance of potential conflict of interest.” after examining the potential conflicts of interest , epa had the contractor prepare a conflict avoidance plan and awarded the contract . among other things , the plan prohibited the employees of the contractor who had worked on other projects that could cause a conflict situation from taking part in the epa work . we did not evaluate the reasonableness of the avoidance plan . case 2 . this case involved the award by epa of a $50 million contract in march 1994 for the identification of parties responsible for pollution at superfund sites in one of epa's regions . under the superfund law , parties responsible for contaminated sites may be required to clean them up or to reimburse epa for the cleanup it performs . as instructed by epa , the contractor searched epa's list of potential polluters in the region to identify any party on the list with which the contractor could have a conflict of interest . the contractor reported that it had business relationships with approximately 40 parties on epa's list of potential polluters , but did not believe they would constitute a conflict of interest . the contractor certified to epa that it was unaware of any potential conflict of interest . according to the pre - award contract officer , he and the technical evaluation panel reviewed the identified relationships and found no apparent conflict . he pointed out , however , that it was difficult to determine whether the business relationships constituted a conflict because actual work assignments and pollution sites had not been identified . he said that the subject contract was essentially considered a contract vehicle with no specific requirements . after the contract was entered into , work assignments were issued with specific requirements to be performed under the contract at specifically identified pollution sites .