these issues are discussed below and in appendix i . , by december 1 , 1994 ) . given ofheo's history of failing to meet its own publicly announced completion targets and considering the challenges that remain , we are concerned that ofheo may not meet its current estimate of issuing a final rule by 1999 . for example , to meet the schedule in the current plan , ofheo must coordinate the interagency review process and make key policy decisions , such as forecasts about future interest rates . in addition , ofheo must translate the complex components of the stress test and capital standards into proposed and final rules as required by apa while protecting against the unauthorized disclosure of proprietary enterprise data . ofheo also initiated and completed several complex and time - consuming projects between 1994 and 1997 to develop the stress test and risk - based capital standards . according to oracs' director , however , ofheo had largely completed the integrated financial model by april 1997 , although some final testing and documentation projects were to have been completed during the summer of 1997 . ofheo faces continuing challenges in meeting its proposed deadline of issuing the final rule implementing the stress test and risk - based capital standards by 1999 . in particular , ofheo officials must coordinate the interagency review process and make key policy decisions about the stress test . he said that given the complexity of the stress test and its related financial models , it will be important to provide information about them at the earliest possible stage . the acting director said the informal interagency review process can go forward before the stress test is finalized because the goal will be to explain the technical components of the stress test and related financial models to omb and treasury technical staff and to receive their comments and analysis . ofheo's acting director told us that the organization needs to make key policy decisions about various components of the stress test by early 1998 . ofheo's chief economist said that ofheo's technical staff had the responsibility to lay out options on various complicated issues that are necessary to complete the stress test , such as assumptions about future interest rates , the shape of the yield curve , the enterprises' future debt issuances , and the relationship between home prices and interest rates , but it is up to ofheo management to choose the appropriate option . once these decisions have been made , then ofheo will have a better idea as to how the stress test will affect the enterprises' financial condition and risk - based capital levels . ofheo's general counsel told us that once oracs completes development of the stress test , ofheo's staff will face the task of translating the stress test into proposed and final rules . the general counsel stated that ofheo wants to avoid having the final rule successfully challenged in court under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .