additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the sfo stated that this was not a prospectus - level lease . therefore , to be considered , any offer must be below the prospectus threshold . there was nothing in the contract file to indicate that a check had been done after ssud's space requirements were finalized to verify that ncr could still expect lease offers for this project to be below the prospectus threshold . because of the increase in space needs over ssud's june 1996 estimate , it would seem prudent to have done another prospectus - level calculation before issuing the sfo . had this calculation been done using the actual minimum space requirement in the sfo ( 69,500 square feet ) times the low end of the estimated market rental rate ( $29 ) that the contracting officer had initially used , the estimated annual rent would have been about $2.02 million . this amount exceeded both the fiscal year 1998 prospectus threshold of $1.81 million that was initially used for this lease and the fiscal year 2000 threshold of $1.93 million that was later used . we believe that if an update of the prospectus calculation had been done at this point , the need to reevaluate the prospectus decision would have been apparent to ncr . early in 1998 , there were three offerors competing for the ssud lease . about the time that ncr received the best and final offers , the original contracting officer left gsa . when the new contracting officer took over responsibility for the ssud lease , he raised the question about the need for a prospectus on the basis of the offers received . in may 1998 , the contracting officer reopened negotiations on the lease to clarify the calculation for determining compliance with the prospectus threshold . representatives from 1920 l street llc did not attend a scheduled meeting and failed to submit a best and final offer . therefore , at this point there were three remaining offerors . original contracting officer left gsa to work for the secret service and a new contracting officer took over the ssud lease . the new contracting officer said that when he became involved with the ssud lease he saw the need for a prospectus . current contracting officer tried to clarify calculation for determining if offers meet the prospectus threshold . letter to offerors defined the calculation as the total full - service rental rate , minus parking , minus operating expenses , and minus the cost of amortizing the tenant improvement allowance . the letter also specified that using the above calculation , the offers must not exceed the fiscal year 1998 prospectus threshold of $1.81 million . contracting officer sent another letter to the offerors amending the may 8 , 1998 , letter . in this letter , the calculation for determining if offers meet the prospectus threshold was defined as the total full - service rental rate , minus operating expenses , and minus any concessions offered to the government .