aamva will provide the brand file . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the mco file and vin pointer file have been developed and are being maintained by the polk company , which is also an aamva contractor . to test nmvtis in operation , aamva agreed with seven states to have them develop their computer software to interface with nmvtis . the test in the seven participating states is to allow for an evaluation of the technical feasibility of nmvtis , degree of success in meeting the 1992 act's requirements , areas that would benefit from federal rulemaking , estimated costs of implementation and operation , and time it will take the remaining states to develop interfaces to nmvtis . as of march 18 , 1999 , the seven participating states were developing the capability to interface with nmvtis files and were in various stages of testing the interface . aamva expects completion of the test within the first quarter of calendar year 2000 and its evaluation of the results shortly thereafter . aamva has prepared an evaluation plan for testing nmvtis . the evaluation plan includes an assessment of nmvtis' ability to meet the act's requirements . according to aamva officials , aamva expected to complete its preliminary evaluation of nmvtis by the end of july 1999 . aamva's march 19 , 1999 , cost estimate for a fully implemented nmvtis is $33.9 million — that is , $24.2 million for states to develop new systems or adapt existing ones to link with nmvtis and $9.7 million for aamva and its contractors to develop and implement nmvtis . aamva expects the federal government to fund $22.2 million , which is to be used to offset $16.5 million of the states' costs and to reimburse aamva for $5.7 million in its role as the technical assistance provider . aamva and its contractors will be responsible for the additional $4 million . aamva expects the states to fund their remaining costs ( $7.7 million ) . nmvtis' operation and maintenance costs will be the responsibility of the states and aamva and its contractors . as previously mentioned , the states and aamva and its contractors can charge system users a fee for information provided . according to aamva , its estimate of the costs the states would incur is based on the participating states' actual costs plus other factors , such as inflation . aamva estimated that the development costs for other states would average about $425,000 per state . in developing its estimate , aamva stated that it assumed that the 7 participating states' costs would be representative of the nonparticipating states , and that the other 44 states would participate in nmvtis . according to aamva officials , indiana , kentucky , and virginia have fully implemented nmvtis . the other four states may continue to incur additional unanticipated costs , which could impact aamva's projected cost estimate for the nonparticipating states . as previously discussed , aamva expects to report on the results of the participating states' efforts to interface their titling systems with nmvtis in calendar year 2000 .