ch . the extent to which items are available through the supply schedules program but at higher prices than are available through other means or with less desirable servicing or sales conditions will limit the potential effect of the cooperative purchasing program on state and local governments . our case studies conducted as part of this review and procurement work we have done previously demonstrate that gsa does not always have the lowest price or the most favorable sales conditions . as part of our review , we asked gsa to compare its schedules' offerings with 255 items recently purchased by 16 state and local governments included in our case studies . gsa found that although some items were more favorably priced through the schedules program , others were not.of 70 items that state and local governments said they would be interested in purchasing that are available through the schedules program , 20 were purchased by the state and local governments at lower sales prices or with more attractive sales conditions than those of the schedules program , 47 items could have been purchased at lower prices through the schedules program , and 3 items could have been purchased at the same price . for example , the raleigh county , west virginia , board of education purchased a hewlett packard laserjet computer printer for $485 ; gsa's schedule price was $446 , or 8.04 percent lower . the city of mountain view , california , purchased another type of computer printer ( laserwriter 16 / 600 ) for $2,046 ; the gsa schedule price was $2,104 , or 2.83 percent higher . fairmont , west virginia , state college purchased a computer system upgrade for $510.75 ; gsa's schedule price was $394 , or 22.86 percent lower . the state of west virginia purchased road de - icing salt for $36.90 per delivered ton ; the gsa schedule price was $42.75 per delivered ton , or about 15.9 percent higher . according to state purchasing officials , gsa may not always have the lowest price . of the 50 respondents to our survey , 33 indicated that they had analyzed some gsa schedule prices . of those 33 respondents , 13 , or about 39 percent , indicated that state prices were generally lower than those available through gsa for the items they compared , while 2 states , or about 6 percent , indicated that gsa generally had lower prices for the items they compared . in addition , of the 33 respondents , 18 , or about 55 percent , said some state prices were higher and some were lower than gsa's prices for the items they compared . we did not ask state purchasing officials to identify any specific items or prices they compared , nor did we verify their responses . some officials we interviewed in the four states included in our case studies also indicated that gsa's schedule prices were not always lower than their prices . for example , a purchasing director in the new york state office of general services said that state contract prices are frequently lower than gsa's schedules prices .