we disagree . irs has already developed measures , as indicated above , and those measures represent reasonable indicators of the accessibility of irs' toll - free telephone service . our continuing discussions with irs are not centered on the measures themselves but on the reliability of the data used for those measures . our recommendation merely seeks a commitment from irs that one or more of those measures , once finalized , be included among irs' key filing season performance indicators . we do not believe it is premature to seek that commitment . our draft report also included two proposed recommendations that were intended to provide taxpayers with better information on potential refund delays in 1996 . we proposed that if irs planned to continue validating ssns and delaying refunds in 1996 , it ( 1 ) clearly alerts taxpayers , in the 1040 tax package and publication 17 , to the possibility that their refunds will be delayed even if there are no problems with the ssns provided on their returns and ( 2 ) reconciles the inconsistency between those refund delays and irs' customer - service standard . in commenting on the proposed recommendations , irs said that the problem we identified in 1995 with respect to adequately alerting taxpayers should not recur in 1996 because of the aforementioned changes to irs' ssn - validation procedures and criteria . irs has however , revised its customer - service standard on refunds by including a caveat to alert taxpayers that their refunds may be delayed if their returns are selected for further review . the revised standard has been included in the tax packages and publication 17 for tax year 1995 ( those that taxpayers will use in preparing returns to be filed in 1996 ) . assuming that irs is correct in believing that its revised procedures will cause few taxpayers with valid ssns to have their refunds delayed , we believe that further action is unnecessary . accordingly , we have deleted the two proposed recommendations from our final report . we are sending copies of this report to various congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v. please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-9110 if you have any questions . irs envisions that by the year 2001 , 90 percent of tax payment processing will be done by lockboxes . under this concept , which is already being used for some types of tax payments , taxpayers are to mail payments to a lockbox , which is a postal rental box serviced by a commercial bank . the bank processes the payments and transfers the funds to a federal government account . the payment and payer information is then recorded on a computer tape and forwarded to irs where the tape is to be used to update taxpayers' accounts on irs' master file . irs conducted two lockbox tests during the 1995 filing season to assess taxpayers' willingness to use different procedures for mailing tax payments associated with their returns .