( app . i contains information on the annual special tax registration and return process. ) the stamps must be available for inspection as proof of payment , are nontransferable , and are valid for 1 tax year . the sot tax year begins on july 1 and ends on the following june 30 . both atf and the treasury's ig estimated sot compliance rates . the two offices used different data and methods when computing their estimates , and those data and methods leave the accuracy of both offices' estimates uncertain . the audit work needed to quantify the potential error in these estimates was beyond the scope of our study . the two offices also used different definitions of compliance . atf's definition covered the timely filing of the annual return and the timely payment of taxes due in response to atf's annual renewal notification . the ig's definition covered only the payment of tax when a tax liability existed . atf estimated that , as of april 3 , 1998 , 93 percent of the producers with permits , 95 percent of the wholesalers with permits , and 89 percent of the retailers known to atf filed timely returns and timely paid the taxes due for tax year 1998 . the noncompliant taxpayers were those known to atf that did not respond to the annual notification process and were not identified by atf as being out of business . atf determined that about 0.03 percent of the producers , 3 percent of the wholesalers , and 4 percent of the retailers did not respond because they were out of business . atf was uncertain whether the access and recordkeeping authority may exist under other provisions of current law . atf was not sure whether recordkeeping could be imposed under other provisions of the irc if the retailer does not have a special occupational tax liability . if the sots were repealed , atf said it could attempt to write regulations requiring specific records be kept by retailers . according to atf officials , the courts could rule that the recordkeeping requirement is a valid exercise of the taxing power , or they could deny the authority because the activities that the bureau wants recorded are not closely enough related to the excise tax collection process . if sots are eliminated and access and recordkeeping authority do not exist under other provisions of current law , atf officials believe that the laws concerning regulation of the alcohol industry may have to be changed to permit the bureau the same enforcement powers . the federal alcohol administration act of 1935 ( faa ) regulates fair trade practices , chiefly promotional activities of dealers that affect the sales of other dealers . the act also imposes licensing requirements for wholesalers and producers , but there is no authority in this act for imposing recordkeeping requirements . if the sots were repealed , faa could be expanded to impose recordkeeping requirements on retailers . atf officials believe that the access and recordkeeping authority currently provided by the sots is essential for effective enforcement of alcohol laws and regulations . we have not evaluated atf's claim that the access and recordkeeping authority provided by the sots is necessary for atf's enforcement efforts .