we made that update . irs officials generally agreed with our recommendation . with respect to the first part of our recommendation , the officials generally agreed that irs should do a cost - benefit analysis before deciding to increase the percentage of forms 1040ez or information returns that scrips processes or to add additional forms , such as forms 941 . they said that this analysis would be done by the end of fiscal year 1997 and would take into account approved results from the paper processing task team . irs officials said that in the event of workload imbalances during the 1997 tax return filing season , if necessary , they may decide to increase the workload for scrips before the cost / benefit analysis is completed . we recognize that irs' priority must be to process tax returns during the filing season in a timely manner , and it needs to reserve the right to do so . with respect to the second part of our recommendation , irs officials said that they plan to work with the contractor to identify and implement any necessary contract modifications that may be needed to ensure complete testing . they said the testing will ensure that scrips can meet performance expectations in a peak production environment . irs officials said that a few changes are planned for the 1997 filing season that could help improve scrips' future performance . specifically , they mentioned that irs would be testing different incentive systems for scrips operators to determine the extent to which incentives affect operator performance , which could also affect overall scrips' performance . they also mentioned that irs is negotiating with the contractor to provide a new scanner feeder that should resolve some of the problems experienced when information returns are filed on extremely thin paper . irs officials expressed concern about using $133 million as the baseline cost estimate for scrips . that estimate was included in a february 1992 business case and again in a revision dated april 23 , 1992 . irs officials said that we should have used an earlier cost estimate of $209 million that was included in irs' information systems initiative summary database in august 1991 . irs' post - implementation review report on scrips also stated that the scrips project office considered the $209 million as the baseline life - cycle cost estimate . however , the report also noted that between fiscal years 1993 and 1996 , irs cited four other different life - cycle cost estimates for budget purposes , including an estimate of $132 million . we revised the report to acknowledge that $209 million was one of the cost estimates for scrips , but we believe that the business case estimate is an appropriate baseline because the business case was a major basis for decisions to go forward with scrips . irs officials said that irs developed the scrips business case before it began taking steps to manage information technology projects as investments . since that time , for example , irs has developed an investment justification handbook to help ensure that project cost and benefit analyses that are included in business cases are standardized and complete .