ii ) . the chief information officer said that irs agreed with the information in our report . he emphasized that , in some regards , irs' current weaknesses are associated with its aging systems and that these weaknesses will be corrected as part of irs' long - term systems modernization plans . in the meantime , according to the chief information officer , irs ( 1 ) has initiated actions to block employees' access to more taxpayer accounts than they are currently restricted from accessing and ( 2 ) is reviewing the feasibility of incorporating audit trail records from systems other than idrs into atlas . these actions focus on awareness . in an attempt to make certain that all employees are explicitly informed about unauthorized access and the related penalties , irs , among other things , adopted a policy that proven instances of unauthorized access will result in removal from irs , absent any extenuating circumstances ; sent a memo in october 1997 to all irs employees that discussed , among other things , the penalties associated with unauthorized access ; started giving annual agencywide briefings in november 1997 to inform all employees of irs' unauthorized access policy and the penalties for violations ; created a form that is to be signed by employees and managers to acknowledge attendance at a briefing and receipt of guides on what constitutes unauthorized access ; created a policy that all employees who join or return to irs after the annual awareness briefings have been administered will be given their briefing within 30 days ; developed a standard message to be given in all training courses in which access to tax information is discussed ; developed a video and guides on unauthorized access to ensure that managers deliver a consistent message in briefing employees ; and finally , established an unauthorized access steering committee and unauthorized access support team to address questions and issues raised by employees and managers . other irs actions are intended to prevent unauthorized access ( i.e. , stop employees who intentionally or unintentionally try to access taxpayer data without authorization ) . in that regard , according to irs , the most effective way to safeguard against unauthorized access is to build controls into automated systems that prevent employees from accessing information they have no need to access . however , according to irs , its current systems cannot be effectively modified to provide the “need to know” environment that allows employees to access taxpayers' records only when they have a work - related reason to do so . irs expects to correct this situation as part of its long - term systems modernization effort . in the meantime , irs has taken some steps to prevent unauthorized access . for example , irs ( 1 ) has incorporated blocks into its systems to prevent employees from accessing their own records and , in some cases , the records of their spouses or ex - spouses and ( 2 ) is reviewing the access rights given to individual employees to ensure that they do not have greater access to tax data than is necessary to do their work .