additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we discuss their comments at the end of this letter . large , internationally active u.s. financial institutions , which account for most of the financial exposures and relationships with foreign financial institutions and markets , may be at risk if the foreign organizations are not ready for the year 2000 date change . however , officials from the u.s. institutions we visited told us that they have mostly completed the changes required to ready their own computer systems to process year 2000 dates . with financial relationships around the world , these officials also said they were assessing the year 2000 readiness of their customers , business partners , and financial counterparties . further , they said that they are preparing plans to mitigate the risks their international activities pose to their operations , but that they generally did not anticipate year 2000 problems in other countries to have a significant long - term impact on their business operations . although many financial institutions may be active internationally , fewer than 25 large institutions account for most of the total foreign financial exposures of u.s. banks and securities firms . the year 2000 readiness of foreign organizations' computer systems is important to these large u.s. financial institutions because they have substantial international financial exposures . u.s. financial institutions are active in various global financial activities . large u.s. banks and securities firms are active participants in the foreign exchange markets in which transactions valued at $1.5 trillion were estimated to be occurring daily as of april 1998 . determining the portion of u.s. financial institutions' foreign exchange activities that are conducted with foreign entities is difficult , but about 18 percent of the daily volume of foreign exchange trading is reported to occur in the united states . the comparable share of global daily trading volume in london , which is the most active foreign exchange trading center , was about 32 percent . u.s. firms are active in london and other world foreign exchange centers as well . over - the - counter derivatives dealing is another global financial market activity in which u.s. financial institutions actively participate.about $70 trillion in notional principal was outstanding in june 1998 , with u.s. banking institutions having an estimated $28.2 trillion outstanding as of that time . u.s. banks are also active globally as lenders of funds and , as of june 30 , 1998 , had a total foreign lending exposure of about $487 billion . six u.s. banks accounted for over 75 percent of this total exposure . as shown in table 1 , u.s. banks' largest lending exposures were concentrated in the major european markets and japan . although most of their lending was in developed countries , large u.s. banks also had exposures to organizations in various emerging market countries . the primary purpose of these reports is to provide sec with more specific information on these entities' actions to address their year 2000 problem .