occ closed rushville . kane a. wong , assistant director gerhard c. brostrom , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . both suits were dismissed by the courts . the remaining suit seeking compensation for occ's seizure of the bank as a taking under the fifth amendment is still pending . rushville directors have questioned whether occ followed its policies and procedures in closing rushville and have alleged that occ misclassified performing loans during its last examination to make it appear that the bank was insolvent . accordingly , you asked us to review whether occ followed its policies and procedures in its net worth calculation and loan classifications during its final examination before rushville's closure . although our in - depth review of 25 problem loans found that many loan classifications were not well documented , we found that , except for the lack of documentation , examiners followed established occ procedures and generally accepted accounting principles in their net worth calculation and loan classifications . our review found that occ's net worth calculation showing that rushville was insolvent by about $326,000 was essentially based on examiners' determination that the bank lacked sufficient equity to cover estimated loan losses from problem loans . documentation from past examinations and interviews indicate that , over the previous decade , occ had been critical of rushville's allowance for loan losses , which represented a reserve for bad debts . in 1983 , the directors consented to an occ cease - and - desist order that required rushville to maintain a capital ratio of 7 percent . in december 1992 , rushville's capital ratio was at minus 1 percent , which was well below the level required by the cease - and - desist order . following generally accepted accounting principles , occ examiners determined rushville's net worth during the december 1992 examination by valuing its loan portfolio and then determining the amount of equity the bank should be setting aside to absorb losses . by comparing the two amounts , the examiners determined that rushville lacked sufficient bank equity to cover loan losses . table 1 shows the calculation that occ used to make its determination .