ii. ) gatt / wto members are to provide responses , called “notifications,” to the questionnaire . ideally , the notifications should provide enough transparency ( openness ) about ste operations to determine whether or not they are adhering to gatt disciplines . the questionnaire asks members to list their stes , the products for which stes are maintained , and the reasons for maintaining stes . the notifications we reviewed provided much of the information requested in the questionnaire , including sectors in which stes operate , their purposes and activities , and some statistics about their operations . however , compliance with the notification requirement was limited during 1980 to 1994 , as 79 percent of gatt members did not submit ste notifications during 1981 , the best year of reporting . the evidence we obtained suggested the lack of compliance could be attributed to ( 1 ) confusion over the definition of stes , ( 2 ) the lack of systematic review of notifications received , ( 3 ) the apparent low priority some gatt members assigned to article xvii's reporting requirement , and ( 4 ) the overall burden associated with gatt reporting requirements . under these circumstances , it is impossible to determine whether article xvii has yielded information on the full nature and extent of ste activity in gatt / wto member countries . moreover , the lack of notifications from most member countries has hindered gatt / wto members in identifying all stes in gatt / wto member countries and determining whether they operate in accordance with gatt disciplines . twenty - nine member countries submitted ste notifications to the gatt / wto secretariat at least once during the period 1980 to 1994 , with 21 of the countries reporting some form of state trading . these notifications provided some insight into the activities of stes in member countries . for example , the majority of stes described in these notifications operated in the agriculture sector , covering such products as grains and cereals , dairy products , beef and veal , and sugar ( see fig . member countries also reported that they maintained state trading in alcoholic beverages and petroleum products . in addition to the products listed in figure 1 , a few countries also provided notifications about state trading in salt , coal , inflammables , aircraft , and nuclear fuel . the notifications also provided information related to the purpose of stes and how they operate . with respect to purpose , some member countries have reported using stes to help agricultural producers “achieve their full potential in overseas markets,” to ensure “protection of the domestic agricultural production against low - priced imports,” and to ensure a “stable and adequate supply” of certain agricultural commodities as part of “national defense preparedness.” regarding operations , member countries have reported that stes acted as sole agents for production , imports , and / or exports in the sectors covered . additionally , the stes assessed levies on production and / or imports , issued export licenses , and received government guarantees on borrowed funds . other state trading practices reported included government - guaranteed minimum prices and subsidized exports .