ii. ) according to a ctac official , for fiscal years 1992 through 1997 , ctac distributed about $61.0 million , or about 71 percent of its total funds , for 72 counterdrug r&d projects . ctac also spent $17.7 million for operational test - and - evaluation efforts and $4.6 million for technical and contracting agents who are to manage the projects once funded . table 1 in appendix iii shows the distribution of ctac funding by spending category for fiscal years 1992 through 1997 . as previously discussed , we found a lack of agreement between ctac and s&t committee members regarding the criteria for ctac project - related contributions . when we examined the contributions identified by ctac , we found that they were more output - related than outcome - related . that is , ctac focused more on quantifying specific activities and products than on assessing their effectiveness or impact on law enforcement and demand reduction counterdrug efforts . for example , ctac generally considered completed projects ( output ) successful whether or not they resulted in the deployment of useful technology by law enforcement or demand reduction agencies . in addition , our review did not find that ctac obtained periodic feedback from law enforcement or demand reduction agencies on the extent to which the technology resulting from ctac - funded projects was useful in helping to reduce drug supply or the demand for drugs ( outcome ) . also , ctac cited the number of symposiums and workshops it sponsored ( output ) but did not specifically measure the outcome of those forums in terms of , for example , the unnecessary duplicative r&d avoided and the technology developed and used ( outcome ) . in addition , ctac is responsible for coordinating counterdrug r&d activities to ensure that unnecessary duplication is avoided and that it supports otherwise unfunded projects with the highest priority . however , we found no indication that ctac had developed a means for measuring the results and effectiveness of its coordination ( outcome ) , such as obtaining feedback from the agencies with r&d missions whose activities it is charged with coordinating . nor , as we previously discussed , has ctac developed a means for measuring its effectiveness in identifying and avoiding unnecessary duplicative r&d efforts . without measurable outcome indicators linked to its mission and identifiable goals and objectives , ctac and others cannot reliably determine ctac's impact on reducing the nation's drug problems through the development and deployment of useful counterdrug technologies . in september 1997 , ondcp and ctac officials informed us that they were taking steps as part of two separate , but related , initiatives to develop long - term strategic goals . first , pursuant to statutory provisions requiring the development and submission of the national drug control strategy , ondcp has been developing a performance measurement system for the national strategy . as part of this effort , ctac officials said that ctac and other federal r&d agencies have been developing performance targets and corresponding measures or indicators for each of the technology - related objectives for the national strategy's goals .