it also shows the u.s. supervisor for each office . to address the objectives of this report , we reviewed examination manuals , relevant laws , and guidance issued by the board of governors of frs ( federal reserve board ) . we interviewed officials from the federal reserve board and the federal reserve banks of atlanta , chicago , new york , and san francisco . we also interviewed state bank supervisors from california , florida , illinois , and new york , and officials from fdic , occ , and the institute of international bankers — an association of foreign banking organizations with u.s. operations . in addition , we identified a number of weaknesses in sosa and country reports that could limit the program's effectiveness . these included inconsistent , incomplete , or outdated information , as well as sosa rankings that did not appear to be justified by data in the report . in late march 1995 , the federal reserve board distributed to the reserve banks initial guidance for implementing the fbo supervision program . additional guidance was issued as implementation progressed from march 1995 to august 1996 . as of december 31 , 1996 , sosa reports and accompanying home country reports were completed for 120 ( about 43 percent ) of the 281 fbos subject to the requirements of the program.we found only limited use of country and sosa report information in the comprehensive examination plans that we reviewed . however , at the time of our review , supervisors had just begun to incorporate sosa and country report information into the supervisory process . although the fbo program has not been fully implemented , frs staff and other banking supervisors told us of a number of benefits of the program — most importantly , improved communication and cooperation among supervisors and bank management , both domestic and foreign , and improved access to information about fbos and their home countries . regulators reported many instances of increased coordination and cooperation among federal and state supervisors . supervisory officials told us that implementing the fbo program has , in some cases , required supervisors from different agencies to coordinate with each other — whereas before the program , they said coordination was more ad hoc . for example , because an fbo may have subsidiaries or offices in several locations across the united states , the development of a coordinated examination strategy for a given fbo has required supervisors to work cooperatively , sharing information about the subsidiaries or offices they individually supervise . this is important because problems identified at a particular office could manifest themselves at other offices of an fbo . this improved coordination and communication is intended to result in improved supervision of the u.s. operations of fbos . frs officials also said preparing home country reports and sosas had helped them develop valuable relationships with foreign regulators and foreign central banks . these officials said such preparation has helped them supervise the u.s. operations of foreign banks . they also said the relationships they have developed with foreign regulators have helped them obtain better information on how u.s. banks are doing abroad .