the broadest of the measures — s . 1588 — also includes financial incentives for volunteers who help with the census , namely: reimbursements for expenses , such as gasoline and food , and a program of undergraduate or graduate debt relief . if enacted , the legislation could make census employment more attractive to millions of people . however , the bills contain restrictions that limit their applicability . in addition , other statutory provisions exist that prohibit or create financial disincentives for certain groups of people who might be interested in census employment . regarding the restrictions contained in the measures currently before congress , the exemption in all three bills would not apply to federally funded program beneficiaries who were appointed to temporary census positions before january 1 , 2000 . this could discourage some people who had worked on early census - taking operations , such as address list development activities , from seeking further census employment . at the same time , the census applicant pool is not as large as it could be because provisions contained in current laws continue to prohibit or potentially discourage large groups of people from considering census jobs . although our review was not exhaustive , and we did not comprehensively weigh the pros and cons of each option , we identified three large sources of potential applicants who might be interested in census employment were it not for these provisions . active duty military personnel . the census act allows uniformed personnel to take census jobs to enumerate members of the uniformed services . however , active duty military personnel are generally not permitted to accept outside federal employment in the absence of specific statutory authority to do so . thus , additional statutory authority would be needed to authorize military personnel to work on the census . doing so could increase the potential census applicant pool by over 1 million individuals . recipients of federal government voluntary separation incentive payments . since the early 1990s , as part of an effort to restructure the federal government , the department of defense and , later , civilian federal agencies , have had the authority to offer voluntary separation incentive payments ( also known as buyouts ) of as much as $25,000 to eligible employees who left federal service . for nondefense agencies , congress has authorized both governmentwide buyouts and over 15 agency - specific buyout programs . according to information provided by opm , most of these buyout programs contain provisions that generally require buyout recipients to repay their buyout if they accept a federal job within 5 years of their separation date . thus , it is unlikely that the bureau's post - census coverage improvement programs — programs that had limited success in 1990 — will address the overall and differential undercount in 2000 . with less than 4 months until census day , the bureau faces some significant risks that , taken together , continue to jeopardize the success of the 2000 census . securing an adequate level of public participation is a great challenge with implications for the size of the nonresponse follow - up workload .