576 in our report . this regulation on buyouts , repayments , and waivers of repayment was published on november 9 , 1994 . we had not specifically referred to opm's regulation 5 c.f.r . 576 in our draft report because it was not pertinent to our focus on agencies' internal controls . section 576.101 of the regulation provides guidance on who is covered by the buyout conditions , what is covered , what is required ( the buyout recipient must repay the entire amount of the buyout to the agency that gave the buyout ) , and exceptions under the repayment provisions . however , the section is stated generally and does not address what agencies should do to help ensure that returning buyout recipients comply with the law . section 576.102 deals with buyout recipients' requests for opm's approval for waivers of the repayment provision , and , while it does not deal with what agencies should do to help ensure compliance with the provision , this section is an example of the instructional approach opm could use in regulations requiring agencies to adopt internal control procedures . we have added a reference to 5 c.f.r . 576 to the report to provide additional information on waivers of the repayment provision in accordance with opm's and another agency's suggestion . 2.opm said that the draft report needed to more accurately reflect its analysis and findings regarding buyout recipients who were reemployed in violation of the repayment requirement , particularly the differences in the methodologies used in the two analyses opm conducted and the most current data available from opm . we had not distinguished between opm's two research methodologies because it did not make that distinction in its interim report , which we cited in the draft . she said that the state department had no other comments . as arranged with your office , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 15 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of interested congressional committees , the director of opm , the heads of the nine agencies included in our review , and other interested parties .