postal service . in private firms. in january 1995 , a group of the service's customers and competitors called the coalition for the relaxation of the private express statutespetitioned the postal service to initiate a rulemaking to suspend the statutes for all or certain categories of third - class mail . the coalition said its members included “private carriers of mail that would like to be able to compete more broadly with the usps and users of usps third - class mail that would like the opportunity to enjoy the benefits of such competition.” coalition participants included the nation's largest alternate delivery networks and the industry's recognized trade association , as well as the largest third - class mailers' associations . in other words , the coalition acted on behalf of organizations representing the vast majority of those who mail third - class material and who deliver it outside the u.s. mail system . in its petition , the coalition said that the world had changed markedly since the service examined the statutes in 1973 . a final hearing on november 15 , 1995 , “the postal reorganization act 25 years later: time for change ? ” set the stage for the subcommittee's 1996 agenda . one legislative proposal ( h.r . 210 , 104th cong. , 1st sess . ( 1995 ) ) discussed during the house subcommittee's november 1995 hearing would turn the postal service over to its employees under an employee stock ownership program . this proposal provides for the continuation of the private express statutes only during the first 5 years of the newly formed corporation's existence . in a january 1996 hearing , the senate and house postal oversight subcommittees jointly continued to assess the need for postal service reform . 1104 at pp . to this end , congress removed the service from the political arena by making it an independent establishment ; giving sole power to a board of governors to appoint and remove the postmaster general and his deputy ; and making the postal service exempt from many , but not all , laws that apply to federal agencies . for over 200 years , the postal service and its predecessors have operated with a statutory monopoly imposed by the private express statutes , which restrict the private delivery of most letters . over the years , congress has reaffirmed the need for the monopoly many times . however , the scope of the monopoly has been both broadened and reduced at various times through statutory and regulatory changes . the monopoly was created by congress as a revenue protection measure for the postal service's predecessor to enable it to fulfill its mission . it is to prevent private competitors from engaging in an activity known as “cream - skimming,” i.e. , offering service on low - cost routes at prices below those of the postal service while leaving the service with high - cost routes . those who favor retention of the statutes continue to cite the threat of cream - skimming as their principal economic justification . the letter monopoly was not changed under the postal reorganization act of 1970 . rather , congress adopted then - existing restrictions on private letter delivery with little debate .