iii ) . in a letter dated june 5 , 1995 , the director of interior's office of equal opportunity said that our analysis was useful and provided additional updated information ( see app . iv ) . the director of opm , in a letter dated june 20 , 1995 , said that our report underscores the findings of the national performance review that there is duplication between the requirements and oversight roles of opm and eeoc and that current requirements place too much emphasis on process rather than results ( see app v ) . the department of state's director of eeo and a personnel specialist from the department of agriculture's office of personnel provided oral comments on a draft of this report in july 1995 meetings . both provided technical suggestions that we have incorporated , where appropriate . ” “have studies been conducted on time - in - grade to determine the reasons for any differentials which may exist by minority status and sex ? ” eeoc stated that the program analysis questions in md - 714 are considered as guidance and not specific requirements . however , eeoc's memorandum on federal affirmative employment planning dated january 21 , 1988 , suggests otherwise . the memorandum states that “the program analysis is the foundation upon which the agency's entire plan will be based . therefore , each agency should ensure that it performs a comprehensive assessment of how the agency's efforts are directed toward the eight major program elements . the analysis must provide complete rationale for responses to the questions that follow each element . it is not necessary that the analysis be limited to just those questions.” the memorandum also states that agencies should maintain documentation which supports the agency's identification of barriers and development of objectives . however , agency officials from two of the agencies we reviewed also said that they considered the questions in md - 714 as guidance rather than requirements that must be met . agency officials also said that eeoc did not always ask agencies to provide comprehensive answers to the program analysis questions when it reviewed their plans . another reason for the incomplete analysis of the program elements is that agencies did not fully analyze personnel event data ( eg , data on recruitment , hires , training , promotions , and separations ) . we discuss this issue later within this chapter . in prior reports we have recommended that eeoc expand the agency workforce analysis requirements to include ( 1 ) major occupation workforce data by grade level or grade groupings , and ( 2 ) analysis of hiring , training and development , promotion , and separation data . we believe that these additional analyses are critical to fully understanding the causes for trends in underrepresentation and overcoming barriers to achieving a representative workforce . we also have recommended that eeoc provide agencies with better guidance on what constitutes a major occupation and additional guidance on what to analyze . eeoc agreed with these recommendations and has addressed them in its proposed new management directive .