we have revised the report to reflect this fact . in reference to our statement that opm's plan does not mention specific training or workforce skills that will be needed to achieve its performance goals , opm referenced the statement in its plan that states that opm has a major initiative underway to ensure that gaps in core competencies are addressed . our position on this issue remains unchanged since opm's plan does not specify the training or skills needed nor does it link these needs to specific performance goals . these discussions are consistent with results act requirements . however , in some cases , a more explicit discussion of opm's intended coordination with other agencies would be helpful . for example , opm has a performance goal to seek improvement in adjudicatory processes that address conflicts in the workplace and to work to make them more understandable , timely , and less costly . the means , or strategy , opm proposes to achieve this goal implicitly recognizes that opm has limited authority to set or influence policy regarding adjudicatory processes . it states that opm will “promote and provide active participation in response to governmentwide efforts to improve the adjudicatory process.” meaningful participation by opm would require ongoing coordination with the adjudicatory agencies , such as the equal employment opportunity commission and the merit systems protection board , but such coordination is not discussed in the plan . opm's relationship with the adjudicatory agencies and its approach to coordination could be described more fully to portray the status of opm's involvement in this issue and the extent to which it intends to participate in interagency efforts to improve the adjudicatory process . opm's performance plan could more fully discuss the strategies and resources the agency will use to achieve its performance goals . because many of opm's annual performance goals are not results - oriented , it would be difficult for policymakers to judge from the plan , itself , how the strategies associated with these performance goals would add up to achieving a significant result related to opm's mission . nevertheless , the plan specifies strategies for achieving each of its performance goals . but in many cases , the plan does not provide a rationale for how the strategy will contribute to accomplishing the expected level of performance . opm's performance plan could also be enhanced by discussing external factors that could significantly affect performance . we found that opm's strategies are connected to its performance goals , but because many of the performance goals are not results - oriented , it is unclear how the strategies will contribute to achieving an intended result related to opm's mission . for example , opm's performance goal to improve recognition of opm as a leading source for effective , efficient technical assistance in a broad range of employment programs does not readily indicate what result this would help opm to achieve . consequently , it is also difficult to determine whether its corresponding strategy to monitor current and emerging issues , trends , and stakeholder interests will contribute to achieving a results - oriented change , such as improving the effectiveness of federal employees .