all are awaiting sentencing . the ring leaders are likely to receive 20-year sentences , while the other four gang members face sentences ranging from 14 to 30 years . this investigation was one of several task force efforts directed against one of los angeles' most notorious and violent street gangs . if yes , how useful was the assistance ? the two gang members used juvenile gang members to commit the robberies , supplied them with weapons and plans for carrying out the heists , and kept the bulk of the money for themselves . table ii.1: summary of local los angeles area law enforcement officers' views of federal assistance assistance received ? includes coordination and cooperation on criminal investigations between federal and local agencies and / or between local agencies . fbi and atf officials provided us with information on several federal anti - gang efforts . the following briefly describes five la task force efforts and one atf investigation . some of these efforts targeted specific factions or “sets” within a gang or were part of larger investigations directed at a gang over time . this operation was part of a long - term investigation of a los angeles gang that figured significantly in the 1992 riots . the fbi began investigating the gang in 1989 and established a joint investigation with a local law enforcement agency in 1992 , after the riots . after over 2 years of joint investigation , the fbi and the local agency initiated a widely publicized 1-day anti - gang operation involving about 800 fbi agents and local law enforcement officers , covering a 30-by - 30-block neighborhood in south central los angeles . according to the local agency , the gang faction targeted in the effort accounted for less than 1 percent of the community population but was responsible for over 80 percent of the community's violent crime . the 1-day operation resulted in four federal indictments on charges such as felon in possession of a firearm and possession with intent to distribute . task force members also seized 67 firearms , about 2,000 rounds of ammunition , and 2 kilos of methamphetamine . local law enforcement officials also credited the operation with reducing violent crime in the targeted area by 57 percent in the 2 months following the effort . according to police statistics , violent crime ( including robbery , attempted murder , rape , kidnapping , aggravated assault , and assault with a deadly weapon ) dropped from 262 crimes in the same 2-month period of the preceding year down to 112 crimes . the operation received widespread media attention , with some community residents quoted as being pleased with the task force's efforts and others as being upset with them . fbi officials believed that these efforts were successful , citing , as an example , that gang members went into seclusion after the operation . the officials justified the large amount of personnel resources expended as necessary to ensure officer safety , protect evidence , and apprehend suspects .