director of facilities . from september 1995 to december 1996 , the project executive , in addition to his role as project executive , was also responsible for the functions of this position . effective december 3 , 1996 , the role was transferred to , and became an additional responsibility of , the director of security . on july 20 , 1997 , the director of security , who had performed the duties of director of facilities in an acting capacity , was appointed the director of facilities while retaining the responsibilities of director of security . officials to whom we spoke told us that , although one person has been given responsibility for both positions to reflect the close relationship between facilities and security needs in regard to operation of the center , neither position had been abolished . they said that the center could at any time appoint separate individuals to each position . the position description for the director of facilities summarized the roles and responsibilities as principal advisor to the vice president of facilities ( 1 ) on all matters pertaining to facilities and infrastructure , ( 2 ) on all matters pertaining to maintenance and operations , and ( 3 ) for the development and justification of the center's annual utilities budget . additionally , the director is responsible for managing all security , fire , and life safety matters . director of contracting . on february 27 , 1995 , the center posted a vacancy announcement to fill the position of contracting officer . the position description summarized the roles and responsibilities to include ( 1 ) the head of the contracting activity for the center ; ( 2 ) responsibility for the organization and management of the office of procurement ; ( 3 ) management and control of the center's appropriated fund contracting procedures ; and ( 4 ) management of all aspects of the procurement cycle , including planning , negotiation and administration of construction , personal services , technical services , maintenance , supply , and related contracts in accordance with the federal acquisition regulation and center guidance . this committee , also a committee of the board , was previously referred to as the fine arts review committee . the committee reviews and provides guidance to staff on detailed aspects of project design and construction work , thus , according to officials , acting as the board's project oversight mechanism between operations committee meetings . the committee recently focused on the concert hall renovation project , and officials told us that they expect the committee to provide similar guidance on future projects . vice presidents' committee . the members of this committee are the center's president and six vice presidents . the meetings of these senior managers serve as the mechanism for elevating problems and policy questions concerning facility work to the attention of the president . building operations coordinating committee . this committee , headed by the vice president for facilities , focuses on facility projects' progress , schedules , problems , or open issues requiring the vice president's input or decision .