dod and opm agreed with our findings . similar to what was done for buyouts authorized by p.l . 104-208 , congress should also require agencies to submit their plans to appropriate congressional committees prior to implementing their buyout authority . dod and opm concurred with our findings . opm agreed that much of the increase in payroll cost during downsizing was due to pay raises , with smaller increases due to changes in the workforce's composition and in benefits costs . opm also said that it believes the report reflects the success of the administration's efforts to slow the rate of growth in federal employment and payroll costs , noting that the growth would have been much greater had the federal workforce not been reduced by about 300,000 employees during the period we reviewed . we agree that the federal payroll could have been larger in the absence of downsizing and recognize the importance of the administration's role in downsizing the government . however , as noted in chapter 1 , both congress and the administration played roles in the downsizing effort . subsequent to obtaining the agencies' comments , we revised the report to provide additional context on the impact of downsizing on human capital . since comments had been previously requested from the appropriate agencies regarding the human capital issues discussed in our prior reports , we did not request additional comments . the increased payroll costs for the 1.9 million federal employees in fiscal year 1997 were due primarily to employees' annual pay comparability adjustments . the annual pay comparability adjustments were responsible for an estimated 59 percent of the overall increase in federal payroll costs . this estimate includes the effect of comparability adjustments not only on the basic pay of federal employees , but also on the costs of other types of pay and employee benefits , such as premium pay , the costs of which are based on percentages of employees' basic pay . basic federal pay rose about $5,440 per employee due to annual comparability increases during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 , and associated pay and benefits increased about $1,400 per employee . these pay comparability adjustments were comparable to the increases provided to nonfederal employees during the same period , as measured by the eci . some of the benefits that are calculated on the basis of employees' basic pay increased by more than the amounts that were due to basic pay increases . in addition , some benefits costs , such as health insurance premiums , that are not calculated on the basis of employees' basic pay also increased during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 . in total , increases in the cost of benefits , exclusive of the increases directly attributable to increases in employees' basic pay , accounted for an estimated 13.6 percent , or $1,580 per employee , of the overall increase in the average payroll cost per employee . premium pay , exclusive of the effect of comparability and other pay increases , also increased in cost during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 . this accounted for about 0.3 percent , or $30 , of the overall $11,600 increase in federal payroll costs per employee .