ii ) . fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement during fiscal year 1994 . the central intelligence agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details on its concessions agreements . operations during fiscal year 1994 ? department of the army corps of engineers federal mediation and conciliation service federal mine safety and health review commission federal retirement thrift investment board department of health and human services department of housing and urban development the john f. kennedy center for the performing arts ( continued ) operations during fiscal year 1994 ? national aeronautics and space administration national archives and records administration national endowment for the arts national endowment for the humanities occupational safety and health review commission thrift deposit protection oversight board u.s. trade and development agency ( continued ) operations during fiscal year 1994 ? twenty - seven of the 75 departments and agencies we surveyed reported that they had concessions operations during fiscal year 1994 . table ii.1 contains overall information reported by the 27 departments and agencies . forty - two departments and agencies responded because some had more than one component managing concessions . as indicated in the table , data on all concessioners' revenues were not available . some agencies reported that gross revenue data were not available because concessioners paid a flat concessions fee and the agency had no requirement to track gross revenues . as a consequence , total concessions revenues and fees in this table can not be compared to determine the rate of return the government received from concessioners' revenues . value of concessioners' nonfee compensation ( continued ) value of concessioners' nonfee compensation ( continued ) value of concessioners' nonfee compensation ( table notes on next page ) the central intelligence agency did not provide details on its concessions agreements . agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: ( 1 ) reduced prices on vended items , ( 2 ) difficulty in obtaining contractors — the building is surrounded by many food establishments , ( 3 ) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors , ( 4 ) a limited profit rate for concessioners — with overage to be either returned to the government or put back into the food service operation , ( 5 ) concessioners make it possible to market native americans arts and crafts — an activity the agency could not do . agency responded that some revenue data were not available mainly because concessioners were not required to report revenues for certain concessions where they generally paid a flat concessions fee . according to the bureau of reclamation , the 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency's concessioners . survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed by state agencies . total ( fees + special accounts ) . rate of return ( percent ) transportation ( including ferry , cruise , tourmobile ) . food service operations , lodging , campgrounds , vending machines , retail sales , river running , big game hunting , marinas , ski resorts , transportation , cruise boats , boat docks , coin - operated copiers , and others .