timeshares . performing and nonperforming . $5 million maximum loan amount . no judgments , deficiencies , or charge - offs . we analyzed the completeness of loan data on diskettes that were supplied to investors before the august 1993 auction . using computer analysis techniques , we analyzed the loan diskettes to determine the extent to which data were missing or invalid . we also compared codes used in the data on the diskettes with coding information in the documentation given to investors along with the diskettes to determine whether all the codes used were defined . to conduct our analysis , we obtained copies of the data diskettes from rtc . we did not validate the accuracy of all of the data on the diskettes . we surveyed investors through telephone interviews to obtain comments about the adequacy and usefulness of the loan data rtc provided them for the august 1993 nonperforming loan auction . we identified 146 investors from rtc's lists of bidders who registered for the august auction . we also used rtc records to stratify our sample by whether they were winning bidders and by the type of loan data investors reviewed before the auction — i.e. , the loan diskettes or the loan files or both . we then drew a stratified probability sample of 34 participants to represent the 146 participants in the auction . of these participants , 17 were successful bidders and 17 were not . we developed a questionnaire covering the loan data diskettes and the loan files that rtc provided investors . a copy of the questionnaire is provided at the end of this appendix . we pretested the questionnaire in september and october 1993 and conducted the telephone interviews in october and november 1993 . before conducting the survey , we faxed the questionnaire to the investors and we contacted the investors by telephone to obtain their responses . to ensure consistency , we read the questions verbatim and entered the investors' responses and comments directly on the questionnaire form . we combined individual responses with those of other respondents for analysis and reporting purposes . we interviewed 29 of the 34 sample members , which gave us a response rate of 85 percent . five investors declined to respond . all sample results have been weighted to provide an estimate that represents the total population of 146 participants . we considered the possibility that our survey findings on the usefulness and completeness of rtc data might apply only to certain investors . we compared successful bidders with other participants , individual investors with institutional investors , new auction participants with those who had previously participated in an rtc loan auction , and small investors with larger investors ( more than 10 employees ) . none of these differences between investors was associated with a statistically significant difference in evaluations of the usefulness of either the loan data diskettes or the loan file reviews . the lack of a statistically significant difference was also found for the investors' experiences with missing or omitted data on the diskettes and the file reviews . we therefore concluded that our findings were not limited to particular investors .