fers has no maximum benefit provision . thus , the higher maximum benefits available to members of congress under csrs do not exist in fers . fers provides benefits to the survivors of all employees and members who have completed at least 10 years of service and die in the interim between their separation from federal service and the age at which their deferred annuities would have commenced . csrs makes this benefit available only to members of congress . the two programs are very different . csrs was designed as a “stand - alone” pension program with no supplementation by social security or any other source of employment - related retirement income . in fact , csrs predates the social security system by several years . fers was developed in response to the social security amendments of 1983 that extended social security coverage to federal civilian employees hired after december 1983 . fers includes ( 1 ) a pension plan ; ( 2 ) a thrift savings plan to which most employees and the government contribute ; and ( 3 ) social security , as a three - part retirement package . the social security amendments of 1983 required all members of congress to be covered by social security on january 1 , 1984 , regardless of when they entered congress . members in csrs were given the option of being fully covered by both csrs and social security and making the employee contributions required by each or participating in an “offset plan” whereby the social security contributions members made and any social security benefits they received from their congressional service would be deducted from their csrs contributions and benefits , respectively . a similar offset plan was applied to all other employees who entered the government between december 1983 , when social security coverage began and csrs was closed to new entrants , and january 1987 , when the fers pension plan was implemented . csrs and the fers pension plan each have a number of separate provisions for the various employee groups they cover . differing provisions in each plan apply to members of congress , congressional staff , law enforcement officers and firefighters , air traffic controllers , and all other employees.the latter group ( which we refer to as “general employees” ) constitutes more than 90 percent of all employees covered by the plans . appendixes i and ii show all the csrs and fers provisions that differ by employee group . the significant differences are highlighted in the next sections . the comparisons do not include several provisions that are the same for all groups , such as disability retirement and annuitant cost - of - living adjustments . appendixes iii and iv illustrate the benefit amounts that are available to each employee group at various ages and years of service . we derived the information in this report by reviewing chapters 83 and 84 of title 5 of the u. s. code ( chapter 83 covers csrs and chapter 84 covers the fers pension plan ) and federal regulations on csrs and fers contained in parts 831 through 846 of the code of federal regulations .