ii ) . the 1988 policy and its effectiveness in eliminating interagency problems came into question during the house government operations subcommittee hearings on two high profile fugitives . responsible for fbi cases . may elect responsibility for dea case if new charges are involved . responsible for dea cases unless new charges are involved and dea elects responsibility . if electing responsibility , dea must provide written notice to usms . responsibility becomes effective 7 days after notification is received , with interim efforts to be coordinated between dea and usms . responsible when fbi case involves counter - intelligence , organized crime , terrorism , or new charges . may elect responsibility for dea case if new charges are involved . responsible after judgment of guilt with noted exceptions ( see fbi and dea ) . if electing responsibility , fbi must provide written notice to usms . responsibility becomes effective 7 days after notification is received , with interim efforts to be coordinated between fbi and usms . if electing responsibility , dea must provide written notice to usms . responsibility becomes effective 7 days after notification is received , with interim efforts to be coordinated between dea and usms . must notify original agency of the violation . may ask to be involved after a 7-day period . if denied , may appeal within the 7 days to associate attorney general , who is to decide within 48 hours . agencies are to coordinate in the interim . responsible when fbi case involves counter - intelligence , organized crime , terrorism , or new charges . may elect responsibility for dea case if new charges are involved . responsible with noted exceptions ( see fbi and dea ) . must notify original agency of the escape . if electing responsibility , fbi must provide written notice to usms . responsibility becomes effective 7 days after notification is received , with interim efforts to be coordinated between fbi and usms . this matter has not been systematically examined . given its charter and with representatives from all justice criminal investigative agencies , oiap is positioned to help ensure that the current division of fugitive responsibilities among justice agencies is well founded and results in the most efficient and effective use of resources . also , by involving representatives from key non - justice agencies , oiap could help to ensure that efficient and effective use of limited law enforcement resources and fewer interagency coordination problems occur across the federal government . although the division of fugitive responsibilities as it has evolved may be appropriate , no systematic assessment of the current alignment of these responsibilities has been conducted to determine whether the differences or inconsistencies are well founded and represent the most efficient and effective use of law enforcement resources . for example , under justice' 1988 fugitive policy ( see app . these comments are noted earlier in this report . justice said that interagency disputes will not be allowed to affect its efforts to pursue federal fugitives and that any disputes that arise will be handled through interagency discussion , cooperation , and departmental oversight .