we have made this change . ncua commented that the report seems to imply that guidance initiated to date by regulators is missing the mark . we did not intend to imply this . to the contrary , as ncua said , regulatory guidance to the entire industry on risks posed by internet banking is a necessary first step . however , as noted in a later section of the report , we encourage regulators to take the next step , which is to work with individual institutions that examiners find are not sufficiently prepared to mitigate risks posed by internet banking . the following are gao's comments on the office of the comptroller of the currency's letter dated june 3 , 1999 . while stating that the agency did not collect information centrally for banks planning to offer internet banking or require advance notification , occ commented that it does conduct a quarterly review of a bank's risk profile , which would include significant changes in bank products or services . according to occ's guidance to examiners , examiners are to assess the overall condition and risk profile of the bank , but they need not answer or complete optional steps . assessing changes in technology , such as internet banking , is an optional step in the guidance . ots commented that the draft of this report did not include information on its web site reporting requirement and the agency's national database . we added language to this report discussing both points . ots commented that the draft of this report did not discuss compliance examinations that are conducted to assess an institution's compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations . we have added to this report a discussion of compliance examinations . ots referred to a section of the report that discusses after - the - fact methods used by other regulators to obtain information that ots gathers through its advance notice requirement . ots commented that it was proactively supervising thrifts as evidenced by its thrift notice requirement . we agree and believe that the report clearly reflects that . ots commented that the draft of this report suggested that the agency only examined internet banking activities through its safety and soundness examination program . we added language to this report discussing compliance examinations . we also have added language to clarify that we are referring to safety and soundness and information systems examinations . in addition to those named above , abiud amaro , bruce engle , robert pollard , nolani traylor , and karen tremba made key contributions to this report . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .