additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . our testimony will provide preliminary observations on the september plan . omb has a crucial and multifaceted role to play in the successful implementation of the results act . under the act , omb is charged with overseeing and guiding agencies' strategic and annual performance planning and reporting . omb has also prepared its own strategic plan based on results act requirements . omb's strategic plan is important as both a statement of the agency's objectives and to underscore to other federal agencies the importance of effectively implementing the results act . our comments today are based on our review of omb's strategic plan and our body of work on omb and the issues the agency is responsible for addressing . omb's strategic plan indicates that the agency will use its annual performance plan , the governmentwide performance plan , other functional management plans , and the president's budget to provide additional information about how it plans to address some of these and other critical management issues . to support the needs of this and other committees , we will continue to review omb's plans and proposals as additional detail concerning objectives , time frames , and priorities is established . our intention is to apply an integrated perspective in looking at these plans , consistent with the intent of the results act , to ensure that omb achieves the results expected by its statutory authorities . since its creation in 1970 , omb has had two distinct but parallel roles . omb serves as a principal staff office to the president by preparing the president's budget , coordinating the president's legislative agenda , and providing policy analysis and advice . omb officials have said it would be worthwhile to more fully discuss the nature and dimension of program evaluation in the context of the results act . the congress has also assigned omb specific responsibilities for ensuring the implementation of a number of statutory management policies and initiatives . such efforts are noteworthy because some of omb's activities , such as developing the president's budget or coordinating the administration's legislative program , present challenges for defining quantifiable performance measures and implementation schedules .