( see app . i for a discussion of our selection of statistical procedures and technical details about the analyses. ) we used two types of analyses — longitudinal and cross - sectional — to compare student outcomes . in both types of analyses , we compared test scores and attendance measures of students attending the privately managed schools with those of students attending matched , nonprivately managed schools . in the cross - sectional analysis , we performed the comparison at the school level , analyzing each year separately , disregarding changes in the student population from year to year . in the longitudinal analysis , we limited the analysis to those students who were enrolled in a privately managed school ( or its matched , comparison school ) for the entire 3-year period . students meeting this criterion were aggregated into a privately managed or nonprivately managed group for the analysis . we did not conduct our own analyses of student outcomes for test scores and attendance in the dade county or minneapolis school districts . instead , we used findings from evaluations conducted by the districts themselves , which sometimes included measures other than test scores and attendance ( for example , suspensions ) . we did not analyze student outcome data for the hartford school district , which was in the relatively early stages of implementation . of the four school districts we visited , baltimore city and hartford were the only districts in which the company was to manage school or district budgets . although hartford was not far enough along in its budget implementation for a financial analysis , we did compare reported operating expenses for baltimore for 1 year before private management with reported operating expenses for 2 years during private management . to carry out our analysis , we obtained and reviewed reported operating expense data provided by the district and eai . we could not , however , determine the reliability of the expenses provided by the baltimore district because audits were not done for individual schools . when we attempted to verify the eai data , eai would not provide the supporting documentation we needed . as a result , we based explanations for differences between reported operating expenses before and during private management solely on oral or written explanations from eai and baltimore city public school district officials . however , for the nine baltimore schools , we were able to reconcile eai's fiscal year 1993 and 1994 expenses with its audited statements of cash receipts and disbursements . we did our study between december 1994 and december 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the four school districts we visited gave private companies varying authority and responsibilities in managing their schools . under the contracts , school districts also retained varying powers and responsibilities and compensated the companies in different ways . except for the minneapolis contract , however , the contracts that school districts had with private companies were similar in their lack of requirements for improving student outcomes , which are traditionally measured by test scores and attendance and graduation rates .