hcfa is reconsidering this proposal . subsection 4432 ( b ) of the bba amended medicare law to require , in effect , nursing facilities , rather than dme suppliers and other nonphysician providers , to bill medicare directly for dme and nonphysician services provided to their patients under medicare part b . this requirement will enable hcfa to identify dme supplied to medicare beneficiaries in nursing facilities . institutional suppliers such as those servicing nursing homes obtain dme at substantial discounts ; establishing a separate fee schedule for dme provided to nursing home patients would allow medicare to pay fees that reflect the institutional discounts , rather than paying retail prices . pursuing this strategy could require new statutory authority for hcfa . the use of competitive contracting for high - volume medical equipment and supplies also has merit . section 4319 of the bba directs the secretary of hhs to undertake up to five competitive acquisition demonstration projects , in three competitive acquisition areas , and to complete these projects by the end of 2002 . under this arrangement , medical equipment and supplies billed to medicare part b would be reimbursed at rates set through competition . hcfa has completed the plans to administer this project but has not finalized the demonstration sites . medicare spends billions of dollars on medical equipment , supplies , and prosthetic and orthotic devices , but the prices medicare pays reflect historical charges and , in some cases , outdated products . similar to previous studies , our work indicates that medicare grossly overpays for some products . although the bba gives hcfa greater flexibility to more quickly adjust medicare fee schedule allowances , some underlying problems need to be resolved for hcfa to most effectively use its new authority . medicare overpays some claims for dme because it does not know specifically what it is paying for . resolving this problem is fundamental to making sure that medicare fees are reasonable . although upns offer a solution to the problem , hcfa and hhs are reluctant to require upns on medicare claims . the current hcpcs codes and the fee schedule allowances do not reflect changes in products and prices brought about by improved technology and a more competitive marketplace . some products that were once custom - made are now available as lower - cost , off - the - shelf items , but in some cases the medicare fee schedule lists only the more expensive , custom - fabricated product . finally , medicare pays institutional suppliers and retailers the same fee schedule allowances , even though large suppliers benefit from lower product acquisition costs . medicare does not currently have a mechanism to set separate fees for large institutional suppliers and retailers so both types of providers could be fairly reimbursed for their costs .