this is not the case . furthermore , survey choices were categorized as “would stay,” “would leave and choose tricare standard,” “neither , or would choose different plan,” and “don't know.” to reduce the number of “don't know” responses , interviewers were instructed to probe respondents and try to force them to make a decision . one probe was “we're not asking you to make a firm commitment right now , but we are interested in knowing which one you would be most likely to choose on the basis of the information i just read to you.” because interviewers tried to force respondents to change “don't know” answers , the responses in these cases may not reliably predict the respondent's answer . finally , the average length of time individuals took to respond to the survey was about 4 minutes . this short period probably did not allow most individuals to weigh and respond thoughtfully about the medical plan they would choose . when analyzing cost differences among respondents , the ustf actuaries combined the “don't know” responses with the group who responded they would disenroll . this caused an overstatement of the number of respondents the ustfs estimated will leave . also , in analyzing potential cost differences , the ustf actuaries did not verify the claims data the ustfs reported . in addition , four of the ustfs provided incomplete data for the surveyed households . they provided less than 12 months of claims data and / or omitted such services as outpatient prescription drugs and care provided under subcontract with non - ustf providers . for bayley seton and johns hopkins , 172 and 106 , respectively , of the 300 surveyed households for each facility were dropped because no claims data were available for these households . furthermore , the ustf report stated that the ustfs had to perform some adjustments to produce theoretical billed charges . in effect , a percentage of the claims costs the ustfs provided is incomplete , or estimated ; thus , such data cannot be validated and are of questionable use for estimating the potential cost effects of adverse selection . according to actuarial research , any time a health plan increases a member's out - of - pocket costs relative to competing plan choices , some adverse selection can occur . but for the ustfs to experience the 40-percent disenrollment rate they estimated , the cost differences would have to be significantly higher than what would exist between the ustfs' new cost shares and tricare standard . as table 2 shows , the ustf households that face the greatest out - of - pocket increase — $460 — relative to tricare standard are those incurring no medical expenditures . most ustf households , or those incurring some medical expenditures , will have even lower relative cost differences . according to actuarial experience , such relative cost difference levels will not result in major enrollment shifts . moreover , a congressional research service study of the 1987 fehbp open season found that out - of - pocket cost differences among plans had to be at least $1,000 — $2,000 in 1996 dollars — to result in more than a 10-percent plan disenrollment rate .