all such comparisons have some inherent limitations . after evaluating the alternatives , we decided to use va's competitive contracting rates , with some adjustments , for our rate comparisons . we did not use medicaid payment rates for our comparisons because each state has wide latitude in determining the benefits it covers and its reimbursement rates . also , since medicare is the largest single payer of home oxygen benefits , many states base their payment levels on medicare's fee schedule . similarly , we found that private insurance companies use a wide range of methods to establish payment rates . some firms base their fees on medicare's reimbursement levels , while others pay submitted charges or negotiate rates on a case - by - case basis . we found that some private insurers pay more than medicare and others pay less . we were not able to identify any insurance company with a large number of beneficiaries on long - term home oxygen therapy whose rates could serve as the basis for a nationwide comparison with medicare's rates . nor could we identify any private insurer that had done a study to determine the appropriate reimbursement level for home oxygen services . furthermore , the coverage criteria for home oxygen varied both from company to company and within the same company depending on the type of coverage purchased by an individual or a group health plan . medicare managed care plans that we contacted were unwilling to provide us information on the rates they negotiate with oxygen suppliers because they consider that information to be proprietary . however , during our patient file reviews at oxygen suppliers , we identified two medicare managed care plans that pay about $200 a month for services comparable to those provided to fee - for - service medicare beneficiaries . because the availability of these data was very limited , we could not use them for our analysis . benefits to 23,000 patients at a cost of almost $26.5 million . va's medical criteria for using supplemental oxygen to treat pulmonary insufficiency are the same as medicare's . further , clinical experts and suppliers told us that the home oxygen service needs of va and medicare patients with pulmonary insufficiency are essentially the same . we analyzed claims and charge data compiled by the four durable medical equipment regional carriers and the statistical analysis durable medical equipment regional carrier . these data provided information on how the medicare home oxygen benefit has grown and how suppliers structure their medicare billing for the different types of home oxygen systems . the statistical analysis durable medical equipment regional carrier began compiling national claims data for home oxygen in 1994 , so we concentrated on data from the past 2 fiscal years . we supplemented the national medicare claims data with information from home oxygen suppliers' records for about 550 medicare patients . we obtained data on va payments for home oxygen from original contractor invoices for a nationwide sample of about 5,000 va patients , drawn from 46 of the 162 va medical centers that have home oxygen contracts . these 46 va medical centers included at least one va medical center from each of va's 22 veterans' integrated service networks .