for most patients , this was an acceptable alternative . however , some patients cannot tolerate the conserving devices or are unable to maneuver e tanks on carts , especially in the snow . this supplier said he consulted every patient's physician and obtained permission to make the equipment change . further , the patients were tested to ensure that they were able to tolerate the new lightweight portable equipment . other firms stated that while they will not change the oxygen delivery systems they are currently providing to patients , they will provide liquid systems to new patients only if they have high - liter - flow needs or if their ambulatory needs cannot be met with the compressed gas systems available . in a november 1997 report , we made several recommendations to hcfa about its implementation of the bba provisions , including that it monitor trends in medicare beneficiaries' access to the various types of home oxygen equipment ; restructure the modality - neutral payment , if warranted ; educate prescribing physicians about their right to specify the home oxygen systems that best meet their patients' needs ; and establish service standards for home oxygen suppliers . hcfa has made only modest beginnings in addressing the bba provisions and our recommendations . as required by the bba , hcfa has contracted with a pro to evaluate access to and quality of home oxygen equipment and services provided to medicare patients . the pro plans to gather evidence from various sources , including medicare claims data on equipment use patterns , hospitalization rates , and utilization of home health services by home oxygen patients . an important component of this study will be a survey of beneficiaries , suppliers , and physicians . changes in supplier practices will be an indicator of the impact of the payment reduction . the pro will use this information to assess whether the payment reduction has affected the types of equipment and level of services provided to home oxygen patients . hcfa has not decided whether this will be a one - time assessment or an ongoing effort to monitor trends . results from the pro study are not expected until january 2000 . the bba gave hhs the authority to restructure the modality - neutral payment system for home oxygen , but hcfa has not established an ongoing process for monitoring access to determine if such a restructuring is warranted . hcfa officials said they will use the results of the pro study and the competitive bidding demonstration project to evaluate the need to restructure the oxygen payment system . however , the pro study will not be completed until at least january 2000 , or 2 years after the first payment reduction , and neither project will provide hcfa information on access problems as they develop . hcfa has the ability to monitor access indicators but has not done so . for example , hcfa could ask its contractors to track beneficiary complaints , such as insufficient refills of portable tanks or , as occurred in anchorage , problems with access to liquid oxygen systems .