va rpm data . one of the ways that va facilities adjust to resource limitations is by rationing care to veterans . as a result , there are differences in the provision of care to veterans among facilities . some facilities have adequate resources to provide services to all categories of veterans ; whereas , others find they must curtail their services . they do so by limiting the categories of veterans served , the types of services offered , and the conditions for which veterans can receive care . when we reported on these differences in 1993 , va responded that the rpm system — under development at the time — would help overcome these differences . specifically , va officials indicated that to address wide variations in veterans' access to health care systemwide , va was designing a new resource planning and management process with several objectives , including the elimination of gaps in service to veterans systemwide . more specifically , you asked us to determine the following: to what extent does va's allocation system provide for an equitable distribution of resources among va facilities ? what are the causes of any inequity in the distribution of resources , and what changes , if any , would help ensure that the system more equitably distributes resources ? in september 1995 , we sent you our preliminary observations . this report presents our final results . to accomplish our objectives , we first needed to apply a definition of the term “equity.” we based our evaluation of the equity of the system's distribution on va's vision for rpm . we considered the following two elements to be characteristics of an equitable system: it provides comparable resources for comparable workload . it provides resources so that veterans within the same priority categories have the same availability of care , to the extent practical , throughout the va health care system . we then reviewed va documents and analyzed rpm system data to determine the degree to which these two elements were present . the remaining $1.8 billion in non - rpm - allocated funds paid for leases , travel , and patient care programs such as dental programs and women veterans health programs . in part , these funds also were to pay for contingencies that arose through the year . an assessment of the equity of these allocations , and their impact on the relative equity of the rpm system allocations , could not be made with available data . while va's financial system accounts for individual transactions to facilities throughout the year , it does not summarize for each program the amount received by each facility . va officials agreed that some non - rpm resources support patient care operations , such as those for prosthetics or facility activations , and indicated that they had conducted special evaluations of non - rpm accounts to determine whether any of the funds should be allocated through the rpm system . as a result of these evaluations , the percentage of the medical care funds allocated through rpm increased from 66 percent in fiscal year 1994 to 75 percent in fiscal year 1995 .