washington has begun to do this . the state conducts monthly customer satisfaction surveys of random groups of beneficiaries and surveys of beneficiaries who switch mcos to obtain reasons for plan changes . both surveys include questions pertaining to beneficiary knowledge about their managed care plans . allowing mcos to directly market to medicaid beneficiaries — whether to boost enrollment in voluntary managed care programs or to reach newly eligible uninsured in certain mandatory programs — has resulted in some abusive practices that states have found difficult to prevent . as states move to mandatory enrollment , they are increasingly retaining primary responsibility for the enrollment process or contracting with enrollment brokers . the four states we visited that are considered to have effective enrollment programs are focusing on educating beneficiaries about how to access services in a plan and counseling them to choose a primary care provider and mco that best meets their health care needs . for the majority of medicaid beneficiaries , who are accustomed to a fee - for - service system in which they can choose their own provider , learning how to navigate the managed care system and choosing a plan can be a perplexing process . this process also can be difficult for new beneficiaries who are unfamiliar with fee - for - service or managed care . consequently , some states believe that investing resources in educating beneficiaries — with an emphasis on choosing a primary care physician and appropriately using health care services — is important for the beneficiary's smooth transition to this new health care delivery approach . differences in the relative effectiveness of how a state communicates with beneficiaries or who handles these communications have not been fully evaluated . although in - person counseling can be more time - consuming and resource - intensive than mail and telephone contacts , this type of counseling may best meet the states' aim to match beneficiaries to an mco and primary care provider . learning about managed care and choosing an mco can be a daunting responsibility , and some states believe that face - to - face interaction results in better understanding and use of the program . when faced with the decision to keep the education and enrollment activities in - house or to contract them out , states are increasingly electing to contract with an enrollment broker . again , however , there is little evidence that this approach is more effective or less costly than performing functions in - house . rather , states , such as the ones we visited , have made their decisions on the basis of factors such as available staff resources and the ability to meet peak workload demands associated with program expansions . also lacking are strong performance measures of effective education and enrollment efforts . while the rate at which beneficiaries select an mco is one available indicator , it alone does not reflect the degree to which medicaid beneficiaries understand and appropriately use the managed care system . focused analyses of complaints and voluntary disenrollment patterns — especially within the first 90 days of enrollment — and well - designed customer surveys are additional tools that states might explore to further strengthen their education and enrollment processes .