( see fig . although hcfa has been studying ways to provide comparative benefits information nationwide since mid - 1995 , it has decided not to distribute printed information directly to beneficiaries . instead , hcfa plans to make information on benefits , copayments , and deductibles available on the internet . hcfa expects the primary users of this information to be beneficiary advocates , insurance counselors , and government entities — not beneficiaries . as of september 6 , 1996 , hcfa expected the information to be available electronically by june 1997 — at the earliest . hcfa has a wealth of data , collected for program administration and contract oversight purposes , that can indicate beneficiaries' relative satisfaction with individual hmos . the data include statistics on beneficiary disenrollment and complaints . hcfa also collects other information that could be useful to beneficiaries , including hmos' financial data and reports from hcfa's periodic monitoring visits to hmos . as noted , however , hcfa does not routinely distribute this potentially useful information . because of medicare beneficiaries' freedom to disenroll from managed care or change plans in any month , disenrollment data objectively measure consumer behavior toward and indicate their satisfaction with a specific hmo . disenrollments may be more reliable than some other satisfaction measures — such as surveys — because disenrollment data do not depend on beneficiary recollection . enrollment and disenrollment data , although collected primarily to determine payments to hmos , can be used to construct several useful indicators of beneficiary satisfaction , such as the annual disenrollment rate: total number of disenrollees as a percentage of total enrollment averaged over the year , cancellation rate: percent of signed applications canceled before the “rapid” disenrollment rate: percent of new enrollees who disenroll within 3 “long - term” disenrollment rate: percent of enrollees who disenroll after 12 rate of return to fee for service: percent of disenrollees who return to traditional medicare rather than enroll in another hmo , and retroactive disenrollment rate: percent of disenrollments processed retroactively by hcfa ( typically done in cases of alleged beneficiary misunderstanding or sales agent abuse ) . disenrollment rates that are high compared with rates for competing hmos can serve as early warning indicators for beneficiaries , hmos , and hcfa . ( see ch . 3 for a discussion on interpreting these indicators and an analysis of disenrollment rates for hmos serving the miami and los angeles markets. ) disenrollment rates have already been used to help measure membership stability and enrollee satisfaction in the health plan employer data and information set ( hedis ) , developed by large employers , hmos , and hcfa under the auspices of the national committee on quality assurance ( ncqa ) . however , hedis' measure of disenrollment behavior is limited to a single indicator — an annual disenrollment rate . hcfa could perform a more extensive analysis of the disenrollment data available now . the relative volume of beneficiary complaints about hmos is another satisfaction indicator that hcfa could readily provide beneficiaries . hcfa regional staff routinely receive beneficiary complaints of sales abuses , the unresponsiveness of plans to beneficiary concerns , and other more routine service and care issues .