( see fig . the distribution of food stamp households with an illegal alien parent is only slightly different , with 54 percent of the cases in california , 23 percent in texas , and 4 percent in arizona . in addition , the majority of ssi cases of illegal alien payees for citizen children that records allowed us to identify were located in california and texas . in california , households composed of an illegal alien parent and citizen children represented about 10 percent of the state's afdc and food stamp caseloads in 1995 and accounted for $720 million in afdc and food stamp benefits combined . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . appendix i provides more details on our methodology . an estimated 5 million illegal aliens resided in the united states in 1996 , according to ins . official estimates , however , are not available on the number of children born to illegal aliens in the united states . illegal alien parents may apply on behalf of their children for those federal welfare benefits to which their children are entitled as citizens . a household composed of an illegal alien parent and a citizen child gains access to federal welfare benefits by virtue of the child's eligibility . the afdc , food stamp , and ssi programs generally do not provide direct payment of benefits to minors — children under 18 — requiring that their benefits be paid through an authorized representative payee , typically the custodial parent . in such cases , the citizenship status of the parent is not a consideration in deciding who the payee should be . the rationale is that the parent of an eligible child is in the best position to make decisions on how benefits should be spent on behalf of his or her child . for housing assistance , hud provides funds to a public housing authority or owner of a housing unit to subsidize the rent for an eligible household . under hud rental programs , a household composed of an illegal alien and a citizen would be eligible for assistance if the citizen met eligibility criteria and assistance was available . although illegal alien parents are not eligible for assistance , their income and assets are taken into account when determining the eligibility of and benefit amounts for their citizen children . table 1 shows the average monthly benefit amounts under the various programs . recipients often receive assistance from more than one program . in 1995 , about 87 percent of afdc households also received food stamp benefits and 31 percent received housing assistance . no individual may receive both afdc and ssi benefits . the 1996 welfare reform legislation made sweeping changes to welfare programs for needy families , but it did not directly affect the eligibility of illegal aliens' citizen children .