the department had no comments . our work was conducted from october 1995 to july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during the last 15 years , tuition at public colleges has risen almost three times more than household incomes have . this rise reflects two main trends: public college expenditures have generally risen more than inflation , and states have paid a lower portion of expenditures with appropriated funds . during this same period , growth in grant aid to students has not matched the increase in tuition . as a result of these factors , many students and their families have borrowed more to finance the cost of college . from school year 1980-81 through 1994-95 , increases in tuition at public colleges considerably outpaced increases in both median household income and inflation . from school year 1980-81 through 1994-95 , the average tuition for full - time , in - state students increased from $804 per year to $2,689 , or 234 percent . during approximately the same period , median household income rose 82 percent , from $17,710 to $32,264 , and the cost of living — as measured by cpi — rose 74 percent . computed on an annualized basis , the rates of increase were about 9.0 percent for tuition , 4.4 percent for median household income , and 4.0 percent for cpi . figure 2.1 compares the cumulative percentage increase in tuition , median household income , and consumer prices over the 15-year period beginning with school year 1980-81 . the program charges roughly the current cost of the tuition and of other educational benefits . purchasers pay either in a lump sum or in a series of payments . some states are reluctant to risk the possibility that income from investing the premiums that participants pay into these plans will not keep pace with the rising cost of education . we identified two state programs ( michigan and wyoming ) that have experienced the effects of this risk . in michigan , according to state officials , the original program was suspended because it proved actuarially unsound . a major concern was uncertainty surrounding federal tax liability , on which a court has since ruled in the state's favor . after being suspended for a period , the program was reinstated in response to the public's interest . however , the new program is priced considerably higher and , unlike the earlier program , subject to liquidation if it becomes actuarially unsound . wyoming operates a contract - type program that is also experiencing actuarial difficulties . when participants begin to redeem their $5,000 unit contracts next year , the accounts' principal plus accumulated interest will fall considerably short of covering the cost of tuition , according to a university of wyoming official . the state , in paying the difference , will subsidize these contracts . among other available savings options , some states have developed tax - advantaged debt instruments they identify as college savings bonds . these bonds are generally zero - coupon bonds , sold at a discount , with the difference between face value and purchase price representing interest .