reports are to be filed with the director . the state currently has a law in place , but it does not become effective until 1999 . the state is drafting rules . annual reporting is required . every hmo must show evidence that the grievance procedures have been reviewed and approved by enrollee representatives through their participation on the governing body or through other specified mechanisms . the state does not ( 1 ) provide for explicit time periods , ( 2 ) require graduated levels for the internal appeals process , ( 3 ) require hmos to establish an independent external review process , or ( 4 ) address the required qualifications of the reviewer . every hmo must submit for the director's approval , and thereafter maintain , a system for the resolution of grievances concerning the provision of health care services or other matters concerning operation of the hmo . the grievance procedures must be fully and clearly communicated to all enrollees , and information concerning such procedures shall be readily available to enrollees . the state provides for specific time periods and requires written notification of the determination . notice of the determination made at the final appeal step of the hmo's grievance process shall include a “notice of availability of the department.” the enrollee has the right to attend and participate in the formal grievance proceedings . the grievance committee must meet at the main office of the hmo or at another office designated by the hmo if the main office is not within 50 miles of the grievant's home address . the committee must consider the enrollee's request pertaining to the time and date of the meeting . the state does not ( 1 ) require graduated levels for the internal appeals process , ( 2 ) require hmos to establish an independent external review process , or ( 3 ) address the required qualifications of the reviewer . health maintenance or limited service health maintenance organizations must establish and maintain a grievance procedure , approved by the commissioner , for the resolution of grievances initiated by enrollees and subscribers . the organization is required to provide each enrollee and subscriber with information on how to file a grievance . hmos must provide a toll - free telephone number through which the enrollee can contact the hmo at no cost to the enrollee to obtain information and to file grievances . grievances can be filed orally or in writing . hmos are required to provide timely , adequate , and appropriate notice to each enrollee or subscriber of the grievance procedure . a written description of the enrollee's or subscriber's right to file a grievance must be posted by the provider in a conspicuous public location in each facility that offers services on behalf of the hmo . notification of determinations must be in writing . explicit time period and qualifications of the reviewer are also addressed . the state requires an expedited review process . hmos must provide enrollees and subscribers the opportunity to appear in person at the review panel hearing or to communicate with the panel through appropriate other means if the enrollee or subscriber is unable to appear in person .