i and ii ) . dod agrees that the sharing of health care resources between the dod and va is a worthwhile approach that can result in overall efficiencies for both agencies . dod does not agree , however , that disagreements between dod and va have delayed the implementation of sharing agreements . following are other dod comments: the progress of the asheville agreement will be reviewed and possible additional sharing opportunities will be discussed in october 1994 by the va / dod health care resources sharing policy and operations subcommittee ; guidance is being developed for issuance to the military services to evaluate the possibility and feasibility of using and sharing medical resources when it is cost - effective to do so ; and a new dod instruction on the va / dod health care resources sharing program is being developed , and its issuance is anticipated by the end of fiscal year 1995 . if you have any questions concerning the contents of this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . other major contributors to this report were stephen p. backhus , assistant director , robert p. pickering , senior analyst , and donald c. hahn , advisor . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these differences led to many revisions of the agreement . more specifically , according to va officials , dod wanted va hospitals to follow champus procedures for seeking reimbursement by filing claims with champus fiscal intermediaries and collecting copayments and deductibles from beneficiaries . also , dod wanted to use its own payment methodology , the diagnosis related group system , for reimbursing va hospitals for the care they provided . further , dod wanted va to adhere to champus standards for utilization review and quality assurance . va , on the other hand , wanted its hospitals to be treated as military hospitals , which have no copayments and deductibles . va also wanted to bill the military services directly and not use fiscal intermediaries , and it wanted to bill champus on a per diem system rather than the diagnosis related group system . in addition , va wanted to use its own utilization management and quality review systems .