the cost of gme is unclear . in may 1997 , the dod inspector general reported that gme costs exceed $125 million annually , with per - student costs ranging from about $20,000 to $100,000 , but reported also that military facilities did not accurately account for such costs . dod's office of health affairs is responsible for developing overall gme policy guidance and promoting gme program coordination and integration among the services . the services are responsible for ensuring that gme goals are met and for individual gme programs . civilian boards review dod's gme programs to ensure that they meet such medical standards as minimum numbers of trainees per program and can thus be accredited . gme is taught at the services' facilities throughout the united states , as shown in figure 1 . several dod policies directly affect the services' gme program size , locations , and specialty types . in 1996 , for example , dod issued a requirement that medical force levels including gme trainee numbers be linked to each service's wartime and operational support requirements.this was a major departure from when each service did as much gme training as it had capacity for or when it trained to the prior year's level . dod also defined gme trainees as nondeployable unless a full mobilization state has been reached . deploying trainees would disrupt the specialty physician pipeline and would likely result in lost gme program accreditation . thus , as defined , about 25 percent of active duty physicians are not deployable . a 1994 dod strategic plan set forth the following added gme rightsizing principles: base realignment and closure ( brac ) 1995 would determine whether further sites conducting gme training will close . gme programs having no new trainees for 2 years are to be phased out . duplicate washington , d.c. , and san antonio , texas , gme programs should be integrated to the extent possible . the number of gme trainees in dod medical facilities should not exceed their aggregate fiscal year 1994 proportion of all active - duty physicians . in response to the 1994 plan , brac 1995 identified two hospitals for closure that had gme programs , thus eliminating 177 gme positions . moreover , about 5 months after announcing the portsmouth gme closure decision , the navy surgeon general's office completed a study of health care demographics and workload covering the bethesda , san diego , and portsmouth areas , where it has major health care concentrations . that study concluded that , on the basis of population , workload , and other factors , gme should be preserved at bethesda and san diego rather than portsmouth . along with his portsmouth gme closure decision , the surgeon general announced plans to close the bremerton , washington , naval hospital's gme family practice program . but the mepc had specifically recommended against family practice program closures , concluding that such residencies were needed services . the surgeon general , however , had opted for closure based on the bremerton program's proximity to the madigan army medical center's gme family practice — a key factor that the mepc did not consider .