only the local school had such authority . mis personnel had limited influence over the schools to ensure that corrections were made quickly and accurately , according to dcps officials . furthermore , while duplicate record checks were done , officials told us , the checks were not done on a regular , routine schedule . in addition , individuals who had helped with data quality control in the past as well as those who had monitored attendance were moved in early 1997 to facilities without office telephones or data lines . dcps' practice of allowing schools to enroll , without restriction , students who live outside school attendance boundaries increased the possibility of a student's having multiple enrollment records for school year 1996-97 . students did not have to enroll in the school serving the geographic area where they lived but could enroll in any dcps school if the principal allowed . for example , a student could have gone first to the school serving his or her area , filled out an enrollment card , and been entered into sis . subsequently , the student may have gone to another school , filled out another enrollment card , and — if the person entering this record in sis chose to override the safeguard — been entered into sis a second time . in addition , some principals reported that schools actively sought to attract out - of - boundary students to increase their enrollment . dcps' official enrollment count of 78,648 included not only regular elementary and secondary students , but also other categories of students excluded from enrollment counts in other districts when the counts are used for funding purposes . for example , dcps included in its enrollment count students identified as tuition - paying nonresidents of the district of columbia and students above and below the mandatory age for public education in the district , including head start participants,prekindergarten students ( age 4 ) , preschool students ( age 0 to 3 ) , and some senior high and special education students aged 20 and older . in contrast , the three states we visited reported that they exclude any student who is above or below mandatory school age or who is fully funded from other sources from enrollment counts used for funding purposes . furthermore , even though the district of columbia auditor has suggested that students unable to document their residency be excluded from the official enrollment count , whether they pay tuition or not , dcps included these students in its enrollment count for school year 1996-97 . in contrast with the dcps process , students in the boston and chelsea , massachusetts , school districts enroll at central parent information centers ( pic ) , which are separate and independent from the schools , officials told us . individual schools in these two districts cannot enroll new students , we were told . all enrollment activities , including assignment of all students to schools , take place at pics .