mcnamara . “pathology of fatal west nile virus infections in native and exotic birds during the 1999 outbreak in new york city , new york.” veterinarypathology , vol . 37 ( may 3 , 2000 ) , pp . asnis , d. , r. conetta , a. teixeira , and others . “the west nile virus outbreak of 1999 in new york: the flushing hospital experience.” clinical infectiousdiseases , vol . 30 ( feb. 29 , 2000 ) , pp . how can this incident be translated into increasing the likelihood that the public health network can detect similar threats and then identify and contain them more effectively in the future ? the public health community is doing a great deal to respond — both to this particular outbreak , which continues to unfold , and to the larger set of concerns it raised . the lessons we identified are , to some extent , already part of that ongoing effort . these lessons support the view of many that “an outbreak is an outbreak is an outbreak” — that is , whether an outbreak is intentional or natural , the public health response of determining the causes and containing its spread will be the same . thus , policies and actions that improve the capabilities of the public health infrastructure — including those that improve the animal health infrastructure — do more than help the nation better prepare for a potential bioterrorist event . these same improvements will also increase our ability to detect and contain the more likely sort of outbreak that starts with a global traveler , a wayward mosquito , or a migrating bird . we provided a copy of the draft report to cdc , usda , and new york city and state department of health officials for comment . cdc and the new york city department of health provided written comments , which are provided in appendices iv and v. usda and the new york state department of health also provided comments , which are summarized below . generally , officials agreed with the lessons and conclusions drawn from experience that are presented in the report . the commenting agencies also offered several observations on various aspects of the report draft . cdc said that its strategic plans for emerging infectious diseases and bioterrorism should be mentioned in the report , and we have done so . cdc expressed a concern with the emphasis in the draft on those aspects that did not go as well as others . because this report was designed to analyze the events of the fall of 1999 and identify lessons learned for the nation's preparedness , it necessarily focused on those things that were perceived as problems at that time . cdc also expressed a concern that the report overemphasized the role of the convergence of the human and animal investigations , because laboratory tests conducted by the california researcher and others on the human side were also showing that the virus was not the one initially identified as the cause at the same time as the animal tests . we agree that these contributions were significant , and we made clarifications to the text to recognize them .