no waivers were granted . no waivers were granted . requirements concerning the age span of class groups or class size . does state have authority to waive state requirements ? state did not provide data . rules governing charter schools . state - mandated holidays ; daily physical education requirement . requirements to offer third and fourth year of foreign language ; changes to the length of school day or year ; block scheduling of physical education periods . administrative rules that apply to special education . changes to the length of the school day or year ; class load and teaching load requirements . state did not provide data . changes to the length of the school day or year . changes to the length of the school day . changes to the length of the school day or year to make additional time available for staff development . state did not provide data . changes to the length of the school day or year ; student course requirements ; state special education requirements . no waivers were granted . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . class size and staffing requirements ; state curriculum requirements ; teacher certification requirements . staffing requirements ; student testing ; requirements for summer school meal program ; rules concerning placing special education students in certain private schools . ( continued ) does state have authority to waive state requirements ? state did not provide data . curriculum requirements ; charter schools . state special education requirements ; certification requirements ; physical education requirements ; changes to the length of the school day or year . changes to the school day to accommodate block scheduling . changes to the school day to accommodate block scheduling ; high school graduation requirements . state did not provide data . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . curriculum requirements . state did not provide data . state did not provide data . state did not provide data . age requirements for general equivalency diploma ( ged ) testing ; curriculum changes ; teacher certification . state did not provide data . requirements concerning the age span of class groups ; class size ; tutorial services . special education requirements ; superintendent licensing ; extended school year . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . certification requirements for title i teachers . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . staffing requirements . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . state special education requirements . curriculum and testing requirements . ( continued ) does state have authority to waive state requirements ? types of waivers most commonly granted restrictions on the amount of funds a district can carry over from one fiscal year to the next . state does not have waiver authority . no waivers were granted . changes to the length of the school day or year ; teaching hours ; requirements concerning library and counseling services . changes to the length of the school day or year . changes to the length of the school day or year .