ii . apps . iii and iv contain the aggregate responses to the two surveys. ) vocational education prepares students for an increasingly demanding labor market through an organized sequence of courses that are directly related to preparing students for employment in jobs that do not require a bachelor's degree . for example , one school district offers high school students the opportunity to acquire the technical skills needed for careers in fields like automobile repair , medical assisting , or electronics . vocational education programs are funded at the federal , state , and local levels . funding provided under the 1984 perkins act is the federal government's primary form of assistance for vocational education . although federal financing accounts for only a small percentage of expenditures on vocational education , the perkins act provided about $1.4 billion in 1993-94 , compared with approximately $1 billion in 1990-91 . in addition to eliminating the set - aside requirement for special populations , the perkins act amendments included several provisions intended to improve the quality of vocational education . to help ensure that programs are of sufficient size and scope to be effective , the amendments set minimum funding thresholds at the secondary school level . specifically , this report addresses the following questions: for students from special population groups , what changes have taken place in ( 1 ) participation in vocational education , including participation in innovative programs ; ( 2 ) availability of support services ; and ( 3 ) college attendance and employment following graduation ? for vocational education programs , to what extent have schools and school districts adopted recommended approaches to enhance quality — such as ( 1 ) school - to - work transition activities , ( 2 ) integration of academic and vocational learning , ( 3 ) development of competency standards for students , and ( 4 ) increased use of quality indicators for program assessment ? in 1993-94 , perkins funding included $104 million for tech - prep programs , which link secondary vocational education programs to postsecondary institutions in a coordinated program leading to an associate's degree or certificate . for example , one school district operates a tech - prep program in allied health services that prepares students for a career as a medical assistant , emergency medical technician , or surgical technologist . the perkins amendments also encourage schools and districts to integrate vocational and academic instruction , so that vocational students can develop a better appreciation of how academic learning is related to job requirements . in addition , the amendments require recipients ( schools and districts ) to evaluate the effectiveness of their vocational education programs and in particular to evaluate the progress of special population students . for example , placement data on high school graduates can indicate whether students have continued their education or obtained employment in their field . we collected information for this study through two surveys . to obtain information for 1990-91 , and again for 1993-94 , we mailed questionnaires to a nationally representative sample of public secondary schools and their associated central district offices . furthermore , employment and educational outcomes for special population students — relative to vocational education students as a whole — were unchanged .