additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . other estimates of the extent of job lock among those with health insurance have varied . although one study found little evidence of job lock , other studies we reviewed found that job mobility was reduced by at least 20 percent for individuals with health insurance and more for those who could have high medical expenses . for example , one study estimated that job mobility for workers with health care coverage was reduced by nearly one - third for married men , over one - third for workers with large families ( a proxy for high medical expenses ) , and two - thirds for workers with a pregnant wife . another study reported that employer - based health care coverage reduced job mobility by 23 percent for men and over 30 percent for women . on the basis of these results , the authors of the latter study conservatively estimated that approximately 1 million additional workers would have changed jobs but for job lock . the largest group of people affected by the proposed legislation is those who change jobs . on the basis of our analysis of the cps , over 20 million americans changed jobs in 1993 . since the cost of health insurance coverage is often cited as the most critical determinant of whether firms or individuals purchase coverage , the expected effects on premiums are crucial in determining the net impact of state and federal insurance reforms on the level of coverage . high expected costs for an individual can mean a high premium , particularly for individual and small group policies . if government restrictions constrain premiums for individuals or a group , then insurers may be forced to raise premiums for all other workers . although empirical evidence is sparse , the possible price effects relate more directly to other health insurance reforms , such as guaranteed issue , than to portability . some people will remain in a job or turn down job offers because of health insurance concerns . a few people who exhaust their cobra continuation coverage , or are ineligible for cobra coverage after leaving a job , will be unable to purchase individual coverage at any price if they have a severe medical condition , such as acquired immune deficiency syndrome , severe diabetes , or heart disease.finally , individuals who change employers may find that , even if the employer offers a choice of health plans , their choice is limited to health plans without preexisting condition exclusions .