b . compliance review for building or fire codes includes reviewing architectural plans for conformance with building , mechanical , electrical , or related structural and life / safety codes . c. compliance review for education specifications or other state regulations includes reviewing architectural plans or other documents for conformance with state education specifications such as for the size and use of school building space . it also includes reviewing documents for conformance with other state requirements , such as the use of women - or minority - owned companies , or wages paid to school construction workers . new york's sea staff present workshops and publish newsletter articles on regulations and facilities planning as well as architectural , engineering , and legal issues . they also provide information to about 100 telephone callers per day . staff review architectural plans for compliance with the building code and education specifications . they assess the need for projects , approve sites , enforce the state environmental review act , determine eligibility for state building aid and petroleum overcharge funds , issue building permits , and approve leases . the sea oversees a fire inspection program that enforces building and fire codes for existing buildings through annual inspections conducted by lea - hired inspectors . staff certify completed projects for occupancy , provide on - call assistance for environmental hazard problems and are implementing a requirement for lea comprehensive 5-year capital plans . washington's sea school facilities section staff provide information to local school districts on health and safety issues and ensure that state - assisted school construction projects comply with state law . the section provides assistance to school districts and other state and federal agencies by acting as an information clearinghouse . wisconsin's sea staff provide assistance interpreting the building code and health and safety regulations — usually by telephone or sending documents by mail . the staff present occasional on - site workshops , referrals to other agencies , and assistance with lea facilities plans . nearly half of the states maintained information on the condition of school facilities . some collected it on an ongoing basis , while others had done a recent , one - time study . most states maintained information on facilities other than condition . only 10 states maintained extremely limited or no information on facilities . table ii.3 describes the extent of facilities information maintained by each state . maintains no information or only extremely limited information ( continued ) . r. jerry aiken , computer specialist ( programmer / analyst ) d. catherine baltzell , supervisory social science analyst sandra l. baxter , senior evaluator tamara a. lumpkin , evaluator stanley h. stenersen , senior evaluator virginia a. vanderlinde , evaluator dianne l. whitman , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .