homeless at discharge . competitively employed or in va's cwt / tr at discharge . unemployed at discharge . specific approaches within the continuum of care for homelessness vary with the needs of the subgroup being served . these needs may involve medical , mental health , substance abuse , or other problems ; and different needs may predominate at different times during an episode of homelessness . we visited collaborative programs that target a range of different groups of the homeless ( for example , homeless with substance abuse problems , homeless with serious mental illnesses ) , thus representing different possible elements in a continuum of care for homeless veterans . each of the programs we reviewed has the potential to be replicated , and we included two projects that have been empirically evaluated . convalescent medical care . christ house ( washington , d.c. ) and haven ii ( los angeles , calif. ) address the need for convalescent medical care among homeless persons who do not warrant ( and are not being considered for ) inpatient medical treatment , but whose medical conditions are likely to worsen without continued attention in a stable environment . christ house in washington , d.c. , is a 34-bed medical recovery facility with a staff that includes nurses , a nurse practitioner , and doctors . care is provided to homeless persons with a variety of medical problems , such as postsurgical recovery , temporary instability associated with hiv or diabetes , or sickness from chemotherapy . homeless veterans placed at christ house through an hcmi contract may stay for several months , receiving medical attention , sobriety support , and social service support as necessary . housed at discharge . employed at discharge . improved psychiatric symptoms . improved alcohol symptoms . follow - up planned at discharge . supported housing: change in problems at discharge 29 . improved alcohol problems at discharge . improved psychiatric problems at discharge . supported housing: status of discharges 31 . mutually agreed - on termination . supported housing outcomes 32 . discharge to homeless or unknown housing . turnover rate 1 . annual turnover rate . method of program contact 2 . community entry ( includes outreach initiated by va staff and referrals by shelter staff or other non - va staff ) . va inpatient and outpatient referrals ( includes referrals from the hchv program ) . usual residence in month prior to admission to program 4 . outdoors / shelter . institution ( includes health care facilities and prisons ) . own house , room , or apartment . length of time homeless 7 . at risk for homelessness ( hchv uses the term “no time homeless” ) . appropriateness for admission 8 . no medical / psychiatric diagnosis . length of stay 9 . mean length of stay . method of discharge 10 . domiciled at discharge . completed program . asked to leave . left by choice . deviation from median performance 13 . alcohol problems improved . drug problems improved . mental health problems improved . medical problems improved . housed at discharge .