ii. ) adult education does not cover these costs . one adult education principal told us that , if not for the jobs program's covering these costs , program staff would not be able to do as much record keeping or assessment as they do . we also reviewed studies on coordination . i for further information on expenditures by state. ) the aea makes grants to states and requires that they be used in accordance with federally approved state plans . he hoped to earn his ged , attend college , and become a police officer . in a rural town in iowa , a 48-year - old father of four from laos spoke no english and was enrolled in a beginning esl class . he worked part - time as an upholstery worker but hoped to learn english well enough to get a full - time job . in a city in iowa , a married , 35-year - old mother of three was enrolled in an abe class . a former welfare recipient , she had a job as a child care aide that was contingent upon her earning a ged . at local levels in the three states , we met with adult education providers as well as representatives of local employment training programs . to provide information on program accountability and quality , we interviewed department of education officials and held discussions with national adult education experts . we also reviewed the department's model indicators of program quality and studies on program accountability and quality issues . i for total annual expenditures. ) figure 1.1 compares federal expenditures with state and local expenditures since the aea's passage in 1966 . although total state and local contributions currently far exceed federal expenditures , federal dollars still total more than half the funds for adult education in almost half of the states . the contribution of each state relative to the federal contribution varies widely , depending on each state's commitment to providing adult education services . for example , in fiscal year 1991 , state and local contributions ranged from a low of 21 percent to a high of 96 percent ; conversely , federal expenditures ranged from 4 to 79 percent . since 1992 , the aea has restricted the federal share of each state's expenditure to no more than 75 percent . ( see table i.4 in app . in developing their plans , states must assess the needs of adults , including educationally disadvantaged adults , and the capability of programs and institutions to meet those needs . the department of education annually makes its grants to states on the basis of the number of individuals in each state who are at least 16 years old , not enrolled in school , and lack a high school degree or general educational development ( ged ) credential . local adult education providers then apply to the states for funds .