reg . 61058 ( 1997 ) ) to increase the payment amounts for the 61 procedures to the medicare fee schedule amounts . the proposed rule is expected to be finalized in march 1998 after comments are received and analyzed . see appendix iii for a list of these procedures . while cmac rates are initially set at the national level , adjustments are made for each procedure code for 225 different localities within the united states . the locality - adjusted cmac rates are the rates actually used to reimburse physicians . we found that the selected high - volume cmac rates at each of the four locations were generally consistent with medicare rates . dod began using cmac rates to reimburse civilian physicians on may 1 , 1992 . during the initial cmac transition process to the medicare level of payment , some physicians expressed concern about the low level of payment for certain obstetric and pediatric procedures , but payment levels for these procedures have since been addressed by dod and hhs' health care financing administration ( hcfa ) . current physician complaints about the cmac level of reimbursement are primarily directed at the discounted cmac rates paid to tricare network physicians under the prime and extra options rather than the full cmac rate used to reimburse nonnetwork physicians under the standard option . dod reports that the vast majority of physicians who accept military beneficiaries as patients under the standard option agree to accept the cmac rate as payment in full for their services and do not balance bill for additional payment . during the transition of cmac rates , physicians initially complained about the cmac reimbursement levels for obstetric and pediatric procedures . in response to complaints about obstetric rates , hcfa reexamined and adjusted the medicare fee schedule's obstetric cost components and increased the reimbursement rates for some obstetrical delivery procedures . dod , in turn , made corresponding adjustments to obstetric fees during its yearly cmac revision . dod did not , however , adjust pediatric rates . physicians argued that cmac rates for pediatric procedures should not be set at the same levels as services provided to adults because physician costs for caring for children are higher . to determine the validity of this concern , dod commissioned a study , which concluded that only 12.3 percent of all payments would be for services for which there is a higher cost for children , and 56.2 percent of all payments would be for services for which there is a lower cost for children . the study found that 31.5 percent of payments were the same for children and adults . consequently , dod concluded that no payment differential was needed . according to the actuaries , dod's decision conforms with common insurance industry practice . because most cmac rates are equivalent to medicare rates , the discounted cmac rates that tricare network physicians agree to accept are typically below the medicare level of payment .