history of violations . contracts with the navy for maintenance and repair of ships , small craft , or docks and maritime administration for ship repair ( $2,458,000 ) . highlights from board decision include: refused to recognize union . did not honor collective bargaining agreement . incidents occurred in portland , oregon , where the firm is based . contracts with the department of veterans affairs to provide nursing home care ( $3,008,000 ) . highlights from board decision include: prohibited organizational activities for any group on the company premises without permission . incident occurred in millersburg , ohio , where the firm is based . contracts with the army to provide food services ( $133,000 ) . highlights from board decision include: discharged 289 workers by permanently replacing them during a lawful ulp strike . circulated union decertification petitions , promising workers economic benefits if the union is decertified and threatening them with economic harm if the union is not decertified . incidents occurred at three facilities in los angeles , california . contracts with the department of veterans affairs to provide nursing home care ( $4,000 ) . highlights from board decision include: refused to bargain in good faith with union by refusing to implement mandated wage increases . incident occurred in centerville , massachusetts . contracts with the defense logistics agency to provide petroleum - based liquid propellants ( $321,028,000 ) . highlights from board decision include: refused to bargain with union . highlights from board decision include: interfered with the rights of union representatives to enter job site for the purpose of engaging in lawful union activity . incident occurred in tustin , california . how cases were eliminated is described below . ( see fig . not a violator per board decision review violators receiving federal contracts ( 88 cases ) not a federal contractor per telephone verification out of business / relocated per telephone verification twelve percent of cases were eliminated because the firm went out of business or relocated . this category includes firms for which location information in the executive secretary's database or fpds was incomplete or inaccurate . eleven percent of cases were eliminated because the telephone verification revealed the firm listed in the executive secretary's database was not the same firm as listed in fpds . in addition to the likely underestimation caused by the manual matching procedure , other factors limit the number of nlra violations detected regardless of whether or not they involve federal contractors . the cases we examined represent violations only over a 2-year period . further , nlra is different from most federal statutes in that , rather than imposing regulatory requirements on firms or defining benefits for workers , it establishes rights and obligations of firms , workers , and unions with respect to collective bargaining . neither the board nor the general counsel of nlrb has the authority to investigate alleged ulps on its own initiative . the filing of a ulp charge by employees or their representatives is necessary before an investigation can be initiated , yet some workers may be unaware of their rights or choose not to exercise them .