iii. ) hcfa also provided us with technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . we also provided a copy of the draft to representatives of the american association of health plans ( aahp ) and the health insurance association of america ( hiaa ) . both groups expressed concern that our report understates the role of reductions in payment increases and the heavier administrative burden created by the medicare+choice regulations on the recent plan withdrawals . most of the new plan applications are from traditional hmos . thus far , hcfa has approved one pso and no ppos , medical savings accounts , or private ffs plans . however , it may be too early to assess how many of these new types of health plans will be interested in participating in the program . medicare+choice is still very new , and interim final regulations governing the program were just published in june 1998 . plans had little time to prepare and submit applications for 1999 . the number and diversity of applications may increase in future years as plans become more familiar with the new program . however , officials from organizations representing managed care plans believe that the reduced growth in payments and increased administrative burden under medicare+choice may discourage future plan participation . no one factor can explain why plans choose to participate in particular counties . although plans obviously consider payment rates , many other factors also influence their business decisions . our previous work showed that some areas , such as boston , massachusetts , had relatively high payment rates in 1993 but few managed care plans and enrollees . other areas , such as a number of oregon counties , had low payment rates but still had several managed care plans with high enrollment in 1995 . the pattern of recent plan withdrawals suggests that several factors , including payment rates , may have influenced plans' decisions . a plan was more likely to withdraw from a county where payment rates were low relative to other counties in the plan's service area , the plan had been operating since 1992 , the plan had low enrollment , or the plan was in a weak competitive position compared with other plans in the county . an unusually high number of plans also withdrew from fehbp in 1998 , suggesting that general market conditions may have played some role in the medicare plan withdrawals . in some respects , the current medicare withdrawals are similar to those that occurred in the late 1980s . at that time , many plans left medicare because they were unable to attract members and were unprofitable . other factors , such as plans' inability to establish provider networks , also may have influenced the current withdrawals , but we were unable to quantify those effects . both before and after the recent withdrawals , managed care plans were much more likely to offer services in high - payment - rate counties than in low - payment - rate counties . in 1999 , for example , 91 percent of counties with monthly payment rates over $694 are served by a managed care plan .