ii. ) participants in employer - directed 401 ( k ) plans with employer securities and real property investments at or near 10 percent of employee contributions and the earnings thereon are theoretically vulnerable to employers' further investment in such assets . for illustrative purposes , assume that a plan in which the employer directs the investment of both the employee and employer contributions has 10 percent of employee contributions invested in employer securities . if the value of those employer securities declines to less than 10 percent of employee contributions , the employer may use employee contributions to buy additional employer securities until the 10-percent limit is once again reached . in addition to the fiduciary rules , erisa also specifies a number of prohibited transactions . a fiduciary is barred from engaging in such transactions if he or she knows or should know that erisa prohibits them . the types of transactions prohibited by erisa are those involving an inherent conflict of interest between the plan and people associated with the plan ( “parties - in - interest” ) . our data analysis was limited to the most recent plan year ( plan year 1993 ) for which final plan - specific data were available . the data we developed differ from that produced by pwba and published in its abstract of 1993 form 5500 annual reports . although pwba's data are based on analyses of all large plans with 100 participants or more combined with a representative sample of 5 percent of small plan ( fewer than 100 participants ) filers , our report data are based on the analyses of data submitted by each large and small pension plan contained in the databases that pwba provided for our review . in addition , we worked extensively with irs to identify all known 401 ( k ) plans in the form 5500 database . we did not independently verify the accuracy of the research databases because irs and pwba check the data for accuracy and consistency . importantly , the data we analyzed were accurate only to the extent that employers exercised appropriate care in completing their annual form 5500 reports . to examine the protections provided by and any potential problems associated with the recent amendments to erisa , we discussed the amendments with officials of the departments of labor and treasury . we also developed a model to show the amount of employee contributions that could be invested in employer securities and real property assuming a 10-percent limitation on such investments and various changes in the value of employer securities and other investments . finally , we determined whether available form 5500 data were adequate to implement and enforce the new amendments . to determine what rules and other mechanisms could be considered to better protect plan participants in employer - directed 401 ( k ) plans , we identified alternative strategies already authorized by federal law . in addition , we identified or learned about mechanisms suggested by experts that could be considered to protect pension plan assets — and ultimately future retirement benefits — of plan participants and their families .