v ) . the department also offered a number of technical changes . in general , we agreed with the department's comments , and incorporated them into the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of education ; appropriate congressional committees ; the executive director , ncaa ; and other interested parties . all responses reflect statewide gender equity actions . number and type of sanctions imposed eight states responded to the question ; the remaining 43 states did not use any indicators . the eight national studies we identified that were issued between 1992 and 1996 examined various aspects of gender equity within ncaa schools' intercollegiate athletics programs . because they varied in the time periods they studied , sample size , purpose , and methodology , the studies cannot be compared with each other . while some studies discuss the overall effect of title ix on women's athletics , they do not present sufficient information to determine whether the colleges were in compliance with title ix . the following is a summary of the key findings of each study . authors and date of study: acosta and carpenter ( 1996 ) scope and time period studied: all ncaa schools , academic years 1977-78 to 1995-96 summary: this longitudinal study examined the number of sport offerings as an indicator of opportunities for women athletes to participate in intercollegiate athletics at ncaa schools . it also reported the percentage of ncaa schools offering each type of sports program . the study identified 24 sports that schools could offer to female students . women's basketball coaches association . “a chronicle survey: men far outnumber women in division i sports.” chronicle of higher education ( apr . http: / / www.chronicle.com ( cited mar . lyndon b. johnson school of public affairs . gender equity in intercollegiate athletics: the inadequacy of title ix enforcement by the u.s. office for civil rights , working paper no . austin , tex . : university of texas at austin , 1993 . national collegiate athletic association . participation statistics report , 1982-1995 . overland park , kans . : national collegiate athletic association , 1996 . national federation of state high school associations . 1995 high school athletics participation survey . kansas city , mo . : national federation of state high school associations , 1995 . raiborn , mitchell h. revenues and expenses of intercollegiate athletics programs: analysis of financial trends and relationships , 1985-1989 . overland park , kans . : ncaa , 1990 . tom , denise , ed . “title ix: fairness on the field.” usa today , three - part series ( nov. 7-9 , 1995 ) , pp . 1994 survey of wbca division i head coaches . lilburn , ga.: wbca , 1994 . the most common reasons given for reducing men's sports were to comply with title ix and to contain athletic programs' costs . no women's sports programs had a full - time staff member devoted to marketing their sports .