( see app . i for additional details on each purchaser. ) for hcfa , this implies continual monitoring of how consumer information is used . other lessons for hcfa relate to the need for purchasers to educate employees on the meaning of the measures contained in the report card and how to interpret these measures when deciding between health plans . acceptability: are patients satisfied with the care they receive ? since the concept of quality is multidimensional , experts describe the importance of using different types of measures to evaluate care . for example , the foundation for accountability ( facct ) — a forum for consumers and purchasers , including hcfa — argues for the importance of balancing the use of quality measures to reflect ( 1 ) the results of care , ( 2 ) whether patients are satisfied with the care received , and ( 3 ) whether the appropriate processes have been followed . performance indicators are used to measure the various attributes of quality . for example , for clinical attributes , they can measure appropriateness and technical excellence — that is , providers' actions and the outcomes of those actions . process - related indicators refer to clinical interventions , such as the diagnostic tests performed by a physician when examining a patient . in contrast , outcome indicators measure the results of providers' activities , such as mortality and morbidity . outcome measures are critical to evaluating the quality of care , but experts recognize that these measures are not fully developed . a number of questions have been raised about the reliability and validity of certain measures and the data sources for performance indicators . for example , data from computerized administrative databases maintained by managed care plans and from individual patient medical records kept in providers' offices may be inaccurate , incomplete , or misleading . this is because most administrative databases were designed for financial — not clinical — purposes . in addition , providers may enter incorrect information in medical records or not document certain interventions . in an earlier report , we expressed concerns about the reliability of satisfaction data , since most people lack the knowledge needed to adequately evaluate the appropriateness of the care that they receive or do not receive . we also noted in the report that plan - reported data on access - related measures , such as what constitutes a sufficient provider network , do not necessarily ensure that access to care is received . such data must be checked by independent and systematic monitoring efforts that go beyond plan - reported , paper - based indications of compliance . despite problems in measurement , some large companies — concerned with absenteeism and reduced productivity from illness — have begun to apply value - based purchasing concepts when purchasing health plan services . for example , these companies have considered information about quality to assess , rank , and select health plans and to monitor ongoing plan performance against standards and negotiate rates based on these standards . in addition , these companies are providing information on plan performance to employees to help inform their selection of health plans .