not available . average age ( mean ) average age ( median ) endocrine , nutritional , and metabolic diseases disorders of blood and blood - forming organs mental disorders , excluding mental retardation skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders estimated likelihood of benefit termination 14,212 ( continued ) average likelihood ( mean ) average likelihood ( median ) number of years receiving benefits average years ( mean ) average years ( median ) matured over 10 years ago average years ( mean ) average years ( median ) average age ( mean ) average age ( median ) endocrine , nutritional , and metabolic diseases disorders of blood and blood - forming organs mental disorders , excluding mental retardation skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders estimated likelihood of benefit termination 2 ( continued ) average likelihood ( mean ) average likelihood ( median ) number of years receiving benefits average years ( mean ) average years ( median ) matured over 10 years ago average years ( mean ) average years ( median ) workers 60 years and older ( continued ) workers 60 years and older ( continued ) workers 60 years and older ssa does not estimate the likelihood of benefit termination for mie and mip workers aged 60 and over or for mine workers . therefore , the total number with an estimated likelihood of benefit termination is less than the total for the column . step 6 is impairment severe ? step 7 is beneficiary able to perform work done in past ? step 8 based on ssa guidelines , is beneficiary able to perform other work ? determination beneficiary remains disabled and benefits continue . determination beneficiary is no longer disabled and benefits terminate . if an exception to mi applies in which the initial determination was fraudulently obtained or the beneficiary does not cooperate with ssa , benefits are terminated . at step one , the ssa field office determines whether the beneficiary is engaged in sga . field office staff contact the beneficiary , often through a face - to - face meeting , and obtain information on the person's condition , medical treating sources , and the effect of the impairment on the beneficiary's ability to perform sga . this information describes any changes that have occurred since the initial application or most recent cdr and includes types of treatment received , medicines received , specialized tests or examinations , vocational rehabilitation services received , and any schools or training classes attended since the last medical determination . the ssa field office also obtains information on any work activities since the person became disabled , whether the condition continues to interfere with the ability to work , and whether the beneficiary has been released for work by the treating physician . benefits are terminated for beneficiaries engaged in sga , regardless of medical condition . a beneficiary found to be not working or working but earning less than sga has his or her case forwarded to the state dds office . at step two , the dds compares the beneficiary's condition with the listing of impairments developed by ssa .