bangor , me . albany , n.y. geneva , n.y. petersburg , va. reading , penn . asheville , n.c. charleston , s.c. west indianapolis , ind . ssa did not install new equipment in the st. paul or bangor field offices as had been planned . therefore , we excluded st. paul and bangor from our study . we also discovered that the phone number we had used in the first phase of the study for the murray field office was incorrect so we excluded this office from our analysis . the equipment was installed in different configurations . all staff in each office had voice mail installed on their phones . some of the offices also received automated attendant with automated service options on their general inquiry phone lines . as part of the demonstration , ssa planned two internal evaluations of the project to assess the equipment's effect on local office efficiency and employees' views of the equipment and to identify callers' views about this new service . the social security independence and program improvements act of 1994 directed us to determine whether this new equipment would improve the public's telephone access to local ssa offices and report our results by january 31 , 1996 . also on the basis of congressional interest , we obtained information about ssa's efforts to evaluate its demonstration project . to gauge how access changed with the new equipment's installation , we met with officials responsible for the project and conducted two tests of telephone service at the participating offices . one test established baseline performance data for phone service before installation of the equipment . the second test measured service after installation of the equipment . we measured how access changed for those wanting to speak directly to an ssa representative about a general matter . we did not , however , measure the use of the automated services . appendix i details the design and execution of our tests . as part of our work , we also visited 12 of the 30 local offices participating in the demonstration project . at these offices we met with managers , supervisors , and staff using the new equipment to discuss its effect on daily operations and any public reaction . we also met with ssa personnel responsible for conducting internal evaluations of the project . some of these staff also told us that they no longer worry about losing messages or receiving inaccurately recorded messages . others said that with voice mail , callers can leave messages and information needed for processing a claim . this eliminates the need for repeated calls between ssa and the public , speeding up the claims process . two separate ssa organizational entities are evaluating the telephone demonstration project . ssa's office of workforce analysis ( owa ) is evaluating the equipment's effect on office productivity and employee reactions . the office of program integrity reviews ( opir ) is evaluating public reaction to the equipment . neither ssa study had been finished as of early february 1996 . owa's study has two basic objectives , determining the equipment's effect on productivity levels and identifying employee experiences and reactions to using the equipment .