( see app . iii for the text of the guidance. ) the guidance , jointly issued by the children's bureau and the office for civil rights , was based on legal principles in title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 . the guidance introduced key legal concepts and identified certain illegal practices , such as the use of a time period during which a search would occur only for foster or adoptive parents of the same race as the foster child . the state of california began its implementation efforts in august 1995 by issuing an informational memorandum to alert counties to the act before it went into effect . in addition , state officials began a collaborative effort with an association of county child welfare officials to devise an implementation strategy . the state also began the process of amending its state law to comply with the federal statute . when amended , the state law eliminated a discriminatory requirement that same - race placements be sought for 90 days before transracial placements could be made . the state also revised its adoption regulations after the state law was passed . state officials told us that it was not necessary to revise the foster care regulations because they were already consistent with the act . although the change in state law eliminated the requirement to seek same - race placements , that provision had not previously been included in the foster care regulations . in addition , state officials believe that the act focused primarily on adoption issues . thus , adoption regulations required revision , whereas foster care regulations did not . in the counties we reviewed , one county finished revision of its foster care and adoption policies in february 1996 . the other county issued a memorandum to its staff in january 1996 to alert them to the new law . however , that county has not formally revised its foster care or adoption policies in over 20 years , according to one county official . the state and counties planned training on the 1994 law , but only the counties actually conducted any . the state planned to roll out training , but suspended the planned training when the act was amended in august 1996 . state officials told us that they needed to revise the training to reflect the amendment . the two counties , however , developed their own training programs by relying on information they obtained from the county child welfare association . in both counties , supervisors in the adoption unit took the lead in developing and presenting one - time training sessions to foster care and adoption caseworkers . most , if not all , foster care and adoption caseworkers in the two counties received training . both counties also incorporated training on the 1994 act into their curriculums for new caseworkers . following amendment of the act , hhs was slower to revise its policy guidance and provided less technical assistance to states than it did after the passage of the 1994 act . while california informed its counties of the change in federal law , it did not do so until 3 months after hhs issued its policy guidance on the amended act .