additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . some of these hospitals serve many children covered by medicaid . states are allowed to designate other hospitals to receive dsh payments as long as they have at least 1-percent medicaid utilization . average medicaid utilization rates for state psychiatric hospitals in 1996 ranged from 3.1 percent in texas to 22.1 percent in kansas . in three states , at least one imd had a medicaid utilization rate close to the 1-percent minimum necessary to qualify for dsh . for example , one of the eight state psychiatric hospitals in texas had a 1.4-percent rate , and five other texas state psychiatric hospitals had rates lower than 3 percent . other types of hospitals , with lower dsh payments , generally had higher , and in some cases much higher , medicaid utilization rates . other state - owned hospitals in maryland , for example , had average medicaid utilization rates five times as great as the average for the state's psychiatric hospitals . north carolina private hospitals averaged 19-percent medicaid utilization , but the state's four state psychiatric hospitals averaged less than half that rate , and the state psychiatric hospital with the highest rate ( 18 percent ) still fell below the private hospitals' average . table 4 shows the average medicaid utilization for each type of hospital for our study states in 1996 . an exception to the pattern of higher medicaid utilization rates in private hospitals is new hampshire . there , the only state psychiatric hospital has a center for children , about 80 percent of whom qualify for medicaid . state psychiatric hospitals generally received dsh payments at or near the maximum allowed by medicaid rules , while other hospitals often received payments that were well below their maximums . within federal limits , states targeted dsh payments to state psychiatric hospitals and in some cases to other state - owned hospitals . local public hospitals and private hospitals generally received dsh payments at rates that were a smaller proportion of the maximum allowable . in some cases , the proportions were much smaller , as for local public hospitals in kansas , which received only 8 percent of the maximum the state could have paid them . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs , the administrator of hcfa , state officials in the states we contacted , and others who are interested . we will also make copies available to others upon request .