pub . washington , d.c.: u.s. government printing office , 1992 . iams , howard m. “earnings of couples: a cohort analysis.” social security bulletin , vol . 3 ( 1993 ) , pp . who pays for the earnings credits provided to homemakers ? if they are paid for by the homemaker and her spouse through a supplemental payroll tax , are such payments voluntary or mandatory ? how would low - income families afford their payments ? if the earnings credits are financed out of general revenues , an equity problem would be created since covered workers have to pay social security taxes to receive earnings credits . how is the economic value of homemaker services determined ? the caregiver credits option would reduce the 35-year benefit computation period by the number of years the caregiver was out of the labor force providing caregiving activities . usually , the proposal specifies a maximum number of caregiver credits that could be earned by any one person ( for example , 5 or 10 credits ) , and often the caregiver would be required to have a preschool - aged child in her or his care . this proposal would reduce the number of years of highest earnings used to calculate aimes and would result in increased aimes and benefits for caregivers . however , this option may not accurately target the population of concern because women are returning to work more quickly after the births of their children . if economic necessity causes mothers from low - income families , but not high - income families , to return to work while their children are young , then mothers from high - income families would be the primary beneficiaries of this change , while mothers from low - income families , presumably the primary target group for this proposal , would forfeit caregiver credits for the years they worked . under earnings sharing , homemakers would become eligible to receive retired worker and disabled worker benefits and their dependents would be insured for survivor benefits because earnings sharing would provide the homemakers with an earnings history and a benefit eligibility of their own . however , if they could not inherit all their spouses' earnings credits , they could receive lower benefits than under current law when they become widowed . married women who reduce their attachment to the paid labor force to care for children or other people would also find that their earnings histories and benefit eligibility generally improved from earnings sharing . the caregiver would also receive the earnings - related component based on her covered earnings ; the homemaker would not because she would have no covered earnings . this joint and survivor proposal is not directly related to adequacy concerns , but its implementation would have consequences for the benefits women receive as spouses and survivors . the rationale under which social security pays benefits to married workers , their spouses , and their survivors is based in large part on the adequacy goal of the system . as currently structured , benefits to auxiliary beneficiaries are not earned benefits . married workers did not pay a higher payroll tax than unmarried workers to provide the funding for auxiliary benefits .