( app . ii provides a chronology of their actions. ) if so , benefits are awarded . in contrast , adults whose conditions were not severe enough to qualify under the medical listings could still be found eligible for benefits if an assessment of their residual functional capacity ( rfc ) showed that they could not engage in substantial work . no analogous assessment of functioning was done for children who did not qualify under the medical listings . “an inquiry into the impact of an impairment on the normal daily activities of a child of the claimant's age — speaking , walking , dressing and feeding oneself , going to school , playing , etc.” although the court required the functional assessment , it did not define the degree of limitation necessary to qualify for benefits , except by analogy to the adult definition of disability . to implement the zebley decision , ssa convened a group of experts in april 1990 to help formulate new regulations using age - appropriate functional criteria . included were experts in general and developmental pediatrics , child psychology , learning disorders , and early and adolescent childhood education as well as advocates from groups such as community legal services in philadelphia ( plaintiff's counsel in the zebley case ) , the association for retarded citizens , and the mental health law project . ssa also consulted with its regional offices and the state ddss . building on the functional criteria added to the listings after dbra , ssa issued regulations implementing the supreme court's decision on february 11 , 1991 . according to these regulations , for the child to be eligible for disability benefits , the ifa must show that the child's impairment or combination of impairments limits his or her ability “to function independently , appropriately , and effectively in an age - appropriate manner.” specifically , the impairment must substantially reduce the child's ability to grow , develop , or mature physically , mentally , or emotionally to the extent that it limits his or her ability to ( 1 ) attain age - appropriate developmental milestones ; ( 2 ) attain age - appropriate daily activities at home , school , play , or work ; or ( 3 ) acquire the skills needed to assume adult roles . although ssa officials describe these as state - of - the - art criteria for assessing children's functioning , they concede that many of these concepts are not clear cut . we observed firsthand the difficulty that adjudicators face in making the judgments required by the ifa process for children who have behavioral and learning disorders . the media have reported allegations that parents coach their children to fake mental impairments by misbehaving or performing poorly in school so that they can qualify for ssi benefits . critics believe that cash payments and medicaid act as incentives for some parents to coach and , therefore , they are concerned about the extent to which parents can manipulate the disability determination process . behavior can vary naturally among children of the same age — or in the same child over time — as they go through stages in development or respond to changes in their home or school environment .