ii ) . we judgmentally selected varos that differed in size and the number and type of changes already made . also , varos would have to operate for some time using two processing structures , which could significantly strain operations . though evaluation based on control groups is ideal , it is not absolutely necessary , however . when making management decisions in an organization as diverse as va , it is not always possible to obtain the definitive information gained from control group methodology . other evaluation approaches are acceptable . various statistical methods , for example , would allow va to compare change over time , using past data to project what the situation would have been — for example , average processing times — if no change in approach had been made and comparing it with the situation under the new approach . alternatively , qualitative methods could , for example , provide detailed case study information for selected varos , focusing on the most important initiatives and choosing varos to obtain a mix of approaches and circumstances . whatever the approach , either varo staff or headquarters staff could develop the information . given the urgent need for improving claims processing , the uncertainty about which initiatives will be most effective , and the extent to which some varos have already begun making changes , allowing regional flexibility has merit . varos can be expected to have different experiences with similar initiatives and therefore need some flexibility . however , if first efforts do not result in sufficient improvement , the varos and headquarters need to understand why and to have some basis for determining what other changes have a better chance of success . va needs information to gain meaningful insight into whether initiatives are working — including whether they are addressing the most significant causes of problems — and how they are affected by regional circumstances . different results may reflect many factors , not only differences in the types of initiatives undertaken and in varo size and resources but differences in motivation and commitment to improvement . without meaningful information to interpret varo outcome data , headquarters will be hard pressed to ensure improvements as time goes on . valid varo assessments of initiatives are critical . equally important , va headquarters must understand how results of at least the most significant initiatives were affected by individual varo circumstances . this broader understanding will better enable va to disseminate information to varos about the pros and cons of various initiatives , provide guidance about what changes to make , and , if necessary , direct varos to make specific changes . to better ensure improvement in varo claims processing , we recommend that the va secretary direct the under secretary for benefits to improve plans to evaluate the effectiveness of claims processing initiatives . the improved plans should provide both headquarters and varos sufficient information about the effect of initiatives to allow quick response if results are unsatisfactory and to implement even greater improvements if possible .