( see app . i for more detail on our scope and methodology. ) veterans and spouses will be paid $200 per adult examination and $100 per child examination to compensate them for their time and inconvenience . mileage or airfare , per diem , and lodging costs will be paid for families who live far enough away to require overnight stays . according to a va official , these payments are allowable costs as part of this research project . the estimated report date for the survey is december 2000 . spouse: evans medical foundation , boston medical center children: child health foundation of boston spouse: syracuse va medical center children: suny health science center new jersey university of medicine and dentistry no affiliated medical school contract no affiliated medical school contract university of puerto rico school of medicine university of tennessee medical group the wilson group , vanderbilt university no affiliated medical school contract wayne state university medical school no affiliated medical school contract university of missouri health science center ( continued ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . in phase ii , a sample of 8,000 nonrespondents was randomly selected for follow - up telephone calls to assess potential nonrespondent bias and to supplement the mailed survey data . in addition , during phase ii , selected self - reported data collected during phase i was validated through records reviews for 2,000 veterans from each group . va has completed the first two phases of this survey . in phase iii , the same 2,000 veteran respondents and family members from each group will be invited to participate in a physical examination under a uniform comprehensive clinical examination protocol . va is currently identifying 15 of its medical centers to examine veterans and family members over an 18-month period . the medical centers will be selected in a way that ensures a medical center will be within 3 to 4 hours driving time of the majority of the families sampled . veterans will be examined at va medical centers . the requested budget also permits up to half of the spouses and all of the children to be examined at affiliated medical schools . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the program began in april 1996 and is set to expire in december 1998 . va planned to determine , by using a research approach , whether an association existed between the illnesses of persian gulf veterans and the illnesses of their family members .