i and ii . washington , d.c.: u.s. department of health and human services , 1988 . council on graduate medical education . sixth report: managed health care: implications for the physician workforce and medical education . washington , d.c.: u.s. department of health and human services , 1995 . do federal agencies and states effectively coordinate policies and procedures for granting these waivers ? to what extent are foreign physicians who receive waivers complying with waiver requirements to practice in underserved areas ? to conduct this work , we developed two surveys addressing the extent to which states and federal agencies used waivers to meet physician shortages . one polled all states to determine the size of their programs for requesting waivers . the other surveyed health care facilities for a random sample of physicians who received waivers . these surveys provided more complete information than was available from participating agencies , including usia , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , and the federal agencies requesting waivers for physicians . we supplemented this work with reviews of existing data , interviews with agency officials and others involved with the waivers , and field work in three states . appendix i explains our methodology in more detail . j - 1 visas allow foreign nationals to participate as exchange visitors in cultural and educational programs in the united states . usia is responsible for managing the j - 1 visa program and designates organizations as program sponsors . in 1995 , over 9,000 foreign physicians with j - 1 visas were in the united states for graduate medical education or training . these exchange visitors constituted about one - tenth of all individuals receiving graduate medical education ( see app . ii ) . because many exchange visitors are in the united states for several years for graduate medical education and training , each year a few thousand new physicians receive j - 1 visas and enter the united states to begin graduate medical education and training while a few thousand complete their training . to ensure that the j - 1 visa program works as intended in passing learning and experience to other countries , the congress has imposed restrictions on j - 1 visa holders , including physicians in graduate medical education . these physicians are required to return to their home country ( or to their country of last legal residence ) for at least 2 years after completion of training . however , they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the united states . for most physicians , the waivers are requested on their behalf by a federal agency or by a state agency or department that is responsible for public health issues . these federal agencies and states generally request waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement so that the physicians can practice for several years in underserved areas ( see table 1 ) . the federal agencies and states submit these requests to usia . usia reviews the program , policy , and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the ins commissioner .