1 ( mar . 1990 ) , pp . the mergers and alliances are described below . on november 18 , 1993 , merck & co. , inc. purchased medco containment services , inc. for $6.6 billion . headquartered in whitehouse station , new jersey , merck manufactures human and animal health care products . during 1993 , it had net revenues of $10.5 billion , making it the largest company in terms of u.s. pharmaceutical sales . principal products include prinivil and vasotec , two cardiovascular products ; mevacor and zocor , two cholesterol - lowering agents ; and pepcid , an antiulcerant . goldman sachs u.s. research , drug stock overview ( apr . greton , carolyn , and paul wynn , “the top 50 companies,” med ad news , vol . 12 ( sept. 1994 ) , pp . longman , roger , “merck - medco and disease management,” in vivo ( apr . 1994 ) , pp . mandelker , jeannie , “pharmacy benefits management: the next generation,” business & health , special report ( 1995 ) . mcgahan , anita m. , “industry structure and competitive advantage,” harvard business review ( nov. / dec . all five pbms were included in our study . a common technique pbms use to manage pharmacy care is formulary development . a formulary is a list of prescription drugs , grouped by therapeutic class , that are preferred by a health plan sponsor . drugs are included on a formulary not only for reasons of medical value but also on the basis of price . pbms provide physicians and others with printed formularies that often use dollar sign designations to identify drugs according to their relative cost within a therapeutic class . for example , “$” can signify a low - cost product , while “$$$$” can signify a higher - cost product . both the inclusion of a drug on a formulary and its cost designation can affect the utilization of a manufacturer's products . pbms and the health plan sponsors they represent encourage physicians to prescribe lower - cost formulary drugs over both nonformulary drugs and higher - cost formulary drugs for health plan enrollees . the extent to which the pbms and their sponsors are successful in obtaining physician compliance with formularies can increase the sales and market share within a therapeutic class of a prescription drug , particularly for products on the formulary with the lowest cost designations . because of this potential effect on the sales and market share of a drug , manufacturers offer pbms rebates on drugs that face competition in return for both inclusion on a formulary and a low - cost designation . because of the relationship between formularies and drug sales , ftc has reviewed the recent mergers on antitrust grounds to determine their potential impact on competition in the markets involved . although ftc did not challenge mergers between merck and medco or smithkline beecham and dps , it did challenge the merger that followed between lilly and pcs health systems . ftc entered into a consent agreement with lilly that established safeguards against the merger's potential anticompetitive effects and also stated that it would continue to monitor the integration of drug manufacturers and pbms .