how much higher is uncertain . although a long investment time horizon provides more time to recover from short - term fluctuations , an investor also would have more time to encounter a prolonged stock market downturn . depending on the composition of its stock portfolio , the trust fund could also be exposed to “concentration risk,” or the potential loss resulting from a heavy investment in a group of related companies or an industry susceptible to the same economic dynamics . like any investor , the trust fund would face “default risk,” or the exposure to loss due to an individual company failing . according to portfolio theory , diversification reduces risk . diversifying a stock portfolio across companies and industries reduces both default and concentration risk . diversification also reduces the risk that the portfolio's return will vary widely from the expected market return . indexing , discussed in more detail in chapter 4 , is one way to broadly diversify a stock portfolio and to match the approximate market return . under the advisory council's maintain benefits approach , the trust fund would invest in stocks indexed to the broad stock market . a diversified stock portfolio , however , does not protect against the risk of a general stock market downturn . an investor can shield against stock market risk by diversifying into other types of assets , such as corporate bonds . also , one way to mitigate u.s. stock market risk is to diversify into international markets . to minimize exposure to short - term stock market fluctuations , an investor can hold less risky , albeit lower - yielding , assets to cover liquidity needs in the short run . higher stock returns could delay the trust fund's exhaustion , but , without other program changes , the trust fund inevitably will have to liquidate its stocks to pay benefits . social security's tax revenues are projected to be inadequate to cover annual benefits beginning in 2012 . to pay benefits after that point , the trust fund will have to draw upon its investment earnings and eventually its assets to cover the shortfall . riding out a general stock market downturn could be difficult for the social security trust fund as it faces a cash deficit and growing numbers of retirees . the trust fund might have to sell its stock holdings at a loss to raise cash to pay benefits . the more the trust fund is counting on stock sales to finance current benefits , the greater its vulnerability in the event of a general stock market downturn . conceivably , the trust fund could draw on its contingency reserve to avoid selling its stocks at a loss during a general market downturn . figure 3.2 shows the estimated trust fund assets under the aggressive investment scenario compared to the cash surplus scenario as well as to the current statutory policy of investing solely in special treasury securities . these simulation results illustrate some outcomes associated with our two alternative stock investment policies . they should not be interpreted as forecasts and do not represent the full range of possible outcomes for the social security trust fund .