denial of access . in a 24-hour period , a beneficiary with signs and symptoms of both pneumonia and a heart attack twice sought and was denied admission to a hospital . the hmo primary care physician concurred with both denials of admission . after the second attempt , the patient died on the way to his primary care physician . hcfa's oversight of one of the florida risk hmos illustrates the pattern that has emerged between hcfa and hmos that do not take prompt actions to correct performance problems . this hmo won a hcfa demonstration contract in 1982 . after a series of financial problems and other compliance violations , the hmo was declared insolvent in 1987 , and another hmo acquired its assets . the new hmo operates in four florida markets under a single contract with hcfa . the hcfa enforcement activity documented in the following paragraphs relates to the south florida market , but enrollment and payment statistics in table 1 relate to all four markets . hcfa data systems track the hmo's contract as though it were a single - market hmo — the normal contracting arrangement for medicare . since 1987 , hcfa repeatedly found that the hmo's south florida operations did not meet federal standards for quality assurance . during this period , hcfa undertook special studies and received pro reports that indicated continuing problems with quality of care . nevertheless , it allowed the hmo to continue enrolling beneficiaries and operating as freely as a fully compliant hmo , until hcfa's 1994 investigation of quality assurance practices led to voluntary enrollment restrictions at selected medical centers . from 1988 to 1994 , the hmo maintained and increased its revenues from medicare by enrolling over 336,500 beneficiaries to replace the over 269,000 who disenrolled . the hmo had medicare revenues in 1994 that exceeded $1 billion and constituted 72 percent of its total revenues . hcfa recently determined that the south florida hmo has been responsive to its 1994 findings and in january 1995 approved the hmo's corrective action plan . hcfa has since visited the hmo's offices and declared the hmo in compliance with requirements , effective july 5 , 1995 . ( table 1 presents the history of hcfa's oversight and enforcement related to the hmo's quality assurance practices , including pro reviews of quality of care. ) slow enforcement by hcfa was not unique to quality problems , or to the florida market . two other enforcement cases we reviewed to test hcfa's processes were in california and illinois and included marketing abuses , including high - pressure , illegal practices resulting in high levels of complaints and disenrollments from misinformed beneficiaries ( see p. 12 ) ; nonpayment or slow payment of claims for beneficiaries' out - of - plan services , which can result in out - of - pocket expenses or bill collection actions against the beneficiaries ; and not following prescribed appeal processes , resulting in some medicare beneficiaries not receiving the services they are entitled to under the hmos' medicare contracts ( see p. 13 ) . hcfa's monitoring and certification process has not been adequate to ensure that medicare hmos comply with standards for ensuring quality care .