teachers colleges . the following table lists the default rate history for 19 hbcus whose 1988-90 rates exceeded the statutory threshold of 25 percent and whose rates had fallen below the threshold for the most current ( 1993-95 ) cohort years . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . what measures have hbcus taken to reduce or minimize their student loan default rates ? to conduct our review , we analyzed available student databases with data on various characteristics that previous studies had shown to be related to the level of student loan defaults . much of the data we analyzed were from the department of education , but some were developed from surveys by other researchers . because the databases did not all contain the same information , we were not always able to apply the exact same set of characteristics . for example , one database might contain the high school grade point averages of entering freshmen as an indication of academic preparation , while another might have freshman retention rates or college graduation rates . appendix i describes the studies we examined , including our scope and methodology , and appendix ii lists the specific academic preparation and socioeconomic indicators we identified . in performing our analyses , we also interviewed representatives from the department , hbcus , and other organizations . we conducted our review between june 1997 and january 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in total , 103 schools are currently designated hbcus . they range in size and scope from 2-year colleges with relatively few programs to 4-year universities offering graduate degrees in several fields and enrolling more than 10,000 students . although most students who attend are black , about one student in every six is not . collectively , hbcus enroll about 16 percent of all black students attending all 2-year and 4-year colleges and universities in the united states . title iv authorized the department of education to bar postsecondary schools with high fiscal year “cohort default rates” from continuing to participate in federal student loan programs . each year , the department assesses a school's eligibility on the basis of its three most recent available cohort default rates . in fiscal year 1998 , eligibility is based on default rates for fiscal years 1993 , 1994 , and 1995 . a school remains eligible if its cohort default rate is below the statutory threshold , currently 25 percent , in at least 1 of the latest 3 consecutive fiscal years . a school becomes ineligible if its default rate equals or exceeds the default threshold in all 3 fiscal years . the higher education act exempts hbcus from this threshold requirement through june 1998 . in addition to the cohort default rate threshold specified in the higher education act , the department has established — through regulation — a provision that allows it to start procedures to limit , suspend , or terminate a school's participation in all title iv federal student aid programs if the school's cohort default rate for a single year exceeds 40 percent . the exemption from the statutory threshold for hbcus does not extend to this provision .