4 , was introduced in the congress . as introduced , the proposal includes time - limited benefit and work requirement provisions similar to those in h.r . 4 , but not a family cap provision . the administration's revised welfare reform proposal , the work first and personal responsibility act of 1996 , was introduced in the congress in june 1996 . the chairman of the house subcommittee on human resources , committee on ways and means , asked us to review states' early experiences with implementing welfare reforms under federal waivers , believing that this information would be useful to other states as they prepare to face the challenges of welfare reform . specifically , the chairman requested that we examine the approaches that states took and issues they encountered in implementing three key provisions: time limits , work requirements , and family caps . this delay arose because clients assessed to be job - ready are subject to time - limited benefits and are provided an opportunity to appeal their assessment . the county sought to increase the number of referrals to job placement contractors through such measures as referring clients who had not yet been assessed . we will also make copies available to others on request . to implement time limits and work requirements , these states fundamentally changed the way they do business . they focused their efforts on changing staffs' culture and clients' expectations , seeking greater involvement from their communities , and redesigning their service delivery structures . to date , however , most of their changes have been implemented on a relatively small scale , within a few counties or small metropolitan areas . thus , it is uncertain what additional implementation and operational issues these and other states could encounter as they move to implement welfare reform statewide or in larger metropolitan areas . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at 202-512-7215 or david p. bixler , assistant director , at 202-512-7201 . other gao contacts and major contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . because the existing welfare system has not been successful in preventing long - term dependency , many states are using federally approved waivers of statutory requirements to implement their own welfare reform initiatives . concurrently , efforts are under way at the federal level to reform the nation's welfare system . some states already are experimenting with provisions similar to those included in recent federal welfare reform proposals , such as time limits on benefit receipt , work requirements , and a prohibition on payment of cash assistance for additional children born to families already receiving welfare — the family cap provision . however , to implement wisconsin's welfare reform program , staff were encouraged to empower their clients to become self - sufficient . to help clients make a more stable transition to the workforce , florida , virginia , and wisconsin extended the length of time that their income disregards would be available . this change responds to concerns that families may experience a significant decline in their standard of living when benefits are reduced or discontinued after existing federal income disregards expire .