we disagree . returns on fixed income portfolios have declined significantly since the 1980s , and forecasts of future returns on the assets in fixed income portfolios do not envision a return to those higher levels . the projections we employed were for an asset whose performance has closely mirrored the performance of the alternate plans' investments . we believe that is a more accurate estimate . we are providing copies of this report to the commissioner of social security , officials of organizations and state and local governments that we worked with , and other interested congressional parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you have any questions about this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in order to compare potential retirement , survivor , and disability benefits under the alternate plans and social security , we simulated the work histories of county employees who had relatively low , median , or high earnings . we classified employees as low earners if they were at the 10th percentile of the wage distribution and as high earners if they were at the 90th percentile . median earners are in the middle of the distribution ( half earn more and half earn less ) . we used the 1998 wage distribution of galveston county employees nearing retirement to determine low , median , and high earnings: $17,124 , $25,596 , and $51,263 , respectively . nationally , low , median , and high earnings were $13,000 , $31,200 and $75,000 . low earners in galveston county , therefore , had wages nearly one - third higher than those in the 10th percentile nationally , but the wages of high earners in galveston were about 68 percent of those of the 90th percentile earners nationally ; median wages of the galveston county workers were 82 percent of the national median . in order to calculate alternate plans and social security benefits for our illustrative employees , we created earnings and contributions histories for these workers . we used a model of earnings growth over workers' careers to reflect the fact that wage income does not grow linearly over a working lifetime , but rather that wage growth resembles an “s” - shaped curve . this curve reflects more rapid growth during the years when an individual's productivity grows fastest and slower wage increases as the worker nears the end of his or her career . we used the earnings for workers nearing retirement in 1998 to project the nominal wages of such workers back to the beginning of their careers . we also used the model to project earnings experiences for those retiring in the future . we projected earnings at age 65 for workers retiring in the future in the three income classes by taking the wage distribution for 1998 earnings and inflating the earnings by nominal wage growth to the future retirement years , using the social security trustees' intermediate cost assumptions ( see app . ii ) . we applied the model to create the wage histories .