( app . i further describes the scope and methodology for this report. ) although the number of donors is not growing as quickly as the demand for organs , the number of donors has steadily increased since 1988 . the major reason for this increase is because many more older people are becoming organ donors than in the past . the increase in organ procurement and hospital development staff was critical to increasing the number of organ donors , according to opo officials . opo officials also noted that the growth in organ donation in the 5-year period allowed them to hold organ acquisition fees relatively constant even with the increased investment in personnel . for medical records reviews to be used to accurately estimate the number of potential donors as part of hcfa's recertification standards , they must yield consistent and valid results . the opos that conduct medical records reviews , however , do so to determine their operations' weaknesses and what practices they should emphasize to increase organ donation . these opos design their reviews to meet their needs and available resources . in addition , opos conducting records reviews generally use different methodologies for their reviews . as the aopo project revealed , consistent records reviews would require standard collection forms , manuals , and reviewer training . as aopo found , validating results can be costly and time consuming . to use records reviews for assessing opo performance , hcfa would have to validate the results somehow . one way to validate results would be to include a sample validation component when inspecting opos . furthermore , a minority of opos do not conduct medical records reviews . these opos lack the experience of some other opos because they have not been working with hospitals to allow them access to records . some donor hospitals' lack of cooperation is a major concern to opos . the opos we visited cited hospitals in their service areas that refused to cooperate with records reviews . one reason for this is the hospital's concern for patient confidentiality . currently , opos have no leverage to make hospitals cooperate in the reviews . we also learned that the degree of cooperation varies among participating hospitals: some hospitals will provide lists of hospital deaths and facilitate access to records ; at other hospitals , the reviewers have to take additional steps to locate appropriate records for review . hcfa is considering changing requirements for hospitals participating in medicare regarding organ donation . the agency may propose changes requiring hospitals to cooperate with opos in reviewing death records . other possible changes would provide opos with more control over identifying potential donors , requesting donations , educating hospital staff , and managing donors while testing and placement take place . a team of researchers from the partnership for organ donation , the harvard medical school , and the harvard school of public health has developed a modeling method using information about hospitals to predict the number of potential donors . the goal of this effort is to design an estimating procedure that will be relatively simple to execute , inexpensive , and valid .