ii ) . it was beyond the scope of this study to estimate effective excise tax rates for those states that control the sales of liquor and / or wine . in contrast to the excise taxes , the district's sales taxes on alcoholic beverages are higher than those in 45 states and equal to those in another state . for the remaining four states , the comparison is mixed — depending on whether the sales are for on - premises or off - premises consumption . this change would lower taxes on beer and high - priced wine in the district while raising the tax on liquor and low - priced wine . the district would face a difficult enforcement task if it adopted the ad valorem excise tax rate on liquor that virginia currently levies . virginia's liquor excise tax is computed as 20 percent of the liquor price after the state has taken its combined wholesale and retail price mark - up . to levy an equivalent tax , the district would have to impose the 20-percent rate on the final prices that retail stores charge their customers before applying the sales tax . this tax would be more difficult to enforce than the district's current liquor excise tax , because ( 1 ) it would have to be collected from a much greater number of taxpayers ; ( 2 ) taxpayers would have more of an incentive to understate their liquor sales , because the tax rate paid by each taxpayer would be higher than it currently is ; and ( 3 ) to verify compliance , district auditors would have to examine a taxpayer's detailed sales receipts . virginia does not face these enforcement difficulties , because it collects the tax from its own stores . no license state levies an ad valorem alcohol excise tax . it would be difficult for the district to devise an ad valorem liquor tax that closely approximates the tax that virginia imposes on liquor sold for on - premises consumption . restaurants and bars in virginia buy their liquor from state - run stores at retail prices that already reflect the 20 percent excise tax . those prices are not equivalent to either the wholesale prices that restaurants and bars in the district pay for their liquor or to the prices that district restaurants and bars charge their final customers . consequently , the district could not replicate virginia's tax simply by imposing a tax rate on either the wholesale or final prices . the district would have to define a new tax base that approximates the state - determined prices on which virginia's excise tax is imposed . we are unable to say whether average alcohol prices and revenues from alcohol taxes would increase or decrease if the district conformed its statutory alcohol tax rates to those in virginia . in order to estimate the effects on average prices and revenues , we would need to know the distribution of alcohol sales in the district , by beverage type and by price range . however , this information does not exist . the total value of alcohol sales in the district each year is unknown .