ii. ) state officials also told us of their difficulties in obtaining payroll records from dfas . why do ui claimants not report reserve income ? what administrative or legislative options are available to prevent future losses ? how will these options affect reserve force retention , if at all ? to estimate the amount of nonreported reserve income , benefit overpayments , and losses to federal and state ui trust funds , we matched fiscal year 1994 ui claimant data from seven selected states with reserve force payroll and personnel data . to identify explanations for the nonreporting of reserve income and possible options to enhance reporting , we interviewed ui service officials from the department of labor's employment and training administration ( eta ) to obtain information on the operation and structure of the federal - state ui system . we also held discussions with state ui program officials to obtain information on claimant eligibility procedures and their treatment of claimants with income from the reserve . in addition , we met with department of defense officials representing numerous reserve operations , department of transportation officials representing the coast guard reserve , and officials from the state national guard bureaus to obtain their views on reserve personnel compliance with ui program requirements and the potential impact of reporting enhancement options on reserve force retention . we conducted our audit work between august 1994 and may 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for additional information on our methodology , see appendix i . the ui system is a federal - state partnership . within overall federal guidelines , states operate their own ui programs , levy and collect their own payroll tax , and determine the level and duration of benefits and the conditions for benefit eligibility . the ui service provides information , guidance , and technical assistance to programs in the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands . however , the federal government , through the ui service , a part of eta , is responsible for maintaining the fiscal integrity of the system , including the individual state ui program trust funds . the ui system includes several programs that cover most public and private sector workers . the regular ui program provides for up to 26 weeks of benefits to qualifying unemployed private sector and state and local government employees . under this program , each state maintains an account in the u.s. treasury , which is funded by state payroll taxes on most private sector employers and by payments from state and local government and some nonprofit employers reimbursing the fund for benefits paid to former employees . the unemployment compensation for federal employees ( ucfe ) program is completely federally financed and provides benefits to qualifying unemployed civilian federal employees . the unemployment compensation for ex - servicemen ( ucx ) program is also completely federally financed and provides benefits to service members after their discharge from active duty as well as reserve and national guard personnel who have been on active duty for 90 days of continuous service before their release from active duty .