participants . additionally , the charlotte county board of women realtors' nonprofit dream house program is designed to help encore ! encore ! , located in port charlotte , florida , prepares single parents ; displaced homemakers ; and single , pregnant women for high - wage occupations in order to help them become self - sufficient . this project is largely funded by a federal grant under the carl d. perkins vocational and applied technology education act of 1990 and is strongly linked to the charlotte vocational technical center ( vo - tech ) . encore ! 's primary components are a 6-week prevocational workshop and a year - round support system for participants during their vocational training . the workshop is intended to prepare participants for skills training . about 99 percent of all encore ! participants complete their vocational training at vo - tech . in the 1993-94 school year , 194 encore ! participants were enrolled at vo - tech . for this same year , the vo - tech campuswide placement rate was 95 percent . ( see app . iv for a detailed description of this project. ) focus: hope , a civil and human rights organization in detroit , was founded in 1968 to resolve the effects of discrimination . its machinist training program , started in 1981 , is intended to break down discrimination in machinist trades and high - tech manufacturing industries and to provide disadvantaged adults with marketable skills . focus: hope has three on - site training levels — fast track , the machinist training institute ( mti ) , and the center for advanced technologies ( cat ) . it serves inner - city adults and relies on federal and state grants as well as on private contributions . for the 1993-94 year , there were 185 participants in mti , and 75 percent completed the program . of these , 99 percent were placed . ( see app . v for a detailed description of this project. ) support and training results in valuable employment ( strive ) is a primarily privately funded employment training and placement project for inner - city adults in new york city who have experienced difficulty securing and maintaining employment . strive's founders believe gainful employment is the most critical element to individuals and families living in disenfranchised neighborhoods of new york city who hope to achieve self - sufficiency . strive central — one of 10 community - based organizations in new york's strive employment group — is located in east harlem and prepares participants for the work place through a strict , demanding 3-week attitudinal training workshop . strive central provides no occupational training ; however , strive provides a long - term commitment of at least 2 years to help graduates maintain and upgrade their employment . during 1994 , strive central trained 415 adults and placed 77 percent of these project graduates . ( see app . vi for a detailed description of this project. ) the private industry council ( tpic ) is a private , nonprofit organization providing employment training services to low - income residents in the city of portland , oregon , and the counties of washington and multnomah .