this information is misleading . we found that only about 14 percent of the program year 1996 participants actually completed all the required tasks of their vocational training programs . job corps' national data system uses three categories to identify a participant's level of vocational training progress: trainee , completer , and advanced completer . a trainee is a participant who has not completed any vocational training component , a completer has accomplished at least one component of a vocational program , and an advanced completer has fully satisfied all required components of a vocational training program . labor considers participants in the last two categories to be vocational training completers . thus , job corps vocational completion statistics include participants who have only partially completed the required skills of a vocational training program . each job corps vocational training program has a comprehensive list of duties and tasks that participants are expected to perform . for example , the clerical vocational training program has 140 duties and tasks that must be mastered to fully complete the program , food service has 109 , building and apartment maintenance has 123 , and carpentry has 75 . vocational training programs , however , can be divided into several components . for example , in food service , the first component entails making a sandwich and preparing a salad ( covering 39 of the 109 tasks ) . the second component adds preparing breakfast dishes ; heating convenience foods ; preparing meats , poultry , fish , and pasta ; and cooking vegetables . the final component adds preparing soups , sauces , and appetizers as well as food management skills , such as preparing a menu , setting a table , developing a food preparation schedule , and conducting safety inspections . vocational training instructors assess participants' performance for each duty and task , and job corps policy permits participants to be classified as vocational completers if they accomplish the duties and tasks associated with any one component of the vocational training program — regardless of whether they can perform all the duties and tasks required in the entire vocational training curriculum . depending on the vocation , the percentage of tasks that a participant must accomplish to be considered a completer range from virtually all , as in the health occupations program , to about a quarter , as in the welding program ( see table 2 ) . thus , job corps policy allows participants to be classified as vocational completers if they can perform some portion of a required curriculum . for example , in the food service vocational training program , accomplishing just the tasks associated with the salad and sandwich making component would qualify a participant as a vocational completer . at the centers that we visited that had a food service program , nearly half of the reported vocational completers had completed only this first component . similarly , nearly 80 percent of the vocational completers in the carpentry program at five centers completed only the first of three components . in contrast , about 15 percent of the vocational completers of the centers' health occupations program completed only the first of two components ( see fig .