often , this is done through a gatekeeper . a gatekeeper is usually the patient's designated primary doctor who oversees the individual's care , referring the patient to specialists as needed . potential for toxic reaction is greater than potential benefit . minimally effective while causing toxicity . potential for toxic reaction is greater than potential benefit . minimally effective while causing toxicity . potential for toxic reaction is greater than potential benefit . minimally effective while causing toxicity . potential for toxic reaction is greater than potential benefit . least effective of available antiemetics . at our request , hcfa's office of the actuary used data from the medicare current beneficiary survey to determine the percentage of community - based elderly who used at least 1 of the 20 drugs identified in appendix iii as generally inappropriate for their age group . the most current compiled data are for 1992 . the first step was to identify survey participants who were 65 or older and who were noninstitutionalized . of their survey population , 9,182 participants met these criteria . this group represented 29,862,854 medicare beneficiaries nationwide according to hcfa's office of the actuary . the next step was to determine which of these participants used at least 1 of the 20 drugs sometime during 1992 and project that use to the national population . the results indicated that an estimated 17.5 percent or 5,219,811 noninstitutionalized medicare beneficiaries 65 or older used at least 1 of those drugs during 1992 . these results are displayed in table iv.1 . specifically , the table lists the percentages of noninstitutionalized elderly found to be using each of the 20 drugs . the middle column details the results based on research using data from the 1987 national medical expenditure survey covering noninstitutionalized residents 65 or older . the right - hand column presents the results of the analysis described above . we did not include the research results based on interviews conducted during 1989 and 1990 of a sample of noninstitutionalized elderly 75 or older residing in santa monica , california . this was because the participants in this study represented one community rather than a national sample and belonged to a different age group than the other two studies . in addition , their use of the 20 drugs was measured during a period of 1 month versus 1 year in the other 2 analyses . use of a drug not recommended for the age group of a patient . the potential for , or the occurrence of , an adverse drug reaction as a result of the use of two or more drugs together . the potential for , or the occurrence of , an allergic reaction as a result of drug therapy . the potential for , or occurrence of , an undesirable alteration of the therapeutic effect of a given prescription because of the presence , in the patient for whom it is prescribed , of an additional disease condition . also , the potential for , or the occurrence of , an adverse effect of the drug on the patient's disease condition . a dosage that lies outside the daily recommended dosage range as specified in predetermined standards as necessary to achieve therapeutic benefit .