ii ) . to address the issue of how ihs ensures that temporary physicians working in ihs facilities are qualified and competent to perform the work assigned to them , we ( 1 ) reviewed ihs' policies and procedures for credentialing and privileging temporary physicians , ( 2 ) obtained and analyzed fiscal year 1993 contracts that ihs facilities had with locum tenens companies , ( 3 ) reviewed the credentials files of temporary physicians at two ihs hospitals , and ( 4 ) interviewed officials at four locum tenens companies that ihs had contracts with and discussed each company's policies and procedures for credentialing physicians . at the hospitals we visited , we reviewed minutes of 1993 meetings of quality assurance committees to determine whether the quality of care being provided by temporary physicians was ever questioned . when we identified problems , we reviewed the medical records of the patients involved and discussed the care with ihs staff physicians . we also interviewed an official of the federation of state medical boards ( fsmb ) to discuss dissemination of physician performance and disciplinary information obtained from fsmb's data bank . to determine what happened to patients who did not receive health care services at the time they were requested , we reviewed a list prepared by the hospitals of all denials and deferrals for fiscal year 1993 at the two hospitals we visited . from this list , we selected 20 files and tracked whether these patients eventually received care from either ihs or elsewhere and interviewed the ihs and non - ihs clinicians who provided this care . we also interviewed tribal leaders and health advocates from the chickasaw and choctaw nations and the sisseton - wahpeton sioux and oglala sioux tribes ; and interviewed oklahoma , navajo , and aberdeen area office staff and non - ihs health care providers . we reviewed and analyzed documents related to their contract health services budgets , eligibility requirements for receipt of care , medical priorities for funding , and program operations . at ihs headquarters , we analyzed contract health services management reviews of selected area and service unit programs and interviewed ihs officials who were knowledgeable about the program . we performed our work between april 1993 and october 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ihs has a difficult time retaining enough qualified physicians . to help meet the constant need for physicians to fill vacancies at various facilities and to supplement current medical staff , ihs service units enter into contracts with private companies that supply temporary physicians , known as locum tenens physicians , who provide services in ihs facilities . however , neither ihs' policy nor most of its service units' contracts with locum tenens companies explicitly requires that an examination be done of all medical licenses that a temporary physician may have before deciding whether the physician is allowed to treat ihs patients . furthermore , the contracts do not require that locum tenens companies provide ihs with all information they may have on all licenses a physician may hold . instead , ihs requires only that a physician have a medical license without restrictions to practice medicine .