these tests are described below . appendix iii provides information on their status . ssa's initial 1994 redesign plan called for testing and implementing alternative ways of serving claimants , based on teams of claims representatives and disability examiners . currently , a disability claim is handled primarily by two staff members ( the claims representative and the disability examiner ) , each working independently of the other , with minimal coordination . as part of the redesign plan , ssa expects to team its claims representatives and dds disability examiners so they can process claims in a coordinated manner . ssa also expects that this team environment would allow claims representatives and disability examiners to share skills and enhance communication , thus better preparing them for the transition to the dcm position . following this initial teaming of claims representatives and disability examiners , ssa plans to build on teaming by implementing the early decision list and sequential interviewing initiatives . ssa envisions that the early decision list and sequential interviewing would provide claims representatives and disability examiners with opportunities to ( 1 ) expedite the processing of disability claims by streamlining the interview process and ( 2 ) expand the claims representatives' skills and experience in the medical area and that of the disability examiners in the nonmedical area . the early decision list identifies severe disabilities that can be adjudicated by claims representatives with minimal training and documentation . the early decision list will allow a claims representative to approve certain types of claims . after approving a claim , the claims representative would forward the case to a medical consultant for final approval . currently , only the disability examiner and the medical consultant approve these claims . ssa expects that initially , about 100,000 claims per year might be approved under the early decision list . eventually , the number of early decision list cases will expand as claims representatives' skills and knowledge base increase . this expansion will result from ( 1 ) phasing in additional categories of disabilities and ( 2 ) the option for claims representatives to issue denials . our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . ssa provides assistance to people who qualify as disabled under two programs: ( 1 ) disability insurance ( di ) , which provides benefits to people who have worked and paid social security payroll taxes , and ( 2 ) supplemental security income ( ssi ) , which is an assistance program for people with limited income and resources who are blind , aged , or disabled . currently , the disability determination process starts when a person first applies for di or ssi disability benefits . to apply for benefits , he or she calls the national toll - free telephone number and is referred to a local ssa field office or visits or calls one of 1,300 local field offices . claims representatives in field offices assist with the completion of claims , obtain detailed medical and vocational history , and screen nonmedical eligibility factors . field office staff forward the claim to a dds .