we disagree . although few cases are reported and the overall risk appears to be small , cpsc's data can produce only imprecise national estimates , making it difficult to observe trends in the number of injuries over time . cpsc's data include only 13 observations over 9 years — a period that extends from before the changes to the standard and the stay of enforcement were proposed to 2 years after the amendments were enacted . as a result , we are unable to draw firm conclusions about trends in the number of injuries over time . we made several changes to the language of the draft report to clarify the reasons for our conclusions . cpsc's response also stated that the agency's staff do not rely solely on injury data for its continued support of the amendments but consider other information such as laboratory and analytical evidence . we agree that it is important to consider these other types of information in examining the changes to the standard . however , because our analysis focused only on burn injury data , an evaluation of these other types of information is beyond the scope of this report . specifically , this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) how many burn injuries involving children's sleepwear occurred annually before and after the amendments ? and ( 2 ) what conclusions , if any , can be drawn from these data about the effect of the changes to the sleepwear standard on the risk of injury ? to do our work , we obtained and analyzed data on burn injuries to children involving clothing in general and children's sleepwear in particular from cpsc and other sources . we reviewed the regulations related to children's sleepwear and the agency's documentation supporting these regulations . we also interviewed cpsc staff , health and consumer advocates , and industry representatives to obtain information about burn injuries and the sleepwear standard . we did our work between january and march 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . cpsc was established in 1972 under the consumer product safety act ( p.l . 92-573 ) to regulate consumer products that pose an unreasonable risk of injury , to assist consumers in using products safely , and to promote research and investigation into product - related deaths , injuries , and illnesses . cpsc has the authority to issue regulations that establish performance or labeling standards for consumer products . in addition , cpsc may order a product recall , in which an item is removed from store shelves and consumers are alerted to return the item for repair , replacement , or refund . although the agency has broad regulatory powers , much of its efforts are carried out by nonregulatory methods . cpsc often assists in the development or improvement of voluntary safety standards and addresses product hazards by providing safety information to consumers . with about 15,000 consumer products under its jurisdiction , cpsc has to carefully consider which potential product hazards it will address . the agency has established criteria for setting priorities to keep within its budget ( $47 million in fiscal year 1999 ) .