it is paramount to the success of the redesign . as a top - down process , reengineering requires strong , continuous , and committed senior executives from the beginning of the redesign . the chairman of the house subcommittee on social security , house ways and means committee , asked us to provide information on the implementation challenges facing ssa as it redesigns its disability claims process . more specifically , in this report , we address ssa's vision and progress for redesigning the disability claims process , issues related to the scope and complexity of the redesign , and the agency's efforts to maintain stakeholder support . to develop our information , we reviewed extensive literature on the principles of reengineering . we interviewed officials at ssa headquarters and its atlanta regional office . in its november 1994 redesign implementation plan , ssa called on its federal and state workforce to make the vision a reality . since then , some actions taken by ssa have raised major concerns for some stakeholders — especially salary issues . according to the president of the american federation of government employees , local 1923 , the union would have opposed the dcm position if ssa attempted to implement it as a grade 11 . under a memorandum of understanding between the union and ssa , those assigned to dcm positions will receive temporary promotions to grade 12 , one grade higher than the journeyman level for the claims representative position . maintaining stakeholder support is critical to reengineering . because stakeholders can jeopardize the chances for successful reengineering if they are not committed to it , managers of redesign must seek out and secure support from all stakeholders . stakeholders have considerable knowledge of the business and organizational environment and can help rally support from other stakeholders . ssa identified and tried to involve stakeholders in the redesign , but has encountered problems obtaining and maintaining their support . in september 1993 , ssa established an executive workgroup to identify the stakeholders that should be involved in the development and implementation of redesign . more than 140 stakeholders were identified from congressional , federal , state , public , and private groups . however , this action raised concerns for the state dds directors and their workforce , many of whom believe that the agreement with the union will ( 1 ) exacerbate the existing salary gap between state and federal employees and ( 2 ) give federal employees a workload that is currently states' responsibility . another stakeholder disagreement arose following deliberations of a workgroup ssa created to determine how to accelerate testing of the dcm position . this workgroup was comprised of ssa and dds management , claims representatives and disability examiners , and federal and state union representatives . the workgroup's final report endorsed ssa's proposal to test 1,500 dcms over a 3-year period . even though dds representatives were workgroup participants , they did not support ssa's proposal to test such a large number of positions . at the conclusion of the dcm workgroup's activities , the ncddd presented a position paper to the dprt director . the paper stated that the directors would only agree to a pilot test involving 60 state and 60 federal dcms .