the median was 54 percent . appendix ii lists projects' enrollment , attrition rates , and participant education award usage . project - level expenditures also varied widely . our expenditure data excluded funding for education awards and for state commission and corporation administrative expenses . projects obtained cash support and in - kind resources to cover their expenditures from the corporation , other federal agencies , state and local governments , and the private sector . the projects' expenditures ranged from $206,000 to $3.9 million . the median expenditure was $627,000 . the median enrollment was about 46 participants . attrition rates: the attrition rate for participants who ended service early for cause ranged from 3 to 58 percent . the median attrition rate was 22 percent . the overall attrition rate — participants who ended service early for either cause or compelling personal circumstances — ranged from 9 to 95 percent , and the median was 39 percent . education award usage: the proportion of participants who accessed their education award ranged from 17 to 78 percent . while some projects' service activities were focused on meeting a particular need within the community , such as housing , other projects' activities addressed multiple areas of need , such as environmental and education needs . in the project reports we reviewed in detail , participants organized food programs that served 2,500 children ; assisted with totally rehabilitating 16 vacant public housing units ; operated a 7-week summer reading camp for 36 children ; planted trees , removed debris , and created gardens improving 32 urban neighborhoods ; and provided parenting classes to low - income families . state commissioners and executive directors in all seven states agreed with senior corporation officials that a federal role in the americorps program is needed . none of these officials believed that eliminating the federal corporation and simply allocating funds directly to state commissions would serve the program well . while some state officials told us that the grant allocation process warrants significant change , other state officials noted the indispensability of federal oversight . corporation officials believed that a federal role is needed for conducting nationwide data gathering on the americorps program , evaluating the performance of americorps projects and state commissions , and providing a central repository of information on the “best practices” of individual americorps projects and state commission operations . all seven state commission executive directors agreed that a federal role is necessary to provide the americorps program with a national identity . according to these officials , a national identity helps americorps projects obtain widespread public support . they told us that national identity provides americorps participants with a sense that the benefits of their service extend not only to themselves and their communities , but to the whole nation . furthermore , they said americorps' name recognition and positive reputation help local projects recruit participants . to promote national identity , the corporation provides americorps projects national advertisement , service gear , and the means to network with other projects across the country to share experience and knowledge .