until then , these concerns will remain . we identified two problems that are not addressed in either fda's current regulation or its proposed approach . we found that some public umbilical cord blood banks obtain informed consent after collecting the blood . some tissue facilities procure their own tissue and process it themselves . other tissue facilities procure their own tissue but have it processed by an outside entity and then receive the tissue back from the processor for distribution to their clients ( that is , hospitals and dentists ) . some facilities receive tissue from other facilities for processing . an assessment of tissue suitability is based on an extensive medical , sexual , and social history completed by the next of kin of a cadaveric donor . living donors complete their own histories . the tissue of donors who meet all acceptance requirements is retrieved under aseptic or otherwise clean techniques and quarantined until a blood sample sent for infectious disease testing for hiv and hepatitis b and c shows that the tissue is safe . table 1 outlines the infectious diseases that have been transmitted by human tissue . each donor is assigned a unique identification number to facilitate tracing tissues during processing and distribution . processing procedures vary by tissue type . some tissue facilities use bleach and peroxide on bones , although this causes structural weaknesses . also , other facilities have advertised the use of “air drying,” although this technique is unfamiliar to some tissue facility officials as an efficacious tool for inactivation . gamma radiation is also used to process bone . for weight - bearing transplants , this process has been found to increase susceptibility to fracture ( not all processors use this technique , but some do ) . irradiation may be a good viral inactivation procedure , but it can cause mechanical problems in the processed bone . although some physical and chemical agents have been shown to reduce the likelihood of isolating virus from treated solid tissues , we found no conclusive evidence that those processes render solid tissue completely safe and structurally intact . in a case of hiv transmission through the use of fresh - frozen bone allografts from a donor who was negative on hiv screening but who infected four organ recipients and three of four recipients of fresh - frozen bone , it was found that more than 25 other recipients of tissue from this donor did not become infected . the latter group were transplanted with tissues that were relatively avascular ; thus , it is unclear whether hiv transmission was absent because of processing or vascularity or both . although processes used to clean , sterilize , and render infectious agents harmless may affect the safety and efficacy of the tissue being processed , fda officials agree that they have little information about the types of techniques currently in use and that they have not specified the processes that can be used safely and efficaciously . the proposed approach would require that facilities validate their procedures for safety and efficacy and make this information available to fda upon inspection .