not applicable . as table ii.1 illustrates , the number of disclosures under vdp and the protocol has been small . an hhs - oig official told us he believes that with justice no longer a formal partner in the program , it is unlikely that this protocol will be highly utilized . however , in the belief that vdp's strict application requirements were discouraging providers from applying , hhs - oig removed the eligibility requirements from the protocol . ” and “what risk areas does our organization face ? ” a few hospitals will have employees respond to hypothetical situations so the compliance officer can judge whether or not the employee knows what to do when faced with concerns regarding compliance with medicare rules . almost all of the hospitals in our study believe their liability under the fraud and abuse statutes will be reduced as a result of their compliance programs . for most of them the reduction of improper payments and their attendant liabilities is a benefit that exceeds the costs of their compliance programs . in addition to this benefit , hospitals expressed hope that they would receive some form of recognition of their compliance efforts if they should be the targets of an investigation by the federal government . they also believe the compliance program helps foster an improved culture for “doing the right thing.” additionally , several hospitals said their compliance program helps them maintain their reputation in the community . these hospital officials told us that these benefits , where realized , also indicate compliance program effectiveness . several of the hospitals we interviewed told us they received such recognition when they were the target of an investigation . one hospital , with a long - standing compliance program , told us that it was subject to an hhs - oig physicians at teaching hospitals audit . this hospital credited its compliance program with enabling it to arrange not only a less expensive method for conducting the audit but , ultimately , a written resolution of the audit without findings . five hospitals that had entered into settlements with justice and hhs - oig told us that their compliance efforts were recognized in the form of nonexclusion from medicare , less onerous future compliance requirements , or less than treble damages . however , more hospitals expressed concern about not getting such recognition from law enforcement agencies . at least one hospital system claimed that a u.s. attorney did not give it credit for its preexisting compliance program in a settlement because the u.s. attorney believed the hospital involved had not effectively corrected prior misconduct . nevertheless , justice and hhs - oig officials told us , and have publicly stated , that they will consider the presence of an effective compliance program when settling allegations of improper billing by hospitals . during our study we attempted to determine whether u.s . attorneys have encountered compliance programs in the course of their investigations and whether the presence of a compliance program affected the investigation . because justice does not track whether health care providers it investigates have compliance programs , we asked justice officials to contact the u.s. attorneys' offices responsible for most of the districts where the providers in our study were located .