labor uses the f.w . dodge data because f.w . labor supplements these data with additional information provided to the national office by federal agencies regarding their planned construction projects . the rspr also includes the date of the most recent survey for each county and whether the existing wage determinations for each county are union , nonunion , or a combination of both . using this information , the regional offices , in consultation with the national office , designate the counties and type of construction to be included in the upcoming regional surveys . although labor usually designates the county as the geographic unit for data collection , in some cases more than one county is included in a specific data - gathering effort . the regional offices determine the resources required to conduct each of the priority surveys . when all available resources have been allocated , the regional offices transmit to the national office for review their schedules of the surveys they plan to do: the types of construction , geographic area , and time frames of when they plan to survey each defined area . when labor's national office has approved all regional offices' preliminary survey schedules , it assembles them in a national survey schedule that it transmits to interested parties , such as major national contractor and labor organizations , for their review and comment . the national office transmits any comments or suggestions received from interested parties to its affected regional offices . organizations proposing modifications of the schedule are asked to support their perceived need for alternative survey locations by providing sufficient evidence of the wages paid to workers in the type of construction in question in the area where they want a survey conducted . the target date for establishing the final fiscal year survey schedule is september 15 . once the national office has established the final schedule , each regional office starts to obtain the information needed to generate lists of survey participants for each of the surveys it plans to conduct . each regional office then contacts construction resources analysis ( cra ) at the university of tennessee . cra applies a model to the f.w . dodge data to identify all construction projects in the start - up phase ( within the parameters specified in the regional office's request ) and produces a file of projects that were active during a given time period . the time period may be 3 months or longer , depending on whether the number of projects active during the period is adequate for a particular survey . third parties may obtain wage data for their own purposes , such as for union officials that need wage information to correctly assess workers' contributions toward fringe benefits . third - party data generally serve as a check on data submitted by contractors if both submit data on the same project . regional offices also organize local meetings with members of interested organizations to explain the purpose of the surveys and how to fill out the wd - 10 . dodge reports do not identify all the subcontractors , both the wd - 10 and the transmittal letter ask for a list of subcontractors on each project .