ii. ) a primary concern in moving to individual account plans is the increased risk to the security of retirement income . historically , social security has offered near certainty regarding benefit receipt . the uncertainty that can surround the amount and lifelong receipt of nonannuity , privately provided retirement income is , in fact , one of the major rationales for public provision of retirement income . individual accounts introduce elements of market risk and other risks currently borne by the federal government . markets are volatile , and , while they can generally be expected to provide better returns than bonds over the long term , they have had periods of substantial downturn that lasted for some years . pensions hold a majority of their assets in stocks , and even individuals hold substantial amounts of their savings in accounts that are invested in stock market equities — such as iras , mutual funds , voluntary 401 ( k ) plans , and so on . thus , if a significant portion of social security income also depended on the market's performance , a broad and long - lasting market downturn could have a negative impact on a large portion of retirement income . even if the market experienced no dramatic or long - lasting downturns , the normal market cycles will create “winners” and “losers,” depending on when and how workers invest their “social security” assets in the market and when they liquidate their holdings . individuals with similar work histories could receive substantially different benefits . as long as workers are aware of and accept this risk , there will probably not be calls to fix the “unfair benefit outcomes.” however , if such large differences in outcomes become commonplace , many participants could become dissatisfied with the program . if individual account proposals were implemented , the question of how to preserve the goal of income adequacy would need to be answered . many proposals based on the annuity - welfare model seek to minimize the redistributive aspect of social security and focus on providing a basic income floor or minimum benefit . thus , one issue involves determining the appropriate level of “social adequacy” for the social insurance system . proposals for individual accounts focus primarily on the retirement benefits portion of the program , but the current social security system also includes ancillary benefits that may not be easily obtained or duplicated in the private market . it is important , then , to consider how creating individual accounts would affect these other elements of the benefit package — in particular , disability benefits and benefits for dependents ( spouses , children , and survivors ) . social security also has important interactions with other retirement income sources: pensions , personal savings , and earnings play substantial roles in determining the level of income that individuals and households will have in retirement . the annuity - welfare concept of social insurance leads to questioning the appropriate role for the government in providing retirement income .