but what is and what should that commitment be ? since colonial times , there has been little doubt that servicemembers injured in combat are entitled to compensation for their injuries . there is less agreement , however , on the role and responsibility of the federal government in meeting the other health care needs of veterans . decisions made with regard to what the nation's commitment is to its veterans will largely drive decisions on whether eligibility distinctions should continue to be based on factors such as degree of service - connected disability and income . if a decision is made that all veterans should be eligible for the same comprehensive health benefits , then eligibility distinctions will , in the future , be used only to determine veterans' relative priorities for care . if , however , a decision is made that certain veterans should be given more extensive benefits than others , then such distinctions will continue to be used to define the differences in benefits . for example , certain categories of veterans might be eligible for a broader range of services or lower cost sharing . the question then would become whether to keep the same distinctions as in the current law or base the distinctions on other factors . in three other countries that operated direct delivery systems for veterans ( united kingdom , australia , and canada ) , declining use of veterans' hospitals prompted actions to open them to nonveterans . it was hoped that caring for community patients would allow the hospitals and staff to maintain their medical expertise and expand services . should our veterans' health care system similarly be opened to nonveterans ? among the options that could be considered would be extending veterans' benefits to more dependents . if a veteran is uninsured and lacks health care options , his or her family is also likely to be uninsured and without adequate health care . once a benefit has been established , it can be difficult to change the cost - sharing requirements . as new benefits are added , however , an opportunity exists to determine to what extent the government and the veteran will share the cost of the added benefits . because of the limitations on coverage of routine outpatient services , va's health care safety net is structured more like a catastrophic health insurance plan than comprehensive health insurance . most veterans are responsible for paying for routine health care services not needed to obviate the need for hospital care . for veterans with other public or private insurance , this limitation likely has a minimal effect on their use of health care services . but low - income veterans without public or private insurance must either use their own funds to obtain routine health care services or forgo needed care . an important issue , then , in considering eligibility reform is whether changes need to be made in va's safety net mission . veterans frequently have unmet needs for nursing home and other long - term care services . medicare and most private health insurance cover only short - term , post - acute nursing home , and home health care .