iv. ) we will send copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on governmental affairs , the senate committee on labor and human resources , the house committee on economic and educational opportunities , and the house committee on government reform and oversight ; the secretary of education ; the president of connie lee ; and other interested parties . almost all were revenue bonds . the five bonds rated a or better were insured after the higher education amendments of 1992 . according to connie lee officials , each bond was refused insurance by other insurance companies before connie lee agreed to insure it , in accordance with the 1992 amendments . the bonds did not exceed the limits on the amount of a - rated business imposed on connie lee by the act , as amended . in addition to the 95 bonds that connie lee insured , at the end of september 1995 , 17 schools were considering whether to accept connie lee's offer of insurance . as of september 30 , 1995 , connie lee had declined to insure 406 bonds because of concerns it had about the schools' ability to repay bond principal and make interest payments as scheduled . it had also rejected an undetermined number of bonds for insurance because the bonds' credit ratings were a or better . data are not available on those applications for insurance because connie lee does not maintain such data . since october 1991 , at least 23 hbcus have approached connie lee about obtaining bond insurance for 25 bonds . as of september 30 , 1995 , connie lee had insured only one bond for an hbcu — a bbb - rated $2.2 million bond insured in july 1994 for a 4-year public university . standard and poor's has since downgraded that bond into the noninvestment grade category . as of september 30 , 1995 , this school was continuing discussions with connie lee about insuring a second bond , but connie lee had not decided whether to offer insurance for the bond . in addition to the bond it insured , connie lee offered to insure seven other bonds for hbcus . this is because of standard and poor's high capital requirements for insuring noninvestment grade issues . a federal subsidy might take the form of a low - interest loan or a grant to connie lee , connie lee officials said . allowing connie lee to make loans to schools that usually cannot issue bonds or that are unable to obtain bond insurance because their bonds would be relatively low rated was also suggested . connie lee would borrow money from the treasury or the federal financing bank to make loans to schools whose bonds would be rated bbb , but especially to those that would be noninvestment grade , they said . this would be a new line of business for connie lee and could be administered apart from its bond insurance business through a separate subsidiary company . connie lee officials realized that their proposed actions would require federal legislation .