i and ii. ) we also interviewed staff of 12 of the surveyed hmo plans ( plans that reported having extensive preventive and monitoring services ) and of 6 disease management companies . in addition , we reviewed the professional literature on diabetes care and discussed diabetes management issues with representatives from medical specialty societies , interest groups , national and regional hcfa offices , and recognized experts . does your plan have a computer system that generates reminders for physicians when specific patients are due for specific services ? can you estimate about what proportion of all your medicare enrollees have type ii diabetes ? in general , we did not find a strong association between the use of particular approaches to diabetes management and specific hmo characteristics , such as model type , tax status ( for profit or not for profit ) , or size . ( see tables ii.3 and ii.4. ) however , for - profit hmos reported slightly higher use of several diabetes management approaches than not - for - profit hmos . these included use of diabetes registries , mailings to enrollees with diabetes , and employment of diabetes - related health professionals , such as certified diabetes educators or nutritionists . similarly , hmos with the most experience as medicare contractors — either in medicare enrollment or in length of medicare contract — were more likely to use certain diabetes management approaches , such as clinical practice guidelines , mailings to physicians and enrollees , and a diabetes registry . table ii.3: diabetes interventions reported by hmos ( percent ) table ii.4: hmos efforts to monitor recommended services by plan characteristic ( percent ) . rosamond katz , assistant director , ( 202 ) 512-7148 ellen m. smith , evaluator - in - charge jennifer grover , evaluator stan stenersen , evaluator evan stoll , programmer analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . does your plan operate any type of program designed to consolidate services for diabetics ? orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . does your plan mail educational newsletters or pamphlets about diabetes care to your diabetics ?