examples follow . in california , surveyors found that one branch of an hha cared for 581 patients over the 12 months ending september 1996 — more than the average number of patients cared for by an entire hha in the state during that time . the branch was not complying with one condition of participation , and the surveyors recommended the branch office be denied certification as an independent hha . among its problems was the fact that the branch office had no system in place to ensure that its contractor staff had the appropriate qualifications and licenses . similarly , a branch office of a massachusetts hha had cared for 69 patients since the hha's last survey . the branch was denied initial certification as an independent hha because it failed to meet nine standards associated with several conditions of participation . for example , the surveyors found that the branch office , in 10 of 12 cases examined , did not follow the plan of care and provide services as frequently as ordered by a physician . at the time of our review , the hha had not yet submitted its correction plan , and the branch office had not been certified as an independent hha . we also found that it is common for hhas to have branch offices located hundreds of miles from the parent office , which may result in branch office staff receiving less direct supervision from their parent office than is required by medicare . for example , one texas hha has branch offices located over 300 miles from the parent office . a california hha located near sacramento operates four branch offices in other parts of the state as far as 200 miles away . hcfa does not define how far a branch office can be located from the parent office because , according to hcfa officials , a fair definition that applies on a national basis would be difficult to develop because of variations in geography and population throughout the country . however , some states have set limits . for example , one state requires that a branch office be located no more than 100 miles from its parent office , while another restricts a branch to being no more than 1 hour's drive from the parent office . in 1996 , an administrative law judge addressed the issue in a california case about whether an entity should be designated as a branch or an independent hha . the judge ruled that parent offices must be capable of sharing required functions on a daily basis with their branches and that a branch office located approximately 50 miles from the parent office , which could , in heavy traffic , be up to 2-1 / 2 hours' driving time away , did not meet this criterion . under hcfa's recertification criteria , hhas are to be resurveyed every 12 to 36 months , depending upon such factors as how long they have been certified , results of prior surveys , and changes in ownership .