evans . “population prevalence estimates from complex samples.” journal of clinical epidemiology , vol . 45 ( 1992 ) , pp . ( relevant to study 7. ) ebly , e.m. , and others . “prevalence and types of dementia in the very old: results from the canadian study of health and aging.” neurology , vol . 44 ( 1994 ) , pp . ( relevant to study 3. ) rocca , w.a. , and others . “frequency and distribution of alzheimer's disease in europe: a collaborative study of 1980-1990 prevalence findings.” annals of neurology , vol . 30 ( 1991 ) , pp . ( relevant to studies 2 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 16 , and 18. ) the source of the diagnostic criteria is g. mckhann and others , “clinical diagnosis of alzheimer's disease: report of the nincds [national institute of neurological and communicative disorders and stroke] — adrda work group under the auspices of the department of health and human services task force on alzheimer's disease. the criteria for the clinical diagnosis of probable alzheimer's disease ( ad ) include dementia established by clinical examination and documented by the mini - mental test , blessed dementia scale , or some similar examination and confirmed by neuropsychological tests ; deficits in two or more areas of cognition ; progressive worsening of memory and other cognitive functions ; no disturbance of consciousness ; onset between the ages of 40 and 90 , most often after the age of 65 ; and absence of systemic disorders or other brain diseases that in and of themselves could account for the progressive deficits in memory and cognition . the diagnosis of probable ad is supported by progressive deterioration of specific cognitive functions such as language ( aphasia ) , motor skills ( apraxia ) , and perception ( agnosia ) ; impaired activities of daily living and altered patterns of behavior ; family history of similar disorders , particularly if confirmed neuropathologically ; and laboratory results of normal lumbar puncture as evaluated by standard techniques ; normal pattern of nonspecific changes in the electroencephalogram , such as increased slow - wave activity ; and evidence of cerebral atrophy on computerized tomography ( ct ) , with progression documented by serial observation . other clinical features consistent with the diagnosis of probable alzheimer's disease , after exclusion of causes of dementia other than alzheimer's disease , include plateaus in the course of progression of the illness ; associated symptoms of depression ; insomnia ; incontinence ; delusion ; illusions ; hallucinations ; catastrophic verbal , emotional , or physical outbursts ; sexual disorders ; and weight loss ; other neurological abnormalities in some patients , especially with more advanced disease , and including motor signs such as increased muscle tone , myoclonus , or gait disorder ; seizures in advanced disease ; and ct normal for age . criteria that make the diagnosis of probable alzheimer's disease uncertain or unlikely include sudden , apoplectic onset ; focal neurological findings such as hemiparesis , sensory loss , visual field deficits , and lack of coordination early in the course of the illness ; and seizures or walking disturbances at the onset or early in the course of the illness .