additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . other hcfa comments were incorporated in the report where appropriate . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . results were similar for our more recent data set . for this follow - on , we also reviewed a range of hourly rates identified in contracts between opts and snfs under the jurisdiction of one hcfa contractor . in those contracts that specified hourly rates for occupational therapy , the rates varied considerably , from $54 to $210 per hour . as we reported in 1995 , medicare has paid substantially more than market rates for some services , which not only increases medicare costs but also can encourage providers to supply excessive services . we also reported that hcfa has generally been slow in addressing overpricing problems . delay in drafting and implementing regulatory changes such as price corrections and salary guidelines is inherent in the rulemaking process established by the administrative procedures act as well as in the complexities of intra - and interagency coordination ( see fig . for it to fully satisfy formal rulemaking requirements , hcfa has projected that it could take 7 years or longer from the time it learned of the problem , and almost 3 years from the time it started assembling salary data , to establish salary equivalency guidelines for professionals providing therapy services . hcfa , therefore , has drafted proposed legislative language under which salary equivalency guidelines for occupational and speech therapists would be established directly by statute , negating the need for formal rulemaking . the proposal was included in the december 1995 summary of the president's medicare proposal . in our september 1995 report , we suggested a similar approach to the effect that the congress consider allowing the secretary of hhs to set maximum prices on the basis of market surveys or , if the formal rulemaking process is preserved , allowing the secretary to make an interim adjustment in fees while the studies and rulemaking take place . hcfa officials consider the establishment of salary guidelines the most urgent step in solving the problem of inappropriate therapy charges . they do not believe it is absolutely necessary to achieve a standard definition of a therapy unit , such as a 15-minute interval , especially since this process would take another 2 or 3 years . their reasoning is that salary guidelines would provide the necessary link ( through the cost report settlement process ) between hours of therapy time and costs claimed . auditors could then confirm that medicare payments did not exceed salary limits .