additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we also reviewed program data and documents . in addition , we interviewed and obtained data from representatives of child care and resource and referral agencies ( ccr&r ) and child advocacy organizations . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . see appendix i for further discussion of our methodology . the cost of child care often creates an employment barrier for low - income parents attempting to support their families through work . to help low - income families meet their child care needs , the congress authorized four child care subsidy programs between 1988 and the passage of the new welfare reform legislation . under three of these programs — afdc / jobs child care , transitional child care , and at - risk child care — states were entitled to receive federal matching funds based on their own expenditures . states could receive matching federal funds through an open - ended entitlement for afdc / jobs and transitional child care expenditures but were limited in the amount of matching federal funds for expenditures on at - risk child care . for the fourth program — the ccdbg — states received capped federal allocations without state spending requirements . under the previous child care programs , federal and state program guidelines determined that afdc clients were entitled to child care assistance if they met the necessary work , education , or training requirements or left afdc because of employment , while non - afdc clients received child care subsidies if funds were available . funding from federal and state governments for these four child care programs totaled about $3.1 billion in fiscal year 1995 , the most recent year for which data were available . our previous work has suggested that child care subsidies can be an important factor in poor mothers' decisions to find and keep jobs . yet we found that the multiple and conflicting requirements of the four previous programs discouraged states from creating systems that gave continuous help with child care needs as families' welfare status changed . in addition , in part because of state budget constraints , states often emphasized meeting the needs of welfare families , who were entitled to subsidies , rather than those of nonwelfare families who , although not entitled to aid , were often at risk of losing their jobs and going on welfare because of lack of assistance with child care costs . the new ccdf provides federal funds to states for child care subsidies for families who are working or preparing for work and who have incomes of up to 85 percent of a state's median income , which is an increase from 75 percent under previous law .