iii ) . in summary , they suggested the development of contractor workgroups to rapidly produce model medical policies for the six groups of procedures in our study . as agreed with your office , unless you release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report for 30 days . at that time , we will send copies to other congressional committees and members with an interest in this matter , the secretary of health and human services , and the administrator of the health care financing administration . claims denied by these screens can be resubmitted by providers or appealed . as shown in figure 1 , claims that pass these basic criteria may be further screened against more complex medical criteria to identify claims that warrant manual review . most of the contractors we surveyed routinely pay claims for procedures suspected to be widely overused without first screening those claims against medical necessity criteria . we looked at six groups of procedures that providers frequently perform on patients who lack medical symptoms appropriate for the procedures . these procedures also rank among the 200 most costly services in terms of total medicare payments and accounted for almost $3 billion in medicare payments in 1994 . ( see table 1 below. ) four of the procedures — echocardiography , eye examinations , chest x rays , and duplex scans of extracranial arteries — are noninvasive diagnostic tests . colonoscopy can be either diagnostic or therapeutic , and yag laser surgery is sometimes used to correct cloudy vision following cataract surgery . in the first quarter of fiscal year 1995 ( oct. 1-dec. 31 , 1994 ) , we surveyed 17 contractors to determine whether they were using any type of medical necessity prepayment screens to review claims for these six groups of procedures . restraining the growth in medicare spending has proven difficult . this is in part because the fee - for - service payment system provides little financial incentive for physicians or patients to consider whether diagnostic tests and some routine services are medically necessary . moreover , physicians paid on a fee - for - service basis may have a financial incentive to increase their income by providing more services than are necessary . in addition , patients often lack the information and expertise necessary to question the medical necessity of services ordered by physicians . as a result of these two factors , preventing medicare payments for unnecessary services calls for program safeguards to check the accuracy and medical necessity of claims . one type of program safeguard is the use of medical policies that define the diagnostic criteria for a service . for example , a medical policy for echocardiography may allow payment if the patient's diagnosis is chronic pulmonary heart disease but deny payment if the diagnosis is indigestion . most medical policies and diagnostic criteria are established and applied locally by each of the 29 contractors ( also called carriers ) that the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) uses to process and pay claims submitted by physicians . including these diagnostic criteria in medicare claims processing systems can enable checking all claims for the service against the criteria before payment .