iii. ) fda's approach to ensuring that device manufacturers are operating tracking systems capable of tracing devices from distribution to end users has several limitations , such as a failure to include audits of the tracking systems in its inspections and infrequent inspections . to address these problems , cdrh's office of compliance is considering initiatives that are intended to strengthen its oversight of manufacturers' tracking systems , but the details of most of these initiatives have not yet been developed . moreover , fda has not taken steps to ensure that tracking continues when manufacturers responsible for tracking go out of business , merge , or are acquired by others . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . all manufacturers of such devices must adopt a method of device tracking . cdrh's office of compliance has primary responsibility for implementing and enforcing the requirements of the device tracking regulation . these responsibilities include providing agency field staff with guidance on inspecting manufacturers for compliance with the regulation during gmp inspections and monitoring corrections and removals of device products from the market . the office of compliance is also responsible for reviewing and approving exemptions and variances from one or more parts of the tracking regulation , filed by a manufacturer , importer , or distributor seeking relief . while we agree with hima that the ability of a tracking system to locate end users provides a valuable measure of recall success , we believe that the timeliness of recalls is also important . a key goal of tracking is to ensure that defective or dangerous devices can be corrected or removed from the market within a short period of time . thus , in our view , fda's timeliness guidelines for completing and terminating recalls are valuable indicators for measuring recall performance . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to other congressional committees and members with an interest in this matter , and we will make this report available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or john hansen at ( 202 ) 512-7105 .