( see fig . 3 for a list of the enabling services provided at each health center. ) one center reported no excess revenues from prepaid managed care . officials at nine of the health centers told us that returns from managed care had not contributed significantly to center support of enabling services and subsidized care . what lessons can be learned from health center experiences in prepaid managed care ? how does the bureau of primary health care ( bphc ) help centers prepare for operating under prepaid managed care systems ? in conducting this work , we performed detailed reviews of 10 health centers in four states — arizona , florida , massachusetts , and pennsylvania — that have had medicaid prepaid managed care programs since the mid - 1980s . ( see app . i for descriptive information on the 10 centers. ) at each health center , we collected program and financial data for fiscal years 1989 through 1993 . we also interviewed health center and state medicaid program officials . in addition , we visited state medicaid offices and health centers in tennessee and washington to learn about recent changes in their medicaid programs and the responses of health centers to these changes . we also interviewed bphc officials with responsibility for providing guidance and overseeing the community and migrant health center program . appendix ii contains a more detailed discussion of our methodology . our work was performed from january 1994 to march 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . grants to states to develop community health centers were first authorized by the federal government in the mid - 1960s . by the early 1970s , about 100 health centers had been established by the office of economic opportunity ( oeo ) . when oeo was phased out in the early 1970s , the centers supported under this authority were transferred to the public health service ( phs ) . since 1989 , close to $3 billion has been awarded in project grants to health centers . project grants are authorized under sections 329 and 330 of the public health service act and are to be used by health centers to provide primary health care and related services to medically underserved communities . bphc sets policy and administers the community and migrant health center program . bphc is part of the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) under phs . ten regional phs offices assist bphc with managing the program . the regional offices are primarily responsible for monitoring the use of program funds by grantees . in 1994 , the community and migrant health center program offered comprehensive primary health care services to about 7.1 million people through 1,615 health care delivery sites in medically underserved areas . health centers are expected to target their services to those with the greatest risk of going without needed medical care . about 44 percent of health center patients are children under 19 years old and 30 percent are women in their childbearing years . about 60 percent of health center patients live in economically depressed areas and nearly 63 percent have incomes below the federal poverty level . a central feature of health centers is their governance structure .