ii. ) a comparison of individual types of loans shows that icr users do not have higher delinquency rates than users of all other repayment plans ( see fig . for example , for nonconsolidated loans alone , the delinquency rate among icr users was below that among users of the standard plan and about the same as that among users of extended and graduated plans . even for dcs consolidation loans , icr users had a lower delinquency rate compared with those in the three other plans . how do borrowers' loan payments under icr compare with payments under other fdlp repayment plans ? how does the department of education , which administers the program , verify the accuracy of income reported by borrowers using icr ? we based our review on data supplied by the department of education as of march 31 , 1997 . we analyzed the usage of icr and compared it with the usage of the three other repayment plans generally available to fdlp borrowers — standard repayment ( 10 years , fixed monthly payment ) , extended repayment ( up to 30 years depending on amount borrowed , fixed monthly payment ) , and graduated repayment ( up to 30 years depending on amount borrowed , with low initial monthly payments that increase generally every 2 years ) . appendix i describes our scope and methodology in further detail . in fiscal year 1996 , students and their families used federal student loan programs to borrow approximately $30 billion to pay for postsecondary education . fdlp is one of two main approaches the federal government has taken to make loans available for college . under this program , students or their parents borrow money directly from the government through the schools the students attend . how do loan delinquencies and defaults under icr compare with delinquencies and defaults under other fdlp repayment plans ? the other major program , ffelp , provides loans through private lenders , and the federal government guarantees repayment if borrowers default . according to a department official , fdlp accounted for about 32.1 percent of student loan volume in fiscal year 1996 . most fdlp borrowers can select one of four repayment options , as illustrated in figure 1 . these four options differ by the amount of time allowed to repay loans and the flexibility of the payment schedule . the icr option is the most flexible . it allows borrowers to pay relatively small or no monthly payments when their incomes are low and to pay more when their incomes rise . for example , a married borrower with a loan balance of $20,000 and an annual family income of $15,000 would initially pay about $77 a month . if the borrower's annual income were $45,000 , the initial monthly payment would be about $225 . maximum of 25 years if the loan is not repaid after 25 years , the remaining balance is canceled ( the unpaid amount is considered income for tax purposes ) . for our analysis,we classified fdlp loans into three main categories . direct nonconsolidated loans: these are the basic fdlp loans with which students or their parents can help finance postsecondary education .