annuity . the annuity provided by the traditional formula and the “annuity equivalent” to the cash balance account ( nominal cash balance accounts converted to annuities at age 65 ) . lump sum . the lump sum value of the accrued benefit from the traditional formula — minimum distribution in accordance with irc section 417 ( e ) — and the nominal cash balance account value , based on the establishment of an opening account balance at conversion . lump sum values represent age - specific present values and are reported in nominal dollars . we examine annuities because cash balance plans legally are defined benefit plans and must provide an annual benefit commencing at normal retirement age , usually in the form of an annuity . the model computes two annuity benefit streams for the traditional formula . one stream shows the traditional formula annuity from the initial age of initial employment up to the age at conversion , with the annuity amount frozen at conversion until normal retirement age . the other stream shows the traditional formula annuity from the age of initial employment to the plan's normal retirement age . for each year upon conversion , the model converts beginning - of - year nominal account balances to “annuity equivalents.” to calculate the annuity equivalent to the cash balance account , the model incorporates the methodology recommended in irs notice 96-8 . we use the methodology prescribed by notice 96-8 because defined benefit plans must express benefits as a function of the plan's normal retirement age , whether as a series of annual payments or the actuarial equivalent of normal retirement benefits . according to irs notice 96-8 , nominal account balances are projected to normal retirement age using interest credits specified by the plan . the projected balance is converted into a deferred age 65 annuity . the “annuity conversion” is calculated in accordance with the mortality factors and interest rate prescribed by internal revenue code section 417 ( e ) . the annuity equivalent to the cash balance account determined by this methodology represents an annual benefit beginning at the plan - specified normal retirement age . the cash balance account annuity equivalent is directly comparable to the annuity provided under the final average pay formula . to compare the lump sum benefits provided by the two formulas , the model calculates the age - specific present value ( lump sum ) of the annuity produced by the final average pay formula . the age - specific present value of accrued benefits that defined benefit plans provide must be determined in accordance with irc section 417 ( e ) . under this requirement , annuity benefits are to be discounted to an actuarially equivalent amount , or a lump sum distribution , that equals the present value of the annuity generated by the formula . the model incorporates the mortality factors and interest rate mandated by irc section 417 ( e ) to determine the present value of the traditional formula annuity benefit .