iii ) . the average length of stay for these beneficiaries was 2.95 days . as we found when we made a similar comparison for maf inpatient costs , these costs compared favorably with the amount medicare would have paid if those patients had been treated at rural pps hospitals . table 3 shows by rpch and cost - reporting year the difference in payments to rpchs comparing the payments that would have been made to rural and urban pps hospitals . california has no certified rpchs . rpchs had to be located in rural counties and were limited to six inpatient acute care beds . initially , rpch inpatient stays were limited to a 72-hour maximum , but section 102 of the social security act amendments of 1994 ( p.l . 103-432 , oct. 31 , 1994 ) changed the requirement to an average of 72 hours during a cost - reporting year for periods beginning on or after october 1 , 1995 . rpchs employ midlevel practitioners — physician assistants and nurse practitioners — working under the supervision of a physician , who is not required to be located at the rpch . rpchs are not allowed to provide surgery requiring general anesthesia but may perform surgeries normally done under local anesthesia on an outpatient basis at a hospital or ambulatory surgical center . we found few surgical procedures being performed at rpchs during 1993-96 . in september 1993 , the first rpch , located in south dakota , was certified to participate in medicare . as shown in table 1 , there were 38 certified rpchs as of august 1997 . in addition to rpchs , the congress authorized a demonstration program for the operation of limited - service hospitals that was implemented by montana . under this program , medicare was authorized to pay for basic emergency care , outpatient services , and limited inpatient care ( maximum stay of 96 hours ) provided at these limited - service hospitals , known as medical assistance facilities ( maf ) . in our october 1995 report , we found that the mafs were important sources of emergency and primary care for their communities . mafs primarily served patients with urgent but uncomplicated conditions and stabilized patients with more complicated needs before transferring them to full - service hospitals . moreover , medicare's costs for inpatient care at mafs were lower than if the care had been furnished in rural hospitals . st. mary's hospital , pierre , s.d . st. mary's hospital , rochester , minn. sioux valley hospital , sioux falls , s.d . university of minnesota hospital and clinic , minneapolis , minn . transferred from rpchs in west virginia aultman hospital , canton , ohio davis memorial hospital , elkins , w.v . fairmount general hospital , fairmount , w.v . grafton city hospital , grafton , w.v . monongalia general hospital , morgantown , w.v . summersville memorial hospital , summersville , w.v . united hospital center , clarksburg , w.v . ( continued ) west virginia university hospital , morgantown , w.v . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .