ii ) . the board disagreed with our recommendation that tsp's educational materials include an explanation of tsp's role in fers and explicit examples of the effect of tsp deferral rates on total fers benefits . the board stated that such actions by tsp would constitute employee education about fers , which is an opm responsibility under the fers statute . the board noted that its educational materials are replete with illustrations that show the dramatic effect of contributions and investment earnings on the size of an employee's tsp account . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . private sector plans have such examples in their educational materials . were tsp's board to revise its materials to include that type of example , it would need to do so in collaboration with the federal office of personnel management ( opm ) , which has some responsibility for overall fers education , including establishing training programs for agency retirement counselors . in may 1995 , tsp's board decided to seek legislation that would add two investment options: an indexed domestic small capitalization equity fund and an indexed international equity fund . the board selected these funds because they add diversity and provide the opportunity for greater returns than the current options though at somewhat increased risk . adding the two funds would make tsp's number of investment options and mix more like those provided under private sector section 401 ( k ) plans . tsp's board began looking into the possibility of increasing the number of investment options in 1992 after the statutory restrictions on c and f fund investments expired . among other things , the board reviewed the investment options generally available under section 401 ( k ) plans and the returns and risks associated with them . on average , most private sector section 401 ( k ) plans offer four or more investment options that include a number of bond and stock funds of varying risk . the board's actions to broaden tsp's investment options are consistent with pension professionals' beliefs that employees should have a variety of investment options encompassing a range of risks and returns to provide the opportunity for higher earnings that would increase their retirement nest eggs . the new options would allow tsp participants to diversify their investments . the new funds would complement the c fund , which has historically outperformed the g and f funds by an average of about 4.5 percentage points since 1987 . proposed legislation to add the options was introduced in the senate on july 27 , 1995 , and in the house of representatives on september 12 , 1995 . tsp was designed to provide one source of retirement income for fers - covered employees .