iv. ) medicare+choice is at a crossroads . because of contract terminations and service area reductions , by january 2001 more than 1.6 million beneficiaries will have had to switch to a different plan or the traditional fee - for - service program since 1999 . industry representatives contend that payment rate increases are necessary to keep the program viable . however , the medicare+choice program has already been expensive for taxpayers . as our work on payment rates shows , the vast majority of plans have gotten paid more for their medicare enrollees than the government would have paid had these enrollees remained in the traditional fee - for - service program . raising payment rates to a level sufficient to retain the plans leaving medicare would mean increasing the excess that currently exists in payments for plan enrollees relative to their expected fee - for - service costs . in areas of the country where there are few beneficiaries and providers are in short supply , no reasonable payment rate increase is likely to entice plans to participate in medicare . thus , a trade - off exists between the significant additional costs that would be needed to keep more plans in the program and the benefits of providing more beneficiaries with options for accessing medicare covered services . such a trade - off raises questions about the equity of providing a greater array of benefits to a fraction of the medicare beneficiary population . in our view , efforts to protect the viability of medicare+choice plans come at the expense of ensuring medicare's financial sustainability over the long term . in commenting on our report , hcfa stated that our findings confirmed its own analysis of medicare+choice plan withdrawals . hcfa noted that the pattern of withdrawals , analyzed at the corporation level instead of at the individual plan level , reinforces our finding that factors besides payment rates likely influenced plans' participation decisions . for example , hcfa said that in 2001 , 54 percent of aetna's medicare+choice enrollees and 69 percent of cigna's enrollees will be affected by plan withdrawals , but less than 2 percent of pacificare's enrollees and only 0.1 percent of kaiser's enrollees will be affected . the agency contends that these differences provide evidence that the withdrawals reflect corporations' strategic business decisions that go beyond medicare payment adequacy . hcfa also said that it believes the administration's proposal to provide a prescription drug benefit to all enrollees would both reduce inequities in benefit availability and increase payments to medicare+choice plans that cover prescription drugs . ( hcfa's comments appear in app . we also provided representatives of the american association of health plans ( aahp ) , the bluecross blueshield association ( bcbsa ) , and the health insurance association of america ( hiaa ) an opportunity to comment on the report . all three groups disagreed with our conclusions and stated that our report did not touch on important issues relevant to plan withdrawals . they also said that withdrawals can be costly for beneficiaries because medicare+choice plans typically provide preventive care services and other benefits that are not covered in the traditional ffs program . ( aahp's , bcbsa's , and hiaa's comments appear in apps .