sill. ) although initial enrollment was slower than expected , the san antonio area had reached 99-percent capacity and the texoma area 67 percent by the end of june 1999 . service delivery was phased in to avoid overload . the mtfs had always served substantial numbers of patients who were 65 and older as part of ft. sill's silver care program , and largely to support gme at bamc and wilford hall . other difficulties affect the demonstration itself . these difficulties include ( 1 ) possible overlaps in procedures , ( 2 ) the lack of clear provisions for beneficiaries' transition to other forms of health care at the end of the demonstration , ( 3 ) uncertainty regarding which aspects of senior prime operation dod will handle centrally for the program as a whole and which will be left to the sites , and ( 4 ) insufficient information regarding the adequacy of arrangements for seniors' care during periods of deployment of military medical staff . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) to work with hcfa to examine medicare and dod procedures , measurement , and reporting systems with an eye toward seeking waivers ( where warranted ) and eliminating duplication to the extent possible ; work with hcfa to determine conditions for transitioning out of the demonstration into other coverage ( including medicare options , access to medigap insurance , and care at the mtf ) and to notify enrollees of these conditions as soon as possible ; determine ( in advance , whenever possible ) which hcfa directives and operational matters will be handled centrally and will be uniform across the senior prime program and which matters will be handled at the site level ; and review plans for the provision of health care to seniors during times of military deployment and either ( 1 ) ensure that staffing at participating mtfs is sufficient to provide seniors with primary care or ( 2 ) provide for primary care to be delivered through some other means . most importantly , if medical staff from the mtf were deployed to support a military action , would each site still have sufficient resources to meet its commitments for seniors' care ? this issue arose in concrete form in colorado springs , where both the air force academy hospital and evans army community hospital had medical staff ( including primary care physicians ) deployed overseas at the time of our visit . our work documented that military retirees enrolled in the medicare subvention demonstration need clearer information about their options for care through the military health system as well as their medicare options once the demonstration has ended . in the temporary absence of one colleague , each of the three remaining air force primary care physicians in internal medicine carried a substantial extra number of senior prime beneficiaries . having just gotten to know one new doctor , these beneficiaries were not eager to be reassigned to another when the deployed physician returned . evans also had some trouble fitting in all of the requested senior prime appointments , in light of deployment .