medicaid is an expensive program . it currently consumes about 6 percent of all federal outlays ( 3 times the share devoted to food stamps and 5 times the share devoted to afdc ) . moreover , medicaid's slice of the federal budget is growing faster than most other major budget items , including medicare . if medicaid continues indefinitely at its forecast growth rate ( 10.7 percent ) , federal spending on the program will double roughly every 5 to 7 years . success in containing cost growth in medicaid , as for the health care sector at large , has been elusive . care for the elderly , blind , and disabled populations — particularly long - term care — is expensive , consuming more than $80 billion of the $130 billion cost of medicaid in 1993 . for acute care services , however , the promise of lower utilization has made the capitated payment features of managed care plans attractive to the states . historical inflation argument . the administration allowed some states to project increases in their baseline costs at rates higher than the administration's existing projections of national medicaid spending growth . these states successfully argued that past years' spending increases exceeded average national spending growth and thus justified a higher or faster growing baseline . for example , in the first year of their waivers , florida and tennessee received relatively large increases ( about 16 percent ) compared with the previous year . florida also received large annual increases for the remaining years of the waiver . because medicaid costs in the late 1980s and the early 1990s grew for reasons not expected to affect future spending , estimates of future medicaid expenditures that rely on historical cost growth may be inflated . for example , although the states' use of provider taxes and donations contributed to the rapid rise of dsh payments between 1989 and 1993 , recent legislation strictly limits dsh growth . hypothetical expansion argument . four states — hawaii , rhode island , kentucky , and ohio — successfully argued that their baselines should include the cost of extending coverage to optional eligibility groups that could have been , but were not then , served by the state's medicaid program . these hypothetical expansions primarily covered women and children ( but may also include elderly and disabled individuals ) , whose coverage was optional . although in hawaii many of these individuals received limited benefits under one of two state - funded programs , these groups were not served at all in the medicaid programs . the states argued that since they could have submitted a state plan amendment and thus received federal medical assistance payments for providing health services to these groups , an equivalent amount of federal funding for the medicaid demonstration project , which would include them , should be considered budget neutral . including the section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) population increased hawaii's baseline by about $58 million over 5 years .