initial test is reactive . a retest in duplicate is performed . one or both duplicate tests are reactive . a confirmatory test is performed ( this test is not always required ) ; the prospective donor is deferred , and the collected unit is discarded . initial test is negative ; or if reactive , both duplicate tests are negative . none ; the donor is not deferred . duplicate tests are repeatedly reactive and confirmatory test is neither positive nor negative . the donor is deferred and the collected unit is discarded . duplicate tests are repeatedly reactive and confirmatory test is positive . the donor is deferred and the collected unit is discarded . any unit that is repeatedly reactive is considered positive even if confirmatory tests determine that the testing procedure produced a false - positive result . such results require that the donor be deferred . fda recommends but does not require that donors who are repeatedly reactive but indeterminate or negative by a confirmatory test should be notified and placed on donor deferral registries . as an added precaution against the inclusion of any plasma that may contain undetectable hiv virus , one company performs additional tests for the hiv antibody . each donation is tested according to the standards noted above by supplementary testing using a different antibody test than that used in the initial screening procedure . the testing uses “minipools” derived from samples of 64 donations . units corresponding to test samples that are confirmed reactive for anti - hiv at individual sampling are then rejected and the donor is deferred . only nonreactive donations are considered to be acceptable for further manufacture . pcr testing — which is more sensitive than licensed antigen or antibody detection methods currently used to screen collected plasma — will be done on pools of plasma rather than single donations . this approach is being pursued because of the constant state of rapid evolution of nucleic acid diagnostics and increased cost - effectiveness of pool testing . fda has noted that it considers pool testing an interim step , but the agency does believe that testing of plasma pools has public health benefits and should be implemented . consistent with this position , tests for plasma pools are now under “investigational new drug” status and are planned to be used by all fractionators to test all units of donated plasma in minipools . some companies have also determined that every product lot that is to be released should be tested one more time to ensure that there were not errors during the testing of the plasma , testing of the pools , and the manufacturing of the product . final testing of lots for some companies includes tests for hbsag , while other companies test for hiv using antibody testing and for hiv , hbv , hcv , and hav using pcr tests . heating and chemical inactivation are the two main methods in use today to inactivate viruses . heating in solution , terminal dry heat , vapor heating , and dry heat under solvent are commonly used . for chemical inactivation , manufacturers typically use solvent - detergent techniques , ethanol ( during fractionation ) , and low ph .