ii. ) the department of education administers four major student financial aid programs under title iv of hea: ffelp , the william d. ford direct loan program ( fdlp ) , the federal pell grant program , and the federal campus - based programs . these programs together will make available an estimated $47 billion to about 8 million individuals during the 1998-99 academic year — about 80 percent of it in student loans . schools are responsible for obtaining and evaluating the financial aid history of students to ensure that students are eligible for aid . to address our objectives , we ( 1 ) surveyed a random sample of schools that participate in financial aid programs , ( 2 ) reviewed pertinent documents , and ( 3 ) spoke with department of education officials and members of the higher education community . to obtain information on schools' use of nslds , including problems encountered and benefits derived , we surveyed a random sample of postsecondary colleges and universities that participated in federal student financial aid programs as of august 1997 . during the development of the survey instrument , department officials informed us that all schools use nslds because data they receive on sars and isirs are generated from the system ; therefore , we focused our survey questions on the use of nslds' on - line and batch processing functions . in addition , we reviewed nslds documents obtained from the department and prior gao reports . to identify measures undertaken by the department to ensure schools' use of the system , we interviewed officials from the department as well as staff from raytheon / e - systems , the contractor responsible for developing and maintaining nslds . we discussed nslds' current operation , including the functions available for school use , the number of schools that have access to nslds , methods by which information is transmitted into nslds , and how users gain access to this information . to aid in designing our survey instrument , we also contacted members of the higher education community . we interviewed officials from the american association of state colleges and universities , the american council on education , the coalition of higher education assistance organizations , the national association of independent colleges and universities , the national association of student financial aid administrators , and the national student loan clearinghouse . we conducted our study between may 1997 and july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to determine the extent of schools' use of nslds' on - line and batch processing functions , we developed a survey instrument and sent it to a randomly selected sample of postsecondary schools . the survey covered a variety of topics , including descriptive background data on each school , types of access to nslds , and actual experiences using nslds' on - line and batch processing functions . for example , we asked schools to identify themselves as public or private and to provide the size of their student body . we also asked the schools that reported having access to nslds whether they used the system themselves or through a third - party servicer .