ii. ) title iv - e provides an open - ended individual entitlement for foster care maintenance payments to cover a portion of the food , housing , and incidental expenses of children from afdc - eligible families . title iv - e also provides payments to adoptive parents of eligible minority foster children or others with special needs , such as health problems , that may make adoptive homes more difficult to find . how are states responding to current foster care and other service needs ? to develop this information , we drew upon our past reports on foster care and related child welfare issues ( see list of related gao products in app . v ) and reviewed reports by government and other organizations as well as position papers and written testimony from witnesses at congressional hearings . in addition , we interviewed national experts and researchers in the child welfare area , child welfare advocates , representatives of public interest groups , government officials in selected states and localities , and federal officials ( see app . our work was performed between march and july 1995 . foster care is an integral part of a child welfare system designed to ensure the safety and well - being of children whose families are not providing adequate care for them . foster care provides primarily food and housing to meet the physical needs of children who are removed from their homes . child welfare services are designed to address the complex family problems associated with children's abuse , neglect , exploitation , or delinquency . in providing child welfare services , caseworkers may also refer children and their families to mental health agencies , medical facilities , or elsewhere for specialized treatment and services . child welfare services are critical in helping prevent the need for foster care as well as in achieving appropriate and stable permanent living arrangements for children placed in foster care . most states and counties provide some child welfare services directly and purchase others from private agencies . available services vary considerably from one area to another in number , type , intensity , and duration , although calls and visits with caseworkers are considered essential in most areas . children generally enter foster care for their own protection because their parents will not or cannot take care of them . when problems such as abuse or neglect are identified , the child welfare system may intervene with services designed to improve the situation and avoid removing children from their homes . if such services cannot ensure children's safety and well - being in their homes , the child welfare system petitions the court to place children in foster care , either in the homes of relatives or nonfamily foster parents , group homes , or institutions . foster care provided by relatives , who are often grandmothers , is known as kinship care . states may choose whether to license relatives as foster parents and provide foster care payments . on the other hand , states require nonfamily foster parents to be licensed and pay them an average of $8 to $15 a day per child for food , housing , and incidental expenses .