( see app . i for a list of members and summary of working seminar activities. ) the working seminar has been meeting regularly to determine what changes are needed to facilitate states' efforts to improve their automated systems to meet the information needs for welfare reform . to provide information for congressional oversight , we undertook a review of states' efforts to meet the information needs for welfare reform , with a focus on the tanf program . for this study , we ( 1 ) assessed the extent to which current automated systems in selected states meet key information needs of programs that help low - income individuals with children obtain employment and become economically independent , ( 2 ) identified the approaches states are using to develop or modify their automated systems to better meet these information needs , and ( 3 ) identified the major obstacles states have encountered in working to improve their automated systems and the potential role of the federal government in helping overcome these obstacles . with respect to the first objective , we focused on three broad types of information needs: those for case management , service planning , and program oversight . in collaboration with field researchers from the nelson a. rockefeller institute's state capacity project , we conducted case studies at the state and local levels in 6 states and collected supplemental information from a survey of these 6 and 9 additional states and some of their localities , so that some comparable information was available for a total of 15 states . in selecting the six states for our in - depth fieldwork , we sought to include states ( 1 ) in varying stages of revamping their automated systems , ( 2 ) with both state - and locally administered tanf programs , and ( 3 ) that were geographically diverse . we interviewed officials in state welfare and labor departments , including program and information technology managers . in addition , we interviewed officials at two local sites in each state . officials interviewed at local sites included welfare and labor program managers , information technology managers , tanf case managers , and supervisors of tanf case managers . at state and local site visits , we observed demonstrations of automated systems and obtained relevant documents , such as systems printouts and manuals . ( see table 4. ) the state and local interviews were administered using a semistructured interview guide that we developed through a review of relevant literature and discussions with members of the gao / rockefeller institute working seminar on social program information systems . we conducted the interviews in five of the six states and were accompanied at some interviews by field researchers from the rockefeller institute's state capacity project . the interviews in georgia were conducted entirely by the rockefeller institute's field researcher for georgia , an associate professor of political science at emory university . on the basis of our fieldwork in the six states , we identified several key topics for follow - up work on a larger geographic scale .