other ojt programs . saas also review and approve other ojt programs that do not qualify as apprenticeship programs and that are not subject to review and registration by labor . saas' efforts to assess other ojt programs thus did not overlap labor's gatekeeping efforts . we estimate that for fiscal year 1994 , these approvals took about 2 percent of saa staff time . the substantial amount of overlap that occurred between saa and other gatekeepers' efforts raises questions about whether saa efforts should continue at their current level . we estimated that 87 percent of the approval effort expended by saas related to schools and programs also subject to accreditation by education - approved entities . also , in our review of six jurisdictions , 93 percent of the accredited schools were also certified by education to participate in title iv student aid programs . school certification involves applying standards that are similar to those used by saas . on its face , an saa review of courses of study at an education - certified school would appear to add only marginal value . the same may be true for saa reviews of apprenticeship programs , though the lack of information precludes us from determining if overlap exists with labor's oversight . we believe an opportunity exists for reducing federal expenditures by over $10 million annually through the elimination of overlapping saa gatekeeping efforts . va and saa efforts would be better focused on such activities as reviewing courses offered by unaccredited schools , for which no other form of federal oversight currently exists . the congress may wish to consider whether it is necessary for va to continue contracting with saas to review and approve educational programs at schools that have already been reviewed and certified by education . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretaries of education and veterans affairs . education provided several clarifying and technical suggestions , which we incorporated where appropriate . in general , va said that it has reservations about relying upon education's gatekeeping system to ensure the integrity and quality of education and training programs made available to va education program beneficiaries . va's two principal comments were that the draft report did not elaborate on the specific mechanisms or organizational elements within education that are in place to ensure that the requirements of title 38 of the u.s. code are met and it is questionable whether accreditation , in the absence of funding for the state postsecondary review entities ( spre ) program , will accomplish the approval , monitoring , and supervisory requirements of the laws governing va education programs . in the report , we do discuss education's gatekeeping triad composed of accrediting agencies , state licensing agencies , and education itself , which performs the same basic function as saas for many of the same schools . under title 38 , the essential responsibility of saas is to determine which courses should be approved and to ensure that schools are complying with their established standards relating to the courses that have been approved before an individual entitled to va education assistance can obtain money for an education or training program .