it plans to meet monthly . benova and maximus , the two enrollment brokers dhs has contracted with , also cited a number of factors that they believed adversely affected their performance . according to these brokers , dhs made frequent policy and program changes and often provided little lead time to appropriately implement these changes . according to maximus , during the first 7 weeks of its contract period — which began january 1997 — dhs made about 300 policy changes , sometimes giving maximus little time to implement them . to comply with dhs' time frames , maximus believed it necessary to sometimes bypass quality assurance measures that it had established to ensure that such system changes did not have unintended consequences . in one instance , changes made to the mailing dates in one county caused maximus to inadvertently halt mailings to another county . benova believed that its performance as medi - cal's enrollment broker suffered because of dhs' often - changing directions and its lack of responsiveness . for example , dhs denied benova's request to transfer calls during peak times to call centers in other states — an arrangement benova believed would have improved service . according to benova , dhs also denied its request for cost - reimbursement for additional equipment needed to handle increasing volumes of enrollment . benova and maximus officials also stated that , relative to their experience with other states , california limited their contact with plans , advocacy groups , and community - based organizations . dhs was concerned about remaining informed about program operations and not burdening limited contractor staff with additional responsibilities . dhs recently has relaxed its policy and begun to allow the enrollment broker to participate in community meetings . hcfa's oversight of california's education and enrollment functions has consisted primarily of reviewing and approving the state's waiver application to implement its mandatory managed care program and conducting preimplementation reviews in each county . as of august 1997 , few federal guidelines existed for states to use for their process of educating medicaid beneficiaries and enrolling them in mandatory managed care programs — two relatively new functions for states . enrollment materials are available at the presentations . beneficiaries also can contact hco's toll - free call center to obtain enrollment packets and to have enrollment - related questions or concerns addressed . since 1984 , dhs has contracted with an enrollment broker to provide certain education and enrollment services . initially , enrollment broker responsibilities consisted primarily of conducting hco presentations in selected counties and helping beneficiaries complete enrollment forms . with the expansion of medi - cal's mandatory program , broker responsibilities increased . in addition to distributing enrollment packets and providing hco presentations , the broker was tasked with processing beneficiary enrollments and disenrollments in 18 counties with managed care and operating a call center to assist beneficiaries . full implementation of medi - cal's mandatory expansion program is more than 2 years behind its initial implementation schedule . some plans protested the contract awards , further delaying the contracting process 6 to 8 months .