we received overpayment records for 528 of these cases . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . ssa selected 440 of these cases for study . among these 440 cases , ssa found 16 cases receiving overpayments . the overpayments exceeded $307,000 , an average of about $19,200 per case . it also found one case for which its regulation , which places a 4-year limit on ssa's changing of payment determinations and subsequent recovery of overpayments , precluded action . because 17 overpayment cases had been found ( 3.8 percent of the cases ) , the illinois study showed that there were about 730 overpayments in this state . if the average of $19,200 per case were applied , the study suggested about $14 million in gpo - related overpayments . believing that its selection criteria needed to be refined to reduce the number of unproductive investigations , ssa undertook a similar study in 1995 of gpo application to state and local government retirees from ohio . making some adjustment in the manner in which cases were selected for study , ssa chose 500 cases for examination . as of october 1997 , the study had not yet been completed , so we have not used the available results to estimate overpayments . however , ssa had identified 19 cases with more than $312,000 in overpayments , about the same proportion of cases and a similar amount as detected in the illinois study . irs believes that the additional reporting requirement must be constructed in a way that minimizes the perception of increased burden on the retirement systems and that any associated disclosure issues under internal revenue code section 6103 must be addressed immediately . irs revised an earlier estimate to us that these changes could be implemented in time for processing year 1999 . it now believes that the necessary changes to the forms and systems cannot be made before processing tax year 2000 returns . we have revised our report to reflect irs's latest estimate . our analysis of the 528 cases indicated that 487 had wep - related overpayments and that overpayment amounts totaled about $2.2 million in these cases , or an average of about $4,500 per case . the data also showed that ssa had either collected or was in the process of recovering most of these overpaid benefits . overpayments averaged about $4,700 in these cases . although no formal decision has ever been made , ssa staff told us that this level of results did not warrant a postentitlement matching program . our discussions with field staff who managed the investigation of the referred wep cases indicated , however , that the number of overpayments discovered during the study was much greater than the 154 identified in ssa's management report . in response to our questions , service center staff told us that they had apparently often failed to follow the instructions to use a special code when entering the wep overpayments in ssa's accounting system . thus , when ssa generated management reports based on the special code , most of the wep overpayment cases identified in the study were not counted .