only then can it be designated as an nb . an eu official told us that he believes the european commission needs to address this problem of potential conflict of interest for nbs . the eu medical device directives require the staff of nbs to be free of all pressures and inducements , particularly financial , that might influence their judgment or the results of their reviews , especially from anyone with an interest in the outcome of the review . to meet this requirement , nbs and their personnel must comply with european standards governing potential conflicts of interest . the importance of this assurance would increase if private review organizations were given the added authority of clearing new devices for marketing . fda and european officials reviewed a draft of this report . fda's written comments are reproduced in appendix iv . fda generally found the report to be accurate and complete and made a number of technical comments clarifying aspects of the agency's review processes . we incorporated these as appropriate , basing the changes in some instances on further discussions with fda officials . we also incorporated technical clarifications on the eu system received from european officials . in its comments , fda stated that the eu system does not evaluate individual devices , but instead evaluates a manufacturer's quality assurance system . as we noted in the draft report , in some situations the eu system does evaluate individual devices , such as when a manufacturer chooses the type examination route of conformity assessment or when a class iii device's design dossier is reviewed . we will distribute this report to the secretary of health and human services , the commissioner of the food and drug administration , and other interested parties . this report was prepared under the direction of mark v. nadel , associate director for national and public health issues . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or bruce d. layton , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6837 . other major contributors to this report include helene f. toiv , claude b. hayeck , mary w. freeman , michele grgich , and liv gorla . for our review of the european union's medical device approval process , we conducted field work in germany and the united kingdom . these countries were ahead of most other member states in adopting the eu regulatory system into their national laws and had greater experience with implementing the new system . additionally , over half of the notified bodies , which review and approve medical devices under the eu system , were located in these two countries . in germany and the uk we interviewed government health officials responsible for medical device regulation ; officials from two nbs , tüv product service and the british standards institution ; and representatives of medical device industry groups . we also interviewed eu officials and a representative of an eu - wide industry association . we reviewed eu documents governing the eu regulatory process . several officials we interviewed reviewed a draft of this report . we reviewed food and drug administration documents and policies as well as laws and regulations governing fda .