this is unprecedented . later in my statement , i will discuss the implications of this proposal for overall fiscal policy and for the social security program . the president's proposals would have the effect of reducing debt held by the public from the current level of 44 percent of gross domestic product ( gdp ) to 7 percent over the 15-year period . how can we best assure the public's understanding of and support for any comprehensive social security reform proposal ? we at gao stand ready to help you address both social security reform and other critical national challenges . working together , we can make a positive and lasting difference for our country and the american people . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . look again at figure 8: social security is not the fastest growing portion of those bars — health grows faster . much remains to be done in reforming entitlement programs , and engaging in meaningful social security reform would represent an important and significant first step . the congress and the administration , working together , can find a comprehensive and sustainable solution to this important challenge . i recognize , though , that restoring social security solvency is not easy . however , it is easy lifting compared to what faces us in connection with the medicare program . ultimately , any reforms to social security will address not only the relatively narrow question of how to restore solvency and assure sustainability but will also go to the larger question of what role social security and the federal government should play in providing retirement income . there are many proposals being made to address these questions ; choosing among them will involve difficult and complex choices , choices that will be critically important to nearly every american's retirement income . in my view , progress is likely to be greatest if we see these choices not as “either / or” decisions but rather as an array of possibilities along a continuum .