supplies . no direct supplies , but , based on fiscal year 1995 meprs data , reimbursement for the costs of ancillary services and supplies for outpatient visits above that achieved during the data collection period , fiscal year 1995 ( 10,188 outpatient visits per year ) . estimated at up to 5,700 visits . ( for outpatient visits , example shows costs per procedure and per visit for pharmacy , laboratory , radiology , medical supplies , and other supplies. ) also , reimbursement for the cost of ancillary services and supplies for inpatient admissions above that achieved during the data collection period , fiscal year 1995 ( 404 admissions per year ) . estimated at up to 226 admissions . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . for example , if a contractor proposed a 5-percent profit rate for health care costs , then the projected contractor profit on resource sharing expenditures exceeding the up - front bid price assumptions should also not exceed 5 percent . a prospective profit limit also applies to an rsa that converts an inpatient partnership agreement that existed in the data collection period ( dcp ) and for which champus admissions were not counted in the dcp data . ( in this case , workload credit should be negotiated as necessary to produce a projected contractor net gain approximately equal to zero , since otherwise the contractor would receive an upward price adjustment for additional nass simply for maintaining the same workload done in the dcp under the partnership agreement. ) if both of the previous questions cannot be answered “yes” for the proposed rsa , then the mtf should either renegotiate some of the terms of the proposed agreement ( for example , the contractor's workload credit ) or consider other alternatives to the proposed agreement ( for example , the task order resource support option ) . in addition to answering both previous questions for resource sharing in isolation , the resource sharing worksheet is designed to project the cost impact of implementing the agreement under task order resource support rather than resource sharing , including a summary comparison of cost - effectiveness under the two options . similarly , the worksheet shows the relative financial impact on the managed care support ( mcs ) contractor of resource sharing versus resource support . ( details on resource support analysis are excluded from this condensed version of the guidance. )