( see app . i for details on our methodology. ) ( see app . ii for a description of the items covered under each of the 10 plans. ) the omnibus budget reconciliation act ( obra ) of 1990 authorized the medicare select program , a 3-year demonstration project in 15 states . medicare select policies combine certain managed care concepts with the 10 standard medigap policies . select policies require the insured to use the doctors and hospitals on the plan's provider panel or pay higher cost - sharing amounts . the select program was extended to june 30 , 1998 , and expanded to all states by public law 104-18 . federal law guarantees that , for a period of 6 months from the date a medicare beneficiary both enrolls in medicare part b and is age 65 or older , the beneficiary has a right to buy the medigap policy of his or her choice regardless of any health problems the beneficiary may have . the medigap open enrollment period at age 65 is also available to all disabled and kidney failure beneficiaries who have previously enrolled in medicare part b . thus , medigap policies are required to be “guaranteed issue” during the 6-month period . once the 6-month medigap open enrollment period starts , it cannot be extended or repeated . beneficiaries are informed of the 6-month open enrollment period when they enroll in medicare . insurers who sell medigap policies outside the open enrollment period are allowed to use medical underwriting . prospective policyholders usually must complete an application form that includes several questions about their health and habits . a “yes” response to any question can trigger a rejection of the application . about 25 percent of the 19.5 million added plans to supplement those they had in 1991 ( see table 2 ) . in addition , over 1 million beneficiaries who did not have a private supplemental policy in 1991 had obtained one or more by the end of 1994 . the data allowed us to compare only coverage by plan name , and we could not identify those instances in which the beneficiary switched coverage within the same plan . for example , we could not identify a case where a beneficiary switched from medigap plan c to medigap plan f if the plan name was blue cross / blue shield in both 1991 and 1994 . for purposes of hcfa's survey , private insurance included individually purchased plans ( primarily medigap policies ) ; health plans from former employers ; and other plans that might cover hospital , physician , or drug charges . hcfa's survey excluded long - term care , hospital indemnity , and specified disease insurance from the private insurance category , but it is possible that beneficiaries reported these types of limited - benefit plans as individually purchased plans . between 1991 and 1994 , about 4.8 million beneficiaries added private health insurance plans to their existing coverage . of these beneficiaries , about 4 million had only one policy in 1991 ; added coverage resulted in their owning multiple policies in 1994 .