most of these cases are still pending . insurers have had some success in court as well . some state courts have ruled that abmt is still widely considered to be experimental and that the health insurance contract clearly precluded coverage of experimental treatments . courts in at least three federal circuits have also upheld insurers' coverage denials for abmt to treat breast cancer . courts in many of these cases permitted insurers wide discretion in making coverage decisions as long as the decisions were not arbitrary or capricious . the controversy over access to abmt for breast cancer patients has led several states to propose or enact legislation regarding insurance coverage of the treatment . as of june 1995 , at least seven states had enacted legislation that , under certain parameters , requires that insurers provide coverage for abmt for breast cancer . at least seven additional states have similar legislation pending . some of these laws are mandates requiring that coverage of abmt for breast cancer be part of any basic package of health insurance . other laws simply require that the treatment be made available as a coverage option , at perhaps a higher premium . the laws in six of the states require coverage whether or not the patient is enrolled in a clinical trial , while one state requires patients with certain types of breast cancer to join well - designed randomized or nonrandomized trials . three of the 12 insurers we spoke with said they were required by a state mandate to cover abmt for breast cancer for most of their beneficiaries . one of these three said it would not cover the treatment if it were not for the mandate . those who advocate passage of the state laws argue that they are necessary to make a promising therapy available to breast cancer patients . among the arguments used is that insurers classified abmt for breast cancer as “experimental” as much for economic as medical reasons because abmt is an expensive treatment . insurers respond that abmt for breast cancer is an experimental treatment still being evaluated in clinical trials and they should not be in the business of paying for research . furthermore , insurers say that legislation mandating coverage of specific treatments is a poor way to make medical policy and that it distorts the market because self - funded plans are exempt from state mandates . the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) is considering a model act for states that would set minimum standards of coverage for health insurers . the model act , which has not yet been approved by the full naic membership , would require insurers to cover an experimental treatment if the peer - reviewed medical literature has established that the treatment is an effective alternative to conventional treatment . a representative from naic told us that in a state that passed such an act , insurers would normally be required to cover abmt for breast cancer if the treating physician considered it the medically appropriate treatment . programs such as medicaid , medicare , and the civilian health and medical program of the uniformed services ( champus ) have varying policies regarding coverage of abmt for breast cancer .