it's not clear . i think a national agenda would be very desirable.” moreover , given the competing priorities in program mission and the differing pressures generated by program expectations and requirements , state program directors must decide how to spread their resources among required collection and noncollection activities . in addition , welfare reform may further expand cse's mission . some proposals broaden the program to include all child support cases in the country . iv. ) we conducted our review from november 1992 to december 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . hhs provided written comments on a draft of this report . these comments are discussed in chapter 5 and included in appendix v. we also obtained comments on a draft of this report from selected officials in each of the states we studied and several child support enforcement experts . their suggested revisions were incorporated , as appropriate , into this report . the cse program lacks essential management tools to help fulfill its mission . thus , the primary beneficiaries of the early program were taxpayers , not families and children . as noted previously , in 1984 and 1988 , the congress extended cse's authority and services , thus expanding cse's mission . while continuing a focus on welfare cost recovery , these amendments raised the priority of several other aspects of cse . in addition , in the first half of the 1980s , when hhs regional offices were still directly in the chain of command to ocse , they provided extensive on - site technical assistance to state programs ; they no longer do . they conducted formal management studies of local and state programs , sponsored conferences for judges , and met with and testified before state legislative committees . regional staff also made presentations before public interest groups ; state and local officials , including legislators , court personnel , judges , attorneys , and child support administrators ; and others ; and participated in educational panels . they also helped write television and radio public service announcements , assisted in drafting state legislation , and appeared on television and radio talk shows . at the time of our review , most hhs regions were providing minimal on - site technical assistance to states . ocse and regional office staff jointly conducted comprehensive management reviews of state programs and provided on - site technical assistance during the early 1980s . today , ocse staff's technical assistance efforts are limited primarily to participating in national conferences , distributing pamphlets and self - help guides , writing letters , making telephone calls , and posting information on electronic bulletin boards . in fiscal year 1981 , ocse's program operations division performed 14 management reviews ; whereas in fiscal year 1993 , ocse officials said they no longer do management reviews . the ocse division director responsible for technical assistance told us the small staff and travel budget devoted to technical assistance severely limits their ability to compile and disseminate best practices and provide direct on - site training and assistance to state programs . in february 1993 , 25 ocse staff were devoted to training and technical assistance .