( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) job corps was established as a national employment and training program in 1964 to mitigate employment barriers faced by severely disadvantaged youths . job corps enrolls youths aged 16 to 24 who are economically disadvantaged , in need of additional education or training , and living in disorienting conditions such as a disruptive homelife . similarly , participants who had completed 12 years or more of school had odds of remaining that were more than 80-percent greater than those of participants who completed 8 or fewer grades , but almost two - thirds of the participants were in neither of these groups . consequently , while the model is very useful in predicting whether participants with specific characteristics will remain in job corps for at least 60 days , the model's ability to predict 60-day retention for the program's full population is limited because we found no large subgroups with great differences . finally , in this analysis , we examined only main effects for the variables we investigated . an examination of the interactions among the variables might produce useful information and improve the predictive ability of the model . in addition to the contacts named above , the following persons made important contributions to this report: thomas n. medvetz , wayne dow , deborah edwards , jeremiah donoghue , robert crystal , and sylvia shanks . job corps: where participants are recruited , trained , and placed in jobs ( gao / hehs - 96-140 , july 17 , 1996 ) . employment training: successful projects share common strategy ( gao / hehs - 96-108 , may 7 , 1996 ) . job corps: comparison of federal program with state youth training initiatives ( gao / hehs - 96-92 , mar . job corps: high costs and mixed results raise questions about program's effectiveness ( gao / hehs - 95-180 , june 30 , 1995 ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . labor acknowledged that the points we made in this portion of the report merit serious consideration and , therefore , it will convene a workgroup to discuss our recommendations and examine the incentives and disincentives resulting from any proposed changes to the performance management system . labor also acknowledged that our report contained “some good points” with respect to training - related placements but expressed concern about our use of hypothetical examples of questionable job - training matches and the lack of data to indicate the degree to which these occur . labor also commented that the claim by a contractor about obtaining a job - training match for participants trained as bank tellers , secretaries , and welders and placed in fast - food restaurants is inaccurate , noting that the system does not permit such matches .