( see fig . in 1995 , the most recent year for which final data are available , the annual birth rate for women aged 15 through 19 was approximately 57 per thousand , compared with 96 per thousand in 1957 when the rate was at its peak . and only white teens were more likely to become teen mothers if their mothers had also been teen mothers . ( see fig . research indicates a link between school involvement and teen births . a national study of girls who were eighth - graders in 1988 , found several measures of school involvement , including dropping out , were associated with a greater risk of a subsequent teen birth . however , only one measure — lower standardized test scores — was consistently associated with an increased risk of a teen birth in all racial and ethnic groups . other measures , such as lower grades or limited postsecondary education plans , were associated with an increased likelihood of a teenaged birth for one or more races but not for all . for example , lower grades in school were associated with an increased likelihood of a school - aged pregnancy leading to a birth for white and black teens . ( see fig . teenage women who dropped out of school were more likely than those who stayed in school to become pregnant and give birth in their teens . however , an association between dropping out of school and teen pregnancy was observed only among whites and hispanics . after controlling for family background and measures of school involvement and performance , white and hispanic teens who dropped out of school were about 1.5 times more likely to become a teenage mother than white and hispanic teens who stayed in school . for black teens , drop - out status had no effect on teen pregnancy . moreover , of school - age teens who gave birth , more than one quarter ( 28 percent ) dropped out of school prior to pregnancy ; an additional 30 percent dropped out after the pregnancy or birth of a child , and 42 percent stayed in school . these findings are consistent with those of a study of teen experiences in the 1970s and early 1980s . limited postsecondary education plans were associated with a greater likelihood of a school - aged birth for black and hispanic teens . descriptive studies have generally found a lower risk of teen birth in two - parent families than with other family types . a study of the effects of changes in family structure — such as divorce , appearance of a stepparent , going to live with grandparents or in an institution — on teen women found that the greater the number of such changes , the greater the probability of an early teen birth , regardless of family income . ( see fig . the impact of family structure or family instability , however , varied by race or ethnicity . for example , one study found that being born into and reared through early childhood in a single - parent family headed by a woman was associated with higher likelihood of a birth for black teens but not for white teens .