but this may be changing . some small employers are also beginning to self - fund , partly to avoid state regulation and taxation of their health plans . whether this trend will continue , and at what rate , is unclear . naic officials provided us with comments on a draft of this report . they pointed out that although the costs associated with state requirements are accurately described , the benefits to plan participants are addressed only to a limited extent . we acknowledge that participants benefit from many state requirements . state requirements on health insurance and their effects raise two questions: who is affected directly , and what factors determine the size of the requirements' cost impact ? under the erisa statute , state governments cannot tax or regulate self - funded plans established by an employer who bears most of the financial risk . by contrast , states continue to have authority to tax and regulate health insurance . as a result , enrollees in insured health plans have the benefits associated with state regulation but also bear an additional cost relative to enrollees in self - funded health plans . this cost differential can differ considerably by state . naic officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to interested parties and make copies available to others upon request . please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7114 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . other major contributors are listed in appendix v . health insurers ( percent ) blue cross and blue shield plans ( percent ) hmos ( percent ) ( continued ) health insurers ( percent ) blue cross and blue shield plans ( percent ) hmos ( percent ) 0.75 aatax assessed on subscriber fees . bbpay insurance commission maintenance assessment of no more than 0.1 percent of premium , with a minimum of $300 . ccadditional fee assessed for department of insurance operations , not to exceed 0.125 percent of receipts . specifically , state taxes on health insurers raise the costs of fully insured plans by about 2 percent in most states , with the actual level determined by state tax rate and type of health plan . in addition , the extent to which mandated benefits and solvency requirements raise costs differs by state , depending upon the scope of state laws . participants ( dec. 31 , 1994 ) . michael gutowski , assistant director , ( 202 ) 512-7128 john dicken , senior evaluator , ( 202 ) 512-7135 carmen rivera - lowitt , senior evaluator , ( 202 ) 512-4342 the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . following are examples of some of this evidence . the colorado insurance division reports that small employer reforms , including guaranteed issue and rate restrictions , have moderated premium increases and increased the number of individuals covered by small group health plans .