most of the other reassessed tolerances were unchanged . was cumulative assessment addressed in any way ? our expert reviewer prepared comments addressing these questions for each of the pesticide examples , and in some cases provided additional information and opinion based on his own knowledge and experience . those comments have been combined with a description of the pesticide and a summary of its review history in the sections below . dicofol is an organochlorine pesticide in epa's high - risk group 1 . it is used primarily on cotton , apples , and citrus crops and has nonresidential uses on lawns and ornamental shrubs ( for example , it may be used by professional applicators on golf courses and landscaping , but it may not be used by homeowners ) . dicofol was first registered as a pesticide in the united states in 1957 . there are 50 current food use tolerances registered for dicofol , all of which have been reassessed under fqpa requirements . dicofol was reviewed at one of the first meetings of the fqpa safety factor committee , on march 30 , 1998 . information was excerpted from the pesticide's reregistration document , which was nearly “toxicological considerations for fqpa safety factor selection.” the reregistration document's “fqpa considerations” section presented the following conclusions: ( 1 ) the data provided no indication of increased sensitivity in young animals , but ( 2 ) a developmental neurotoxicity study was required , but not available ( a data gap ) , because dicofol is an organochlorine , is structurally related to ddt ( which is neurotoxic ) , and is considered an endocrine disruptor . a safety factor of 3 was recommended . the main concern in terms of exposure was for occupational users . however , at that time there were two homeowner uses , and no data were available to assess residential exposure . because of this lack of data , the reregistration document recommended that residential use of dicofol be discontinued . the document stated that epa did not have the methods or the data to consider potential cumulative effects from dicofol and other members of the organochlorine class of pesticides . the safety factor committee reviewed the information from the reregistration document for dicofol in march 1998 but was unable to reach a consensus decision because it was concerned that its recommendation could set a precedent for other endocrine disruptors . after seeking guidance from opp division directors , the committee recommended a 3- fold safety factor . opp managers accepted this recommendation , and the revised ( july 2 , 1998 ) and final ( november 1998 ) dicofol reregistration documents issued by epa included the 3-fold fqpa safety factor . reasons given were as follows: ( 1 ) aggregate exposure concerns were reduced because the two residential uses were dropped , ( 2 ) cumulative effects from dicofol and other organochlorines could not be considered , ( 3 ) strong concerns regarding occupational exposure remained , and ( 4 ) significant risk mitigation actions were required , including voluntary cancellation of some uses by the registrant .