iv. ) most of the violations ( 72 percent ) were of general industry standards , including failure to protect workers from electrical hazards ( 11 percent ) and injuries due to inadequate machine guarding ( 10 percent ) . ( see fig . examples of federal contractors who violated electrical and machine - guarding standards include the following: a dunlop tire corp. worksite in huntsville , alabama , was cited for inadequate machine guarding after a worker , who placed fabric on a rotating cylinder , got caught in the machinery and died from asphyxia after being wound up inside the fabric . we verified that the company name and worksite locations , identified in both databases , referred to the same company or were owned by the same parent company . if there was more than one worksite under the same or identical name in imis ( indicating that violations may have occurred at different worksites owned by or associated with the same parent company ) , we verified that all these worksites were owned by the parent company . we also asked the contact to provide the parent company name or , if a parent company name was included in fpds , to verify that name . the prospect of debarment or suspension can also provide impetus for a contractor to undertake remedial measures to improve workplace conditions . agencies could use the awarding of federal contracts as a vehicle to encourage companies to take more affirmative steps ( for example , develop a worksite safety and health program , or participate in voluntary compliance efforts like maine 200 ) to improve workplace safety and health . given the complexity of federal procurement regulations and processes and individual agencies' familiarity with the specific companies and contracts involved , they are probably in a better position than osha to make each contracting decision . however , agency awarding and debarring officials have not taken actions against contractors for safety and health violations at least partially because they did not have the information to determine which federal contractors have violated safety and health regulations , even when they have been assessed high penalties for willful or repeat violations or cited under osha's “egregious” policy . the considerable number of federal contractors with osha violations , even in the single year we examined , suggests that policies and procedures should be developed to facilitate the exchange of information between osha and agency awarding and debarring officials to help improve federal contractor compliance . also , contractors might be more attentive to their safety and health practices if osha were to give inspection priority to those high - hazard workplaces operated by federal contractors . we recommend that the secretary of labor direct the assistant secretary for occupational safety and health to develop and implement policies and procedures , in consultation with gsa and the interagency committee on debarment and suspension , for how safety and health records of federal contractors could be shared to better inform agency awarding and debarring officials in their decisions regarding contracts in order to improve workplace safety and health . develop policies and procedures regarding whether and how it will consider a company's status as a federal contractor in setting priorities for inspecting worksites .