( ch . similarly , to what extent should va's strategic goals focus specifically on its safety net mission and improving the health status of uninsured veterans ? the burden of serving patients with no health insurance falls disproportionately on va and public teaching hospitals . about 21 percent of veterans using the va health care system have no public or private health insurance compared with about 5 percent of patients using nonteaching hospitals . similarly , public teaching hospitals serve a percentage of hospital patients who have no insurance that is three to four times higher than that served by private academic medical centers . ( see fig . public and particularly public teaching hospitals provide disproportionate and increasing amounts of uncompensated care , according to many studies . for example , urban public hospitals are reported to provide one - third of the nation's uncompensated care , even though they only have about one - sixth of the hospital market . between 1990 and 1994 , their burden of uncompensated care increased . first , their percentage of total costs devoted to uncompensated care increased from 11.8 to 12.8 percent . second , public hospitals accounted for 36.8 percent of total hospital uncompensated care in 1994 , up from 33.4 percent in 1990 . among public hospitals , major teaching hospitals' share of uncompensated care is reportedly three times larger than their share of the hospital market . in 1994 , almost 20 percent of their expenses were reportedly devoted to providing uncompensated care . although public hospitals provide a disproportionate share of uncompensated care , private - sector hospitals still provide most uncompensated care . private hospitals , however , vary widely in the amount of uncompensated care they reportedly provide . for example , about 240 private hospitals reported uncompensated care burdens averaging 15 percent of total operating expenses in 1994 . the remaining approximately 3,600 private hospitals reported uncompensated care burdens averaging 8 percent or less of operating expenses . these findings are consistent with our 1990 analysis of the role of nonprofit hospitals in providing uncompensated care.government - owned hospitals provided a disproportionate amount of the uncompensated care in each of the five states in our review . both nonprofit and for - profit hospitals provided a smaller share of the state's uncompensated care than they provided of general hospital services . moreover , the burden of uncompensated care was not distributed equally among the nonprofit hospitals in the five states . large urban teaching hospitals had a greater share of the uncompensated care expense than did other nonprofit hospitals . generally , the nonprofit hospitals with the lowest rates of uncompensated care also served fewer medicaid patients and had higher profit margins than did the large urban teaching hospitals providing most of the uncompensated care . in other words , the nonprofit hospitals with the most resources for financing uncompensated care were often those providing the least amount of such care . about 15 percent of the nonprofit hospitals we studied reported providing uncompensated care valued at less than the benefits of their federal and state income tax exemption .