most overpayments are recovered , however . hcfa data indicate that unrecovered overpayments in 1996 were less than 1 percent of medicare's hha payments , although even this lower percentage overstates the problem . hcfa counts as unrecovered overpayments some money that is not really overpayment . for such hhas , the underwriting process is likely to be sensitive only to significant changes in financial stability . we also believe that requiring hhas to obtain separate surety bonds for medicare and medicaid may be excessive . even though hcfa exempted small agencies from obtaining two bonds , the majority of hhas are required to purchase two bonds . this entails two fees and , in many cases , pledging collateral for two bonds . however , the level of scrutiny by the surety will be similar regardless of whether one or two bonds are needed . requiring one bond for the two programs diminishes the financial protection but not hhas' incentives to repay overpayments . this is because an hha that defaults on its bond to either medicare or medicaid is unlikely to obtain a bond in the future . allowing hhas to substitute a treasury note for the surety bond makes sense when the primary objective of the requirement is to increase hcfa's ability to recoup some unrecovered overpayments . however , this substitution undermines the objectives of requiring medicare providers to submit to outside scrutiny and giving them strong incentives to return all overpayments . if congressional intent is to screen hhas , the option of substituting a treasury note does not afford that scrutiny . we recommend that to implement bba's surety bond requirement for hhas , the hcfa administrator revise the present regulation so that all hhas obtain one financial guarantee surety bond in the amount of $50,000 for the guaranteed return of overpayments for both medicare and medicaid . with respect to the surety bond requirements that we are recommending , the congress may wish to consider exempting from a surety bond requirement hhas that have demonstrated fiscal responsibility — for example , those that have maintained a bond for a specified period of time and have returned any overpayments — and eliminating the option for hhas of substituting a treasury note , u.s. bond , or other federal public debt obligation for a surety bond . in written comments on a draft of this report , hcfa agreed with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . the agency also agreed that the congress should consider eventually exempting from the surety bond requirement hhas that have demonstrated fiscal responsibility and eliminating the option for hhas to submit federal public debt obligations in lieu of a surety bond . this scrutiny is one of the benefits of requiring a surety bond . the cost of obtaining a bond is the fee or premium charged plus having to provide collateral — cash or assets that can be turned into cash . the greater the surety's risk of having to compensate the third party without being able to recover that compensation from the bondholder , the higher the cost . the fee is usually 1 percent to 2 percent of the face value for most commercial bonds .