( app . iii provides more details on the purpose and potential benefits of risk management for health care facilities. ) a wide range of risk management services was offered to health facilities and practitioners by the insurance companies and federal agencies we interviewed . while some provided extensive services — including site inspections , periodic risk reassessments , and telephone hotlines to respond to center concerns — others offered these services on request or to larger facilities . hrsa has begun to provide centers with some of these services . however , hrsa is not planning as extensive a risk management program as some private insurance carriers or other federal agencies with ftca malpractice coverage , such as the department of defense and the indian health service . the more commonly offered services included claims tracking , analysis , and feedback on specific incidents , educational seminars , risk management publications , and the opportunity to obtain specific guidance on center concerns . most of the health center officials we spoke with valued their insurer's risk management services . many regarded the opportunity to discuss a new procedure or a potential malpractice claim with a risk manager as the most important feature of their insurer's risk management plan . several officials said they were reluctant to cancel private comprehensive malpractice coverage in favor of ftca because they would then lose the risk management services they have come to rely upon . in contrast , other centers find risk management services are still available from their private insurer if they purchase a supplemental policy to cover gaps in ftca coverage . additionally , hrsa has advised centers that the purchase of private risk management services by centers will be an allowable charge to their grant . recently , hrsa has begun to take steps to provide centers with risk management . we spoke with officials at 27 centers with ftca coverage . of those 27 centers , 6 were also covered by private comprehensive malpractice insurance . we subsequently advised hrsa that a deadline was needed to ensure that health centers reduce their costs by terminating duplicate coverage . hrsa officials agreed and recently issued a directive to ftca - covered centers to cancel their private comprehensive malpractice insurance by march 31 , 1997 . more details on our scope and methodology are in appendix i . a complete list of the organizations we contacted is in appendix ii . we performed our review between march 1996 and march 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . community and migrant health centers are financed in part with federal grants administered by hrsa . hhs awards grants to public and nonprofit entities to plan , develop , and operate health centers for medically underserved populations . to assist in providing health care to these groups , hhs awarded over $750 million in grant assistance in fiscal year 1996 . like all patients , those receiving care from community or migrant health centers may seek compensation for medical malpractice if they believe the treatment they receive does not meet an acceptable standard of care .