action is pending . because timeliness standards have not been established , resource needs cannot be evaluated . the following are gao's comments on the nuclear regulatory commission's letter dated february 21 , 1997 . wording revised . figure revised as suggested . discussion of when civil penalties are imposed was deleted from this section . comment not incorporated . according to labor procedures , nrc is supposed to receive copies of settlement agreements . we did not obtain evidence on whether these procedures were followed . incorporated as footnote 14 . 6. corrections made . the following are gao's comments on the assistant secretary of labor for employee standard's letter dated february 27 , 1997 . wording revised . wording unchanged . we believe that the description of the process in the preceding paragraph adequately conveys that there may be several actions involved at labor . wording unchanged . although the regulation does not specifically state that the 90-day time frame can be waived , current procedures have the same effect as waiving the time frame: cases are not completed in 90 days . we do not disagree with the assistant secretary's comment that the wage and hour division completed the investigative phase as quickly as possible . in addition to those named above , the following individuals made important contributions to this report: joan denomme and mary roy gathered and analyzed essential information and drafted the report ; elizabeth morrison contributed extensively to development and presentation of the report's message ; and gary boss and philip olson provided technical advice concerning nuclear regulatory commission activities . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . regulations in 10 c.f.r . part 19 should be reviewed for clarity to ensure consistency with the commission's employee protection regulations . a final rule revising 10 c.f.r . part 19 was issued in february 1996 . the policy statement proposed in recommendation ii.a - 1 should emphasize that licensees ( 1 ) are responsible for having their contractors maintain an environment in which contractor employees are free to raise concerns without fear of retaliation and ( 2 ) should incorporate this responsibility into applicable contract language .