( percent employed ) . the following are gao's comments on the department of labor's letter dated november 30 , 1995 . labor states that statistical significance is not a knife edge of yes or no but a continuum . statistically significant difference at 5% level ? statistically significant difference at 5% level ? no statistically significant difference at 5% level ? employment rates ( percent employed ) statistically significant difference at 5% level ? ( percent employed ) statistically significant difference at 5% level ? no ( percent employed ) statistically significant difference at 5% level ? labor comments that our report understates the gross returns to jtpa training . furthermore , labor implies that these gross returns calculations compare favorably with the returns to college education . our objective , as clearly stated in the report , was not to evaluate the cost - effectiveness of jtpa training , but rather to determine and compare the long - term effects of jtpa training . in fact , because we did not calculate the gross return to jtpa participants the report cannot have understated or overstated the values . such calculations were not within the scope of this report . while it may be true that these returns are favorable , we have no basis to judge the favorability of the gross returns to training . labor states that the report does not acknowledge favorable aspects of this study . specifically , labor cited that ( 1 ) all four target groups had higher earnings in the fifth year after assignment ; ( 2 ) both adult treatment groups had higher earnings than their respective control groups in each of the 5 years following assignment ; and ( 3 ) for male youths , a positive trend exists , and the fifth - year earnings exceed those of the control group by over 10 percent . contrary to labor's comment , we did note many of these favorable program outcomes in our report . we stated that adult male treatment group members had higher earnings than adult male control group members and presented similar findings for the other three target groups . we further stated that adult male treatment group earnings exceeded control group earnings in each of the 5 years and reported similar information for adult women . also , we noted the positive trend for earnings of male youths . we did not note the percentage difference for male youths in the fifth year because we did not report percentage comparisons for any of the target groups . labor states that if the training impacts are accumulated over time during the 5-year follow - up period , the net benefits outweigh the costs . as we stated in comment 1 , our objective was not to evaluate the cost - effectiveness of jtpa training , but rather to determine and compare the long - term effects of jtpa training . while it may be true that the net benefits outweigh the costs , we have no basis to judge this because such calculations were beyond the scope of this report . labor states that the increase in standard errors is primarily responsible for the decline in statistical significance of the estimated impacts .