( see app . i for a more complete description of the five - step process used to determine di and ssi eligibility. ) once a person is on the disability rolls , disability benefits continue until one of three things happens: the beneficiary dies ; ssa determines that the beneficiary is no longer eligible for benefits ; or , for di beneficiaries , benefits convert to social security retirement benefits at age 65 . generally , a beneficiary loses eligibility for benefits for one of two reasons: the beneficiary earns more income than allowed or ssa decides that the beneficiary's medical condition has improved to the point that he or she is no longer considered disabled . a number of factors have contributed to the growth in children's awards , including outreach efforts by ssa and child advocates , rising numbers of children in poverty , and major changes in the criteria for determining whether children are disabled . growth has been especially rapid in awards to children with mental impairments . ssa researchers estimate that ssi awardees ages 1 to 17 with mental impairments will stay on the rolls nearly 27 years on average . the social security act states that people applying for disability benefits should be promptly referred to state vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) agencies for services so that as many applicants as possible can return to productive activity . state disability determination service ( dds ) offices , which act for ssa in making disability evaluations , decide whether to refer applicants to the state vr agencies . furthermore , to reduce the risk a beneficiary faces in trading guaranteed monthly income and subsidized health coverage for the uncertainties of competitive employment , the congress has established various work incentives intended to safeguard cash and health benefits while a beneficiary tries to return to work . nevertheless , few beneficiaries leave the rolls to return to work . many di and ssi beneficiaries will be unable to return to work , while others present challenges to developing effective return - to - work strategies . almost half of the people receiving benefits are not likely to become employed because of their age or because they are expected to die within several years . for other beneficiaries , the ability to find and maintain employment may be challenging because they need to learn basic skills and work habits and build self - esteem to function in the workplace . some may lack access to the assistive technologies that could enhance their work potential . still others might face tight labor market conditions , particularly for low - wage positions , that could constrain employment opportunities . moreover , the nature of some disabilities may limit full - time work , while others may result in logistical obstacles such as transportation difficulties . and despite antidiscrimination laws , some disabilities may stigmatize individuals , making them appear less attractive to employers and less likely to be hired . while beneficiaries may face many challenges in attempting to return to work , research suggests that successful transitions to work may be more likely for younger people with disabilities and for those who have greater motivation to work and more education .