no estimates were made . moreover , no guarantee exists that funding would be available to complete the project . veterans' health care: the reno medical center would continue to provide inefficient care in facilities that do not meet industry standards . in addition , medical center management and va western region officials believe that a funding delay could result in losing jcaho accreditation after the upcoming october 1995 accreditation review . medical center management believes that losing accreditation would result in losing affiliation with the university of nevada , causing university doctors , nursing staff , and other professionals to refuse to practice in the nonaccredited facility ; research opportunities and funding also could be lost . va costs: design is scheduled for completion in november 1995 , construction contract award in january 1996 , and construction completion in january 1999 , although the director believes that construction would be completed in late summer 1998 . cost estimates for funding delay have not been computed . the marion , indiana , medical center is an 88-building campus on 151 acres that serves north central indiana and northwestern ohio . it is affiliated with indiana university and four other state universities for education and training experience . it provides primary and secondary medical and surgical care , nursing home care , and tertiary psychiatric care for other va medical centers in indiana . for fiscal year 1994 , the average number of operating beds was 124 medical , 320 psychiatric , and 69 nursing home ; and the average daily census was 97 , 285 , and 65 , respectively . the center admitted 2,037 inpatients and provided 54,701 outpatient visits , and about 93 percent of its patients were category a veterans , including 33.8 percent service - connected , 48.2 percent nonservice - connected low - income , and 11.2 percent nonservice - connected with special needs ( 3.1 percent were other veterans and 3.6 percent were nonveterans ) . this $17.3 million , 69,259-gross - square - foot patient environment project would construct a new two - story psychiatric nursing care building to replace three existing buildings that would remain vacant . the project would replace rooms with up to four beds and congregate bath and toilet facilities with single and double rooms with private bathrooms ( 12 single rooms and 16 double rooms would be wheelchair - accessible ) ; locate nursing stations on the same floor with patient rooms ; and add dining facilities , elevators , and central heat and air conditioning to the building . the project would decrease acute psychiatric beds from 141 to 100 . the project would not affect other buildings on the campus . the project would not correct all the medical center's deficiencies . marion's 5-year facility plan also includes a $9 million major construction project and $3.5 million for three minor projects . moreover , marion received $45.8 million in fiscal year 1992 for a new 240-bed geropsychiatric facility . veterans' health care: the marion , indiana , medical center would not serve any new types of patients or provide any new services .