the passage of h.r . 1456 , therefore , would likely supersede the demonstration before its viability and cost - effectiveness data could be studied . we are now evaluating this demonstration and are required to provide annual reports to the congress during its 3-year duration . our june 1997 report on alternatives for military retirees' health care analyzed the medicare subvention approach to providing senior retirees' care at military facilities and compared that approach with the fehbp option , among others . enrollment in medicare part b is voluntary . however , if beneficiaries do not enroll at age 65 , when they are first eligible , they must pay a penalty should they later do so . that penalty is substantial , calculated at 10 percent of the monthly premium for each year past the first year of eligibility . thus , a 65-year - old beneficiary who does not enroll and chooses to do so at age 70 faces a monthly premium 50-percent higher than the normal premium . according to a recent dod survey , approximately 10 percent of military retirees aged 65 and older do not have medicare part b. fehbp participation does not require that medicare - eligible beneficiaries be enrolled in part b , and neither does this bill . however , because each fee - for - service fehbp plan waives its hospital and medical deductibles and copayment for members enrolled in part a and part b , if beneficiaries do have part b and choose such a plan as blue cross and blue shield , they would have nearly 100-percent coverage . because part b is not required but adds to the benefit for enrollees , having dod pay the part b penalties would seem to be an unnecessary expense for dod . this bill authorizes fehbp participation for all active duty dependents , retirees and their dependents , and survivors . it also extends the fehbp option to certain former spouses of military members and retirees and to persons eligible for continued dod health care system coverage . we estimate that about 6.5 million beneficiaries would be eligible for participation . the bill , however , temporarily limits the total number of program participants to 100,000 the first year , 200,000 the second year , and 400,000 the third year , with participants to be selected randomly from all those who are eligible and seeking to enroll . the fehbp enrollees are ineligible for military facility care or tricare and must stay in fehbp for a minimum of 3 years . however , the bill does permit dod to contract with plans to provide certain services to military beneficiaries enrolled in fehbp plans . if fehbp coverage is dropped , beneficiaries could not reenroll in fehbp until the 3-year period passes . further , eligibility for dod care cannot be restored until the 3-year period passes . thus , beneficiaries who disenrolled from fehbp before the end of the 3-year enrollment term would be without dod or fehbp health care coverage until the end of that period . the total fehbp premium charges are the same as in the civilian federal program . beneficiaries' premium charges are based on the contribution made by dod .