( app . v shows state , county , and local governments' annual expenditures and the percentage change from fiscal year 1990 through 1994. ) the corporation for national service administers programs that address the nation's education , human service , public safety , and environmental needs through the activities of volunteers and that expand the involvement of volunteers in responding to a wide range of community needs , including drug abuse prevention , by reaching high - risk youth and the communities in which they live . referral and monitoring ( title xvi ) demonstration projects ( title xvi ) disability insurance trust fund ( title ii ) program not in existence or program restructured into another program . the social security administration has placed restrictions on disability insurance and supplemental security income benefits payments to individuals disabled by drug addiction or alcoholism and has established barriers to prevent a beneficiary from using benefits to support an addiction . in some cases , the administration imposes treatment requirements on disability insurance beneficiaries and establishes referral and monitoring agreements in all states . this appendix provides information on the substance abuse treatment and prevention activities of various federal agencies . included are funding information and program and activity descriptions . not included are funding and program descriptions for agencies that devoted less than $1 million to treatment and prevention activities in fiscal year 1994 . these agencies accounted for $1.8 million or 0.04 percent of total federal budget authority for that year . in some cases table totals do not add because of rounding . through the veterans health administration , va operates a network of substance abuse treatment programs in its medical centers , domiciliaries , and outpatient clinics . office of elementary and secondary education drug - free schools and communities act national programs ( including regional centers ) safe and drug - free schools and communities act family and community endeavor schools ( faces ) office of special education and rehabilitative services , rehabilitative services administration office of special education programs grants for infants and families special education special purpose funds national institute on disability and rehabilitation research rehabilitation research training centers and other programs the drug - free school and communities act expired at the end of fiscal year 1994 ; its authorization was extended under the safe and drug - free schools and communities act . program not in existence or program restructured into another program . the safe and drug - free schools and communities act extends the authorization for the drug - free schools and communities act ( which expired on sept. 30 , 1994 ) and broadens it to include activities to prevent violence as well as drug and alcohol use by youth . in 1994 , the funds were used exclusively for alcohol , tobacco , and other drug - related prevention activities . in 1994 , 90 percent of these funds were used to support grants to local educational agencies ( lea ) with serious school crime , violence , and discipline problems . the projects are designed to combat those problems and thereby enhance school safety and promote better access to learning .