ii ) . however , a number of other factors , such as employer matching and size of firm , also influence participation and contribution amounts . participation rates in plans with loan provisions are about 6 percentage points higher than plans with no loan provisions ( see fig . employer matching also increases participation rates by about 20 percentage points depending on the match rate . we also reviewed the relevant technical literature and talked to pension experts . the survey of consumer finances randomly sampled 3,906 households regarding current and past employment by family members , assets and debts , and demographic information . included in the current employment portion of the survey were detailed questions about pension participation . from the survey , we created a database containing information on respondents and their spouses who were working and between the ages of 18 and 64 at the time of the survey . we did not independently verify the accuracy of the survey of consumer finances database because it is commonly used by researchers . we used the survey of consumer finances to determine the effects of pension - plan borrowing on participation in and contributions to 401 ( k ) pension plans and to describe the demographic and economic characteristics of workers who borrow from their pension accounts . for the analysis of the impact of borrowing on contributions to pension accounts , the subsample of the survey contained information on 477 workers who participate in a 401 ( k ) pension plan . since the dependent variable is a continuous variable , which can be no less than zero , the multivariate regression estimation technique used is a tobit model . a tobit model takes into account the fact that the participation rate can be no less than 0 percent , and the results from this model will not predict a participation rate of less than 0 percent . let c* be an individual's desired contribution rate , which is affected by the individual's characteristics . if the desired contribution rate is greater than zero , then the individual contributes to his or her pension account . if it is less than or equal to zero , then the individual does not contribute to his or her account . formally , the model is written as where the x vector contains the variables , the b parameters to be estimated , and the last term is the random error that captures the unobserved factors affecting the desired contribution rate . the dependent variable — that is , the observed contribution rate — is c = c* if c* > 0 c = 0 if c*£ 0 . to describe the demographic and economic characteristics of workers who borrow from their pension accounts , the subsample we used for our analysis contained information on 769 workers with defined - contribution pension plans that allowing borrowing . we were interested in determining how participant characteristics affect the likelihood or probability that an individual has an outstanding loan against his or her pension account .