understaffing . resident lost 22 lbs . in 5 months . resident's feet have sores and are bandaged , but not always changed as ordered . sores are beginning to smell . complainant found resident's face swollen , but staff was unable to explain what happened . resident told therapist that an aide verbally abused her . home was to investigate and report to the state survey agency . however , as of december 1998 , the state did not have the home's investigative report . aide smokes in the home and around residents . same aide mishandled residents — threw them into bed and used nasty language . home was to investigate and report to the state ; however , as of december 1998 , there was no indication home had done an investigation . after contacting home about its investigation of physical abuse of a resident , ombudsman was uncomfortable with the home's inconsistent responses . resident had discoloration of chest that family believed was bruise caused by physical abuse . home to investigate and report to the state ; but , as of december 1998 , there was no indication home had investigated . understaffing , resulting in the dining room being closed for 2 days . during this time , there were only 3 aides for 70 to 80 residents . complainant saw a nursing home employee shaking resident . employee terminated by home . hygiene inadequate - - resident was not bathed , teeth not cleaned , and hair not combed . weight loss from april to june , was 134 lbs . to 120 lbs . home said resident spit food out and that home had recommended a stomach tube . ( continued ) summary of allegation ( s ) resident was not provided food from monday night until wednesday at 3:00 p.m. resident was sent to hospital after complainant insisted . at hospital , the resident was found to have infected sacral decubitus ulcer , was dehydrated , and had urinary tract infection . nursing home staff said they had not sent resident to the hospital because resident was dying . new aide tried to transfer resident without another aide to assist , although the care plan called for two people for transfers . aide said she could not get timely help , so attempted to do it by herself . five days later , resident was found to have two fractured legs . home wrote incident report , but did not interview new aide as required until ombudsman opened a case as a result of family's concern about home misrepresenting circumstances of resident's fall . family called doctor , who ordered x - rays . it is unclear whether home also called doctor simultaneously , or earlier — as home reported . resident was blind , intelligent , and sociable . complainant has found resident alone , begging for help , screaming “ . ” , or “please , someone get me a drink of water,” or “please take me to the bathroom. no one responded or reassured resident that she was not alone . on one occasion , resident was found still in bed at 3:00 p.m. — urine - soaked , hungry , and thirsty . she had no breakfast or lunch .