additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . states are responsible for the remaining 34 percent . the federal government also pays performance incentives to states on the basis of their efficiency in collecting support on both afdc and non - afdc cases . these incentives are calculated separately for afdc and non - afdc collections . collection efficiency is determined by dividing afdc and non - afdc collections each by total administrative costs . incentives are paid on the basis of the resulting ratios and range from 6 percent of collections for ratios less than 1.4 to 10 percent of collections for ratios of 2.8 or higher . in practice , all states earn at least 6 percent on afdc and non - afdc collections . the payment rates identified for collection contracts in our november 1995 report range from about 8 percent to 24 percent and largely depend on factors such as contract case volume , case collection difficulty , type of cases referred ( afdc or non - afdc ) , and the use of multiple or single contractors . states are eligible for federal reimbursement of 66 percent of the payments to contractors as cse administrative costs . when states contract with private firms to provide child support collection services for portions of their caseloads , they often do so to help service their growing caseloads . some have found it difficult to hire additional staff in an environment of staff and budgetary constraints brought about by increased pressures to downsize government . recent estimates of cse caseloads nationwide range from 300 cases to as many as 2,500 cases per worker . in 1994 , states were able to collect only 55 percent of support due that year and only 7 percent of support due from prior years . state cse officials said that contracting with the private sector allows them to service portions of their caseloads without hiring additional staff and to obtain support payments they have been unable to collect . for example , an official from virginia told us that past - due afdc cases are sent to contractors because state staff rarely have time to work them . also , an official from new mexico said that cases the state sends to contractors for collection services are ones on which the state would not try to collect , believing them difficult to collect and , therefore , not cost - effective to pursue .