( see app . i for a list of individuals contacted during our review. ) technological , medical , and societal changes have increased the potential for more people with disabilities to work , and some ssa data indicate that as many as 3 out of 10 persons on the disability rolls may be good candidates for return to work . however , few beneficiaries ever leave the rolls by returning to work . for example , less than half of 1 percent of the beneficiaries have left the di program annually during the last several years because they returned to work , according to ssa data . as we recently reported , ssa focuses little attention on returning beneficiaries to the workplace . ssa's capacity to identify and assist in expanding beneficiaries' productive capacities have been limited by weaknesses in the design and implementation of the di and ssi programs . ssa does not have a system for functionally evaluating each individual's return - to - work potential and identifying the return - to - work services needed by those who have the potential to return to the workplace . instead , ssa's primary focus is on processing disability applications to determine whether applicants meet disability criteria and then paying benefits to those found eligible . the di and ssi programs pay disability benefits to people who have long - term disabilities . to be eligible for benefits , an adult must have a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that ( 1 ) is expected to last at least 1 year or result in death and ( 2 ) prevents the individual from engaging in substantial gainful activity . regulations currently define substantial gainful activity as work that produces countable earnings of more than $500 a month for disabled individuals and $960 a month for individuals who are blind . furthermore , to qualify , an individual not only must be unable to do his or her previous work , but — considering age , education , and work experience — the individual also must be unable to do any other kind of substantial work that exists in the national economy . although both programs use the same definition of disability , they differ in important ways . established under title ii of the social security act , di is an insurance program funded by payroll taxes paid by workers and their employers into a social security trust fund . similar to private long - term disability insurance programs , the di program is for workers who have lost their source of income because of long - term disability . to be insured under di , an individual must have worked for certain minimum periods with a specified minimum level of earnings in jobs covered by social security . reflecting the program's long - term disability character , di benefits generally cannot begin until 5 months after the onset of disability . medicare coverage is provided to beneficiaries 24 months after entitlement to di cash benefits commences . by contrast , the ssi program , established under title xvi of the social security act , is not an insurance program and has no prior work requirements .