eastern u.p . western u.p . michigan allocated 100 percent of the federal formula grant funds to the local service delivery areas . the state retained none of the allowable 15 percent governor's discretionary funds ( $6,333,950 ) at the state level . performance goals were not included in the state plan , but michigan planned to measure duration of placement into unsubsidized employment , increased child support collection , and earnings , measured after 90 days of employment and other times throughout the year . in new york , the department of labor is the welfare - to - work federal grant recipient and state administering entity . new york submitted its welfare - to - work plan on june 29 , 1998 . on september 11 , 1998 , labor awarded fiscal year 1998 formula grant funds to the state totaling $96,886,094 . the state assured $48,443,047 in state matching funds over the 3-year grant period . according to a state official , the state provided half of the state match through a legislative appropriation and required local service delivery areas to provide the remaining half of the state match through in - kind or cash contributions . new york requested that an alternate agency be designated to administer the welfare - to - work program in 2 of its 33 service delivery areas . the secretary of labor granted waivers for these two areas , and the welfare - to - work program is administered by the human services agencies for new york city and the syracuse / onondaga area . the state required these two human services agencies and the remaining 31 private industry councils to submit plans proposing local welfare - to - work strategies and incorporated these plans in the new york state welfare - to - work plan . as of september 30 , 1998 , a state official said that most of the local areas were designing their welfare - to - work eligibility determination processes in conjunction with the local social services departments , but none of the local areas had reported enrollments of welfare - to - work participants in the formula grant program . new york's state plan for formula funds proposed a general focus on improving the connection to work , providing postemployment assistance , and serving the needs and requirements of employers . the state plan emphasized serving individuals with disabilities , many of whom have experienced long - term welfare dependency but are no longer exempt from work requirements . within these state initiatives , the local service delivery areas may further specify the target population and choose the mix of services most appropriate for their area needs . new york allocated 85 percent , or $82,353,180 , of the federal formula grant to the local service delivery areas using the following formula: 50-percent weight was given to the number of people with incomes below the poverty level in excess of 7.5 percent of the service delivery area population , 25-percent weight was given to the number of long - term welfare recipients in the service delivery area having received assistance for at least 30 months , and 25-percent weight was given to the number of unemployed people in the service delivery area .