( see app . ii for more historical information. ) through a multiple project assurance , an institution does not need to reapply through oprr for eligibility to receive hhs funds for each new study approved by its irb . an assurance covers the institution's human subject studies for 3 years , at which time the institution must renew its assurance . renewals are for a 5-year period . as a practical matter , multiple project assurances allow institutions to conduct research with no further oprr involvement until the assurance is up for renewal . as of november 1995 , 451 active oprr multiple project assurances covered more than 500 research institutions . these institutions receive most of hhs' funding for research with human subjects . primary responsibility for negotiating all multiple project assurances in oprr rests with a retired physician who used to be employed for this purpose by oprr . since retiring , she has continued this work on an unpaid , part - time basis . currently , the assurance branch chief is responsible for approving all multiple project assurances oprr negotiates . at institutions without a multiple project assurance , an assurance agreement must be negotiated with oprr for each individual study . these are called single project assurances and require oprr to review , for each study , documentation similar to that required for a multiple project assurance . in addition , oprr reviews the study's informed consent form before approving a single project assurance . as of november 1995 , oprr had 3,063 active single project assurances . primary oversight of these assurances rests with three full - time staff in oprr's assurance branch . a third type of assurance — the cooperative project assurance — recognizes that research is frequently conducted at multiple sites under joint institutional sponsorship . one example is the national surgical adjuvant project for breast and bowel cancers , sponsored by the national cancer institute and conducted at over 300 sites . oprr requires each participating institution to have a cooperative project assurance for all its joint research , regardless of other assurances held by the institution . for projects conducted under cooperative project assurances , oprr designates reviewers to approve each research protocol and a prototype informed consent form . irbs at the participating institutions must also approve the protocol and the informed consent document . irbs can require additional explanations to be included in the informed consent document . however , they cannot modify the core elements of the protocol , which is to be consistent across all sites . nor can they delete or substantially modify the discussion of risks and alternative treatments in the prototype consent document without notice and justification . as of november 1995 , oprr had 1,333 active cooperative project assurances . assurance branch staff responsible for single project assurances also review cooperative assurances with additional support provided by other oprr staff and others . fda can request modifications to or reject proposals deemed to present unacceptable risk . fda's prevention efforts overlap oprr's if the drug study is supported by hhs funds . both oprr and fda educate the research community on issues related to protecting human research subjects .