( see app . i for more detailed information on pbgc's efforts to forecast its future financial condition. ) pbgc has made improvements in administering its insurance programs . it is continuing to address systems and control weaknesses in its operations . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . two areas of concern are the continuing backlog of benefit determinations and inadequate oversight of contractors . pbgc's recent progress has occurred primarily in the areas of financial systems and internal control , plan monitoring , and cooperation with plan sponsors . continued underfunding among some large plans poses a risk to the agency . pbgc also remains vulnerable to other risks , such as downturns in the economy , problems in certain economic sectors , and declines in interest rates . an economic downturn and the termination of a few plans with large unfunded liabilities could quickly reduce or eliminate pbgc's surplus . therefore , a continued focus on maintaining a strong financial condition is important in anticipating and addressing these risks . in addition , pbgc's current methodology for forecasting the future financial condition of the single - employer program does not take into account the range of economic conditions that can result in plan terminations , nor does it measure the probability that such future terminations will result in claims . for many years , and as recently as 1992 , we reported that pbgc had not developed and put into place the necessary documentation and support for the techniques and assumptions used to estimate its future liabilities from terminated plans and from plans expected to terminate . the construction industry alone had 2.8 million participants . there has been , however , a substantial decline in the number of active workers in multiemployer plans because many of these plans are in declining industries that are hiring few new workers . but because many workers are retiring or are vested and moving to other employment , the number of covered participants has remained relatively stable . multiemployer plan contributions are based primarily on two factors: ( 1 ) administrative expenses and “normal costs” ( costs to fund retirement benefits that active workers accrue each year ) and ( 2 ) costs of plan modifications or deviation of plan experience from expectations . payments or credits for these latter costs are amortized over a period of between 15 and 30 years . however , as active workers retire , contributions for normal costs fall and payments for retirees' benefits increase . if such retirements occurred unexpectedly or in large numbers , the plan's financial condition could deteriorate . for an adequate contribution base ( ratio of active workers to other participants ) , the plans primarily depend on new employers joining or existing employers staying in and hiring new workers . the rate of growth in active workers provides a measure of the ability of the plan to fund its liabilities .