irs did not provide comments . ( see app . vi , table vi.2. ) we also estimated that 11 states that used state tax intercept might collect about $1.3 million through extending the federal tax refund intercept to the medicaid program ( see app . vi , table vi.3 ) . one acf official we interviewed suggested that the possibility of intercepting afdc overpayments might not be as great as in the food stamp program because afdc clients are less likely than food stamp clients to be getting a federal income tax refund . further , all of the acf officials we interviewed believed that states may have to “wait in line” behind other programs already using federal income tax refund intercepts to collect from the same clients . other than federal tax liability and past due child support owed afdc clients , which receive first priority , the law does not prioritize agencies . federal and state efforts to recover afdc , food stamp , and medicaid benefit overpayments have fallen short of their potential . while not all such overpayments are collectable , recovery of overpayments could substantially increase if lower performing states improved their recovery practices , particularly in establishing claims for overpayments . although our estimates of the additional collections account for a small proportion of the total estimated overpayments in 1992 , they represent a substantial increase in the amount that states collected in each program in that year . with the food and consumer service's ( fcs ) continued sharing of state recovery information and best recovery practices and the administration for children and families' ( acf ) plans to do so soon , states have an opportunity to improve their recovery efforts in the afdc and food stamp programs . moreover , states could improve their ability to recover more overpayments if the congress would remove certain federal legislative barriers to collection and recovery techniques . specifically , states could run more fiscally sound welfare programs if ( 1 ) limits on offsetting food stamp benefits to recover food stamp overpayments arising from agency error were removed and ( 2 ) authority to use federal income tax refund intercepts was extended to afdc and medicaid overpayments . while providing states these additional tools will not end overpayments in these welfare programs , it would provide states additional opportunities to recover overpayments . managing the three welfare programs' funds — including identifying , establishing , and collecting overpayments — is critical to the programs' integrity , regardless of how they may be structured or administered after the welfare reform debate . preventing overpayments is clearly one way to ensure that taxpayer dollars are not used for unwarranted benefits , but overpayments will inevitably occur . finding methods to better identify and recover overpayments , and obtaining additional collection tools , should continue to be a central concern of program administrators . the congress may want to consider legislative amendments to remove barriers to states' collecting additional overpayments .