additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . are controls in place to ensure that costs claimed for reimbursement are reasonable and to target the cost - reimbursement benefit of the program to clinics needing it for financial viability ? our review was performed using available national statistics and information from our own detailed analysis of rhcs in four states — alabama , kansas , new hampshire , and washington . our detailed analysis included such matters as where clinics were located , how many medicare and medicaid beneficiaries they served , the amounts and types of costs they claimed for reimbursement , and how their service patterns had changed from 1992 to 1994 . details of our objectives , scope , and methodology are in appendix i . in 1977 , many rural communities were facing a disconnect between their health care delivery systems and medicare and medicaid , the nation's primary health insurance programs for the elderly and the poor . many isolated rural communities that had not been able to attract or retain a physician had come to rely on clinics that did not follow the traditional model of physician delivery of medical services . these rural clinics were staffed by specially trained nurse practitioners and physician assistants who acted as either the primary care provider or assistants to overworked sole physicians . however , services rendered by these nonphysician providers were not covered by medicare unless they were under the immediate supervision of a physician , and coverage under medicaid was at the state's discretion . as a result of this and other factors , some rural clinics were confronted with serious financial problems . the congress became concerned that without medicare reimbursement , many of these clinics could never become self - sufficient and would be forced to close , leaving many areas without primary health care services . therefore , public law 95-210 authorized medicare and medicaid reimbursement to nonphysician primary care practitioners in rhcs . the rhc program is one of the few federal programs that is able to address underservice in small communities that do not have a traditional health care system in place . other assistance programs , such as the national health service corps , which places providers in underserved areas , generally require that such a system be present . with their nontraditional approach , rhcs can provide care in areas where a traditional system is not financially viable . appendix ii shows where rhcs were located throughout the nation near the end of 1995 . the rhc program is administered by hcfa , which must certify as rhcs all primary care providers requesting this status if they practice in a rural and underserved area and meet the conditions of participation for the medicare program as determined by the state's survey agency .