additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . we did not assess the validity of ssa's assumptions . ssa estimates used the intermediate assumptions reported by social security's board of trustees in 1998 . to examine the implications of mandatory coverage for state and local government employers , employees , and their pension plans , we reviewed the 1980 study by the universal social security coverage study group , which was prepared for the secretary of health , education , and welfare at that time and transmitted to the congress in march 1980 . we discussed study results with the study's deputy director for research and examined supporting documents for the study . we also held discussions and reviewed documentation of state and local government employer , employee , or pension plan representatives in the seven states that account for over 75 percent of the noncovered payroll . we examined financial reports for nine state and local retirement systems: the california state teachers' retirement system , the public employees' retirement association of colorado , the teachers' retirement system of the state of illinois , the louisiana state employees' retirement system , the massachusetts state retirement system , the massachusetts teachers' contributory retirement system , the state teachers retirement system of ohio , the public employees' retirement system of ohio , and the teacher retirement system of texas . we also identified a number of states that have changed , or have considered changing , plan benefits in ways that are similar to those that might be made by states and localities with noncovered employees in response to mandatory social security coverage . we discussed the potential impact on plan finances of changing plan benefits with pension plan representatives in those states and examined study reports provided by them . the retirement age was increased by the 1983 social security amendments . additionally , we reviewed survey reports addressing pension benefits , costs , investment practices , or actuarial valuation methods and assumptions prepared by bls , ppcc , and the society of actuaries . we discussed the implications of mandatory coverage for public pension plans with actuaries at the office of personnel management , the pension benefit guarantee corporation , the american academy of actuaries , and in private practice . to analyze differences between public pension costs and benefits for covered and noncovered state and local employees , we used ppcc survey data . we used the 1995 survey , which covered 1994 , because the 1997 survey , which covered 1996 , did not include some of the required data .