iii. ) the letter acknowledged that we accurately described the problems and the corrective actions under way and planned . in addition , dod officials provided updated information on some of the actions they are taking , and this has been added to the report . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member , senate committee on armed services ; the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on military personnel , house committee on national security ; the secretary of defense ; and other interested parties . the aviano community is an exception . several patient assistance services have been in place for some time there . for example , the air force contracts with bilingual italian physicians to help beneficiaries understand their diagnosis and treatment . beneficiaries also mentioned that they need help obtaining services from host nation facilities , especially during evenings and weekends . they are concerned about such matters as knowing where to go , having someone available to translate their medical emergency , and getting assistance with paperwork . in addition , beneficiaries using host nation providers were required to pay deductibles and copayments for their care . when admitted , beneficiaries explained that they must contend with language barriers , cultural differences , and quality of care concerns such as differences in treatment . military physicians told us that some differences in treatment do exist among the u.s. , german , and italian systems . although the cultural and treatment differences are unsettling to u.s. patients , the military medical staff , for the most part , are confident about the quality of health care delivered in germany and northern italy . once care is completed and patients are released from host nation providers , many patients are left with their medical information in a foreign language . this problem is most prevalent in germany where , currently , treatment records are written in german , and often the only information translated is that done by bilingual physicians working for the u.s. military . in several communities , military physicians estimated that less than 10 percent of medical records are ever translated . consequently , patients may not have an adequate record of their medical conditions and treatments . dod and beneficiaries recognize that there must be a greater reliance on host nation care: rebuilding u.s. military medical facilities overseas is not an option . therefore , dod has taken and is planning a number of steps to alleviate beneficiary concerns and improve access to host nation care . although some of dod's actions have been slow in coming , most are expected to be in place by october 1995 . in our view , these actions are positive steps toward alleviating the concerns voiced by beneficiaries . new cases are seldom started . in vicenza and livorno , all beneficiaries have access to dental services . many beneficiaries and u.s. military dentists do not consider host nation dental care a viable option . it is expensive , and beneficiaries do not like the differences in the practice patterns of host nation dentists . numerous obstacles confront the mhss in europe .