( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) job corps was established as a national employment and training program in 1964 to provide severely disadvantaged youth with a wide range of services , including basic / remedial education , vocational training , and social skills instruction , usually at residential facilities . it remains one of the few federally run programs , unlike many other employment training programs that are federally funded but are operated by state or local governments . we also eliminated from our analyses those participants from states without job corps centers . this brought our analytic population to 64,060 . certain analyses dealt with subpopulations of the basic population . for example , for the analysis of where participants obtained jobs , only those 41,975 cases where the file indicated a job placement were used . for program year 1993 , the file indicated that 35,116 participants obtained jobs . to determine how far participants traveled when attending out - of - state centers , we calculated the straight - line distance from the participant's residence to the last assigned out - of - state center . the distance was calculated using the centroid — or center — for the zip code of the participants' residence at entry and for the job corps center attended . the 5-digit zip code inventory file — part of the statistical analysis system library — provided the centroid's latitude and longitude . these latitude and longitude measures became the basis for the distance computations . to determine whether an in - state center was closer , we calculated the straight - line distance from the participant's residence to the nearest job corps center located in the participant's state of residence . we then compared this distance with the distance to the job corps center of assignment . our distance analysis was dependent upon having consistent address and zip code information for the participants' residences and job corps centers , and the related longitude and latitude for those zip codes . this includes all participants regardless of the type of training program in which they participated . table i.1 presents a summary of the subgroup sizes for analyses performed on program years 1994 and 1993 data . excluded participant files for missing information ( 61 ) ( 337 ) excluded participants not residing in united states , district of columbia , or puerto rico ( 467 ) ( 444 ) total terminees in our population total terminees in states without job corps centers ( 1,434 ) ( 1,670 ) total terminees in states with job corps centers excluded participant files with longitude and latitude data unavailable ( 989 ) ( 940 ) excluded participant files with inconsistent or missing zip code data ( 680 ) ( 422 ) to calculate the program year 1994 capacity of each job corps center , we used labor's listing of residential and nonresidential capacity at any one time ( slots ) for each job corps center and multiplied it by the average number of days in a year ( 365.25 days ) . we then divided that number by the average length of stay of program year 1994 terminees at that center .