the report was revised . ( see p . no revision was needed . ( see p . the report was revised to include education's comment . have recent administrative changes implemented by ocr improved its operations in conducting and resolving complaint investigations and completing compliance reviews ? to address these issues , we studied pertinent laws , documents , reports , policies , and records in ocr headquarters and in two ocr regional offices . we also obtained information during interviews with ocr officials on interpretations and explanations of the documents we obtained . our study was limited to ocr activities related to complaint investigations and compliance reviews in postsecondary schools that involved title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 . however , for fiscal year 1988 through june 30 , 1995 , we analyzed the timeliness and outcomes of all the closed investigations and reviews . see appendix i for details on our scope and methodology . the u.s. department of education's ocr is a law enforcement agency . its primary responsibility is to ensure that recipients of federal financial assistance do not discriminate — on the basis of race , color , national origin , sex , disability , or age — against students , faculty , or other individuals in educational programs and activities . ocr is responsible for enforcing the following federal civil rights laws as they relate to schools at all levels: title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or national origin ; title ix of the education amendments of 1972 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs and activities ; section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability ; the age discrimination act of 1975 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of age ; and title ii of the americans with disabilities act of 1990 , which prohibits public entities from discriminating on the basis of disability . the civil rights laws ocr enforces extend to a wide range of recipients of federal funds . these recipients include all state education and rehabilitation agencies as well as nearly every school district and postsecondary school ; thousands of proprietary schools , libraries , museums , and correctional facilities ; and other institutions that receive federal financial assistance from education . to ensure equal opportunity in the nation's schools , ocr carries out its civil rights responsibilities through a variety of compliance activities . ocr's principal activity is the resolution of discrimination complaints . most of ocr's staff resources are devoted to such activities as processing , conciliating , and investigating complaints . in an effort to ensure that recipients of federal financial assistance meet their civil rights compliance responsibilities , ocr also conducts compliance reviews , monitors corrective action plans , and provides technical assistance . compliance reviews differ from complaint investigations in that they are initiated by ocr ; they usually cover broader issues ; and they affect significantly larger numbers of individuals .