this places the physicians in competition with each other . three southern california phps that are medi - cal contractors use the following financial incentive arrangements: one plan , which is a staff model , uses a bonus arrangement . the plan compensates primary care physicians at its 30 medical centers on a salaried basis . it seeks to control referral costs by providing a bonus to the physicians that is based in part on the extent to which they hold down specialty and inpatient hospital referrals . the bonus is linked to the referral rates of individual physicians and cannot exceed 20 percent of a physician's salary . another plan , which is a group model , uses a combination deficit and surplus arrangement . the plan pays its medical group a capitation fee as compensation for providing all medical services except inpatient hospital care . since the group is staffed to provide virtually all of the services it is capitated for , the arrangement does not fall into the capitation - for - referral - services incentive category . to control hospital referrals , the plan establishes a budget for hospitalization and shares any surplus or deficit with the group . the amount that can be shared with the group is subject to a relatively modest cap . the group in turn divides its share of any surplus or deficit among its physicians equally , rather than on the basis of their individual referral rates . a third plan , which is a network / independent practice association model , uses capitation for some referral services plus a bonus arrangement for others . we have incorporated their views where appropriate . specifically , hcfa agreed with our conclusion that more competition is desirable in the proposed expansion . in its comments , dhs ( 1 ) emphasized the improvements that the new medi - cal managed care contracting program will bring under the expanded program ; ( 2 ) provided additional information and top management's perspective on dhs monitoring and oversight activities ; and ( 3 ) acknowledged that while competition will be limited under the expansion plan , dhs believes that the expanded access and choice for beneficiaries are major improvements over the current fee - for - service environment . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 14 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of hcfa , the director of the office of management and budget , the director of dhs , and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others upon request . please call me on ( 202 ) 512-4561 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . to obtain general information on california's medi - cal managed care program and plans for expansion , we interviewed state officials from dhs ; the departments of finance , corporations , and personnel ; and the california medical assistance commission . we also interviewed federal officials from hcfa's headquarters and region ix office , contractors , advocacy groups , and associations .