i for more details ) . we estimate that between 1990 and 1994 these recipients transferred cars , homes , land , cash , and other resources worth over $74 million . although other cases involving potential transfers of excludable resources may be in our sample , comments indicating this were not noted in the individuals' records , and we had no other available means to identify those cases . we assumed that the proportion of the 3,550 recipients with automated resource data in mssics who transferred resources other than primary residences would be the same as the proportion of these individuals in our random sample , 98.73 percent . thus , we based our estimates on a population of about 3,505 recipients . all of the sampling errors reported below have a confidence level of 95 percent . for estimates of the value of resources transferred when a value was not reported by a recipient , we considered the value of that transfer to be $0 . our estimate of the total value of resources that recipients reported having transferred , $74.3 million , has a sampling error of plus or minus $12.9 million . the estimate of the average value of transferred resources , $21,000 , has a sampling error of plus or minus $3,672 . for the estimates of proportions in column 2 of table 1 , sampling errors do not exceed plus or minus 3 percentage points . in addition , sampling errors associated with estimates of benefits to be received ( $7.9 million ) and potential program savings ( $14.6 million ) do not exceed plus or minus $1 million . since the principal source of our automated data , the supplemental security record ( ssr ) , is subject to periodic ssa quality assurance reviews , we did not independently examine the computer system controls for the ssr . except for the limitations noted , our review was done between may and december 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , the following individuals also made important contributions to this report: graham d. rawsthorn , evaluator ; daniel a. schwimer , senior attorney ; vanessa r. taylor , senior evaluator ( computer science ) ; nancy l. crothers , communications analyst ; james p. wright , assistant director ( study design and data analysis ) ; and joel i. grossman , social science analyst . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . it was authorized in 1972 and is administered by ssa . to be eligible for ssi , individuals cannot have income greater than the maximum benefit level ( in 1995 , $458 per month for an individual and $687 for a couple if both spouses were eligible ) or resources worth more than $2,000 ( $3,000 for a couple ) , subject to certain exclusions , such as a home that is the primary residence . in 31 states and the district of columbia , ssi recipients are automatically eligible for medicaid without filing a separate application for benefits with the state medicaid agency .