other modifications were more than superficial . one plan customized ahcpr's hiv guideline by adding drug treatments that were not covered in the original guideline , specifying when primary care physicians should refer patients to a specialist , and providing information on state reporting requirements . finally , some changes could be considered substantial . for example , one plan we contacted relaxed the recent chicken pox vaccination guideline from the american academy of pediatrics . the academy recommended that chicken pox vaccinations be given to all healthy children . the plan adapted the guideline by recommending that its physicians discuss the extent of immunity that the vaccine could confer and let parents decide whether they want the vaccine given to their children . the plan maintained that , because the immunity offered by the vaccine might not last a lifetime , it could result in more adult cases of chicken pox , an outcome that could result in serious harm or death . the plan held that it is better for children to contract chicken pox to ensure lifetime immunity than to get the vaccine . an academy spokesperson commented that no significant loss of immunity has been demonstrated in healthy children who were vaccinated . at another plan , we found that a customized guideline recommended treatments specifically not endorsed by ahcpr . in its low back pain guideline , the plan recommended that physicians perform an invasive treatment to control pain and an invasive test to diagnose the extent of disc damage . however , ahcpr's guideline stated that the benefits of this treatment and test were unclear and not worth the potential risk of infection to patients . a plan representative told us that their guideline was adapted to address the concerns of the plan's orthopedists , who felt that the invasive treatment and test should have been included in the original guideline . to the extent that local adaptation , broadly defined , moves in the direction of excluding certain types of practitioners . or of weakening a guideline document fundamentally by allowing for the provision of marginally beneficial services in situations in which guidelines would probably say ‘this is inappropriate for this class of people' — then you have what looks to me like a self - serving change.” “ . guidelines that recommend the best care practices to optimize outcomes for patients may not necessarily be cost - effective or easy for mcos to implement . mcos , with a commitment to the bottom line , may make modifications to guidelines to achieve their best interests and not those of patients. most plan managers we contacted applaud the various guidelines published by public and private entities . the availability of such guidelines makes plans' guideline development efforts easier and less costly . plans consider published guidelines to be useful summaries of the literature and science , written for a diverse audience . however , given the multiplicity of guideline sources , many plan managers told us they would prefer to see some federal agencies assume an alternative role in the guideline movement . plans noted that having many federal and private - sector guidelines on the same topic is an inefficient use of limited resources .