( see app . i for a detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) our work was performed between october 1996 and november 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , except where noted above . a not - for - profit hospital conversion is a transaction that results in the shift of all or a substantial portion of the assets of a not - for - profit hospital to for - profit use . the full implementation of the agreement is awaiting an irs private letter ruling on the tax effects of the operating agreement . while joas raise some of the same concerns as joint ventures , the forthcoming irs and treasury guidance on joint ventures may not address the specific concerns raised in the context of joas . ftc and justice share responsibility for enforcing the federal antitrust laws ; however , according to officials of these agencies , hospital conversions do not raise any special issues under the antitrust laws . in carrying out their oversight roles , ftc and justice investigate and challenge , where appropriate , potentially anticompetitive hospital mergers and acquisitions . according to ftc officials , antitrust issues presented by not - for - profit conversions do not differ from those presented by mergers and acquisitions between not - for - profit entities , and most hospital mergers do not violate the laws enforced by ftc and justice . ftc and justice receive advance notice of many transactions under the premerger notification requirements of hart - scott - rodino . however , according to ftc officials , this filing requirement does not apply to some types of mergers and acquisitions ( such as those involving public entities ) and to certain joint ventures . ftc has investigated ten of the many proposed acquisitions of not - for - profit hospitals by for - profit firms and , in three of these cases , blocked a merger or obtained divestiture as a condition for allowing the transaction to proceed . for example , in 1995 ftc alleged that the proposed acquisition by columbia / hca of john randolph medical center , one of the conversions we reviewed , would endanger competition for psychiatric hospital care because it would bring under common ownership john randolph's psychiatric unit and a competing columbia / hca psychiatric hospital in nearby petersburg , va . in its order , ftc permitted columbia / hca to acquire john randolph medical center on the condition that it later divest itself of its psychiatric hospital in petersburg . concerns about the conversion of not - for - profit hospitals and the transfer of millions of dollars in charitable assets still exist , because they are carried out essentially privately between boards of the selling hospitals and management of the purchasing for - profit companies . these conversions are not routinely subject to any disclosure requirements , which leaves little opportunity for community involvement outside of the community members who serve on the not - for - profit hospitals' boards . a growing number of states are recognizing that the public interest is at stake and , as a result , are becoming more involved in overseeing the conversion process and monitoring the terms of such transactions .