not applicable . the occupational safety and health act ( 29 u.s.c . 651 et seq. ) requires employers to keep the place of employment free from recognized hazards that could cause death or serious physical harm to employees and to comply with workplace safety standards established by the department of labor . size limitations: none ; the act applies to all employers . however , employers with 10 or fewer employees have reduced record - keeping requirements and are exempt from programmed inspection if in a low - hazard industry . comparable state law: the california occupational safety and health act applies to all california employers but reduces some record - keeping requirements for employers with 20 or fewer employees . — employers must follow occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) instructions on how to keep work areas safe . — employers must provide adequate supervision of employees . — depending on the particular standard , employers may also have to provide employee safety training and education and adopt prescribed safety procedures or modify machinery to include safety devices . — california has its own set of standards comparable to the federal requirements . in addition , california has state - specific requirements . employers using hazardous substances ( in an amount over thresholds specified by regulation ) or whose workplace presents high - risk situations ( for example , confined spaces with oxygen - deficient atmosphere ) must protect employees from exposure to health hazards . — employers must conduct periodic tests to determine the presence and concentration of hazardous substances . — employers must develop safe operating procedures and an emergency response plan . — employees must be trained in safe operating procedures . — employers must develop a “hazardous communication program” — that is , prepare “material safety data sheets” identifying the nature of the health hazard and notifying employees of hazards associated with substances . — all health hazard emergencies must be reported to osha . — depending on the particular standard , the employer may also have to provide periodic medical examinations for each employee and obtain special work permits . — california has its own standards comparable to the federal requirements . specific requirements may differ . ( continued ) employers must maintain records on safety at the workplace , post notice of the protection due to employees under osha , and report certain serious injuries to osha . — employers with 10 or fewer employees have reduced record - keeping requirements . — employers in low - hazard industries with 10 or fewer employees are exempt from programmed safety inspections . — employers must keep a continuing log of occupational injuries and illnesses ( on osha form 200 ) . — employers must maintain records on employee exposure to hazards . — employers must maintain environmental monitoring logs and “material safety data sheets.” — employers must report any job - related fatality or accident requiring the hospitalization of three or more employees to osha within 8 hours of occurrence . — employers in high - hazard industries with more than 60 employees must submit illness and injury data to osha's annual survey .