but test results did not support immediate implementation . instead , the outcome has been continual testing that has drained agency resources and energies . in hindsight , ssa could have discovered the marginality of stand - alone initiatives with a much smaller commitment of resources . as noted in chapter 2 , ssa officials continue to believe that the agency must conduct tests involving a large number of cases . given ssa's desire to collect a sufficiently large amount of data and move quickly to change the claims process , ssa officials believe their approach for the ao and sdm tests was correct , and that if the test results had been positive , all would be well . however , we believe that ssa took a costly risk that may have eroded support for the initiatives . ssa officials have said that in the future they would consider reducing the number of sites that they use in tests by concentrating test sites in a few states or within one ssa region to permit more efficient use of resources and easier test management and oversight . ssa's current plans involve testing other initiatives , such as the dcm , on a large scale . the dcm test currently under way has a start - up cost of $20 million and involves 210 federal and state participants at 33 sites across the country . given the uncertainties inherent in this new position , as well as ssa's past experience with large - scale testing of the ao and sdm initiatives , ssa runs the risk of learning on a large and expensive scale that the dcm does not meet the agency's redesign objectives . it would be more cost - effective to test this initiative on a small scale and move on to a large - scale test only if initial results suggested the potential for significant gains . after 3 years of testing , ssa must decide whether to abandon the ao initiative , begin seriously exploring other solutions to pressing problems at the appellate level , or both . compounding matters , opponents of the ao concept have pointed to its marginal test results to support their own favored , albeit untested , alternatives . ssa officials agreed that they did not fully prepare themselves for the possibility that their proposed changes might not work and thus did not adequately pursue alternatives earlier in the redesign process or develop contingency plans . ssa may still be able to apply this important lesson in a remaining area by more fully exploring feasible alternatives to the dcm initiative . as with the ao , the dcm initiative is facing some strong opposition and has perhaps even more barriers to full implementation standing in its way . according to one high - level ssa official , test results would have to be very compelling to support implementation of the dcm initiative . nevertheless , ssa has begun a 3-year large - scale test of the dcm without adequately exploring feasible alternatives . this organizationally complex structure has contributed to a number of problems . for example , through the years a high percentage of claimants who were dissatisfied with their initial determinations received favorable decisions on appeal .