we disagree . the tricare contractors and merck - medco already provide commercial pbm services that supplement dod's direct care system's capacity . moreover , we do not have enough evidence that pbms would cost less than the mtfs . thus , we believe dod needs a system - oriented pharmacy management structure in place and operational experience with best practices before further “make or buy” decisions can prudently be made . furthermore , merck - medco , citing the legislative provision requiring us to study dod's pharmacy programs , stated that the report does not review the cost impacts of tricare contractors' using pbm best practices to provide pharmacy benefits . we disagree . ( app . i provides details on how produr systems work. ) dod's lack of integrated pharmacy patient databases , and thus its inability to use produr systemwide , are the most significant cost - effectiveness and patient safety obstacles in its pharmacy system . now , dod's ability to use a produr system is limited to local systems at specific mtf pharmacies that do not have the patient's complete history . produr would enable dod , as is done in fehbp , the medicaid program , and the private sector , to perform cost - saving and safety - enhancing drug reviews with consistency throughout the drug distribution system ( mtfs , tricare retail , and national mail order ) . for example , each of these pharmacies , when presented with a new or refill prescription by a dod beneficiary , could check the patient's complete medication profile to ensure that the new drug will not adversely react with the patient's other drugs . the review could also disclose whether the prescription is being refilled too soon . dod pharmacy officials told us that integrated program databases would allow mtfs to convert from an inefficient manual third - party billing process to an electronic billing system , annually saving an estimated $25 million . several dod pharmacy officials told us that the lack of produr has allowed beneficiary prescription drug stockpiling to become so pervasive among patients using mtf pharmacies that pharmacists commonly refer to the problem as “polypharmacy” — or the practice of visiting multiple pharmacies to accumulate more prescription drugs than needed . to illustrate , they provided the following examples: during a 10-week period , a sickle cell anemia patient being treated at an army base for chronic pain obtained 14 prescriptions ( a 1-year supply ) of potentially addictive narcotics . several civilian and two army and navy doctors wrote the prescriptions , which were filled at the army medical center pharmacy , a navy hospital pharmacy , and several of the tricare contractor's regional retail pharmacies . the lack of a common , computerized patient drug profile and produr prevented the army , the navy , and the tricare contractor's pbm company from detecting the prescription abuse and drug stockpiling . by happenstance , an army medical center pharmacist came upon the problem during an unrelated regional pharmacy cost review . at an air force base , a young patient's mother obtained 260 prescriptions in 15 months from several on - base doctors . the prescriptions were filled at the base hospital and clinic pharmacies .