( app . ii provides more detail on income and resource standards for the nine states. ) in addition to experimenting with income and resource standards before welfare reform , states experimented with different methodologies for determining financial eligibility and the amount of cash assistance a family could receive . afdc regulations allowed states to disregard ( not count ) certain types of income and resources . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . wisconsin's interactive application guides caseworkers and applicants through the interview , prompting workers to input data sufficient to identify the full array of services and benefits applicants may receive . under the new welfare reform law , states can sanction tanf recipients for not complying with cash assistance rules . states may reduce or terminate recipients' cash assistance or temporarily terminate medicaid coverage for an adult head of a household . the law cites “refusing to work” as a reason for terminating medicaid but does not permit states to terminate medicaid benefits for pregnant women , infants , or children who are not a head of a household . the law also limits the length of a medicaid sanction to when the recipient begins complying with the state's rules . none of the nine states we visited denied medicaid as a program sanction for noncompliance with state work rules . in our interviews with state officials , few thought it appropriate to use medicaid as a sanction for noncompliance with tanf work requirements . four of the nine states we visited intended to provide state - funded medical assistance for aliens not eligible for federal assistance . before welfare reform , aliens who were legally admitted to the united states were generally eligible for medicaid coverage on the same terms as citizens.the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act recategorized all aliens into two broad categories: qualified and nonqualified . states generally had the option of providing medicaid coverage to all qualified aliens who were in the country on august 22 , 1996 , except that refugees , asylees , and aliens whose deportations are being withheld are eligible for the first 5 years on the same terms as citizens . with certain notable exceptions , those qualified aliens who entered the country after august 22 , 1996 , were prohibited from being eligible for medicaid for 5 years . copies of this report will also be made available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about the information in this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 . other contributors were enchelle d. bolden , shaunessye d. curry , barbara a. mulliken , karen m. sloan , and craig h. winslow .