iii. ) this study was limited to the provision of services to preschool aged children , generally 3 and 4 years old , in early childhood centers . we did not examine services provided in family child care settings . the profile of child care settings and our case studies relied exclusively on self - reports of center personnel . we did not conduct on - site observations of interactions between teachers and disadvantaged children as would be necessary to determine the quality of a center beyond what services it offered . in addition , the sample did not allow us to focus our analyses on centers that served only disadvantaged children . long - term relationships with adults who are responsive to the child's needs and provide a stimulating environment for the child are crucial to development . in particular , a child's language and social development are dependent on his or her relationships with adults . by encouraging verbal expression , adults can foster such development.children's relationships with adults other than their parents , such as early childhood teachers , provide important opportunities for their development . early childhood centers can provide the kind of environment that encourages these kinds of relationships and developmentally appropriate practices . certain features foster such relationships and practices: teachers with higher education or specialized training in early childhood education , a low child - to - staff ratio , small group size , and low teacher turnover . a curriculum that includes daily and long - range plans for groups of children and individual children is another important feature . higher levels of education or specialized training in child development is a characteristic strongly related to the quality and frequency of a teacher's interaction with the child . teachers who have had postsecondary education and those with specialized training in early childhood education better encourage child development . for example , teachers with more training are less directive , more responsive to children's needs , and encourage children's expressiveness . teachers can obtain training in early childhood development as part of a college or university program , or they can obtain a child development associate's credential ( cda ) . generally , experts recommend a ratio of no more than 10 children to 1 staff person in early childhood centers for children aged 3 and 4 . some researchers have found that low child - to - staff ratios facilitate good caregiving behaviors , such as use of developmentally appropriate practices and increased interactions between adults and individual children . small group size is also generally recognized as a feature contributing to the development of the child . for example , some studies have found that smaller group sizes are associated with more positive interactions between staff and children . recommended group sizes vary according to the age of the children . for children aged 3 and 4 , experts recommend a group size of no more then 20 children . continuity in the adult - child relationship is important to foster child development ; researchers use staff turnover as one measure of continuity . the research has demonstrated that children develop best in centers where there is low teacher turnover .