these determinations are final . there is no review or comment period provided to interested parties before they go into effect . access to wage determinations is provided both in printed reports available from the u.s . superintendent of documents and on an electronic bulletin board . modifications to general wage determinations are published in the federal register . an interested party may seek review and reconsideration of labor's final wage determinations . the national office and the regional offices accept protests and inquiries relating to wage determinations at any time after a wage determination has been issued . the national office refers all the complaints it receives to the relevant regional offices for resolution . most inquiries are received informally by telephone , although some are written complaints . regional office staff said that a majority of those with concerns appear to have their problems resolved after examining the information ( collected on a form wd - 22a ) for the survey at issue , because they do not pursue the matter further . if an examination of the forms does not satisfy the complainant's concerns , the complainant is required to provide information to support his or her claim that a wage determination needs to be revised . the national office modifies published wage determinations in cases in which regional offices , on the basis of evidence provided , recommend that it do so , such as when it has been shown that a wage determination was the result of an error by the regional office . however , some of those who seek to have wage rates revised are told that a new survey will be necessary to resolve the particular issue that they are concerned about . for example , if the wage rates of one segment of the construction industry were not adequately reflected in survey results because of a low rate of participation in the survey by that segment of the industry , a new survey would be necessary to resolve this issue . those who are not satisfied with the decision of the regional office may write to the national office to request a ruling by labor's whd administrator . if the revision of a wage rate has been sought and denied by a ruling of labor's whd administrator , an interested party has 30 days to appeal to the administrative review board for review of the wage determination . the board consists of three members appointed by the secretary of labor . the solicitor of labor represents whd in cases involving wage determinations before the administrative review board . a petition to the board for review of a wage determination must be in writing and accompanied by supporting data , views , or arguments . in reviewing labor's process of sampling wage data for verification , we identified problems with its sampling methodology that are primarily technical in nature . specifically , although the congress directed that labor use a random sample in selecting wage data to verify , and labor describes its sample as being “random,” the selection method used does not meet the criteria for randomness . randomness would require that each wd - 10 have an equal opportunity for being selected .