ii. ) nih also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of hhs , the director of nih , and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others on request . ori monitors compliance with this requirement . as required by the nih revitalization act of 1993 , hhs recently took action to ensure that the design , conduct , or reporting of phs - funded research is not affected by researchers' outside financial interests . this applies also to all nih - sponsored research . specifically , hhs issued a regulation effective october 1 , 1995 , requiring that each grantee institution develop a conflict - of - interest policy applicable to all staff benefitting from phs funding . to comply with this regulation , researchers must file annual financial disclosure forms that allow the institution to determine if a conflict of interest exists . all applications for phs funding must contain a certification by the institution that no conflict of interest exists . each of the five grantee institutions we visited had developed and implemented conflict - of - interest policies . because of the newness of the policies , however , officials said it would take time to see how these policies operated in practice and how effective the policies would be . a large percentage of nih - sponsored phase iii clinical trials are funded through cooperative agreements so both the institutes and grantees are involved in managing the trials and developing procedures for conducting them , according to nih . the trials have controls designed to safeguard against fiscal and scientific misconduct that the institutes , grantee institutions , and research sites can apply in overseeing the trials . however , no practical level of oversight and controls can completely eliminate the potential for misconduct . most oversight of these trials is decentralized and performed independently by each of the different institutes that sponsor clinical research and by the grantee institutions . because of the large number of diverse phase iii clinical trials nih funds and the independent nature of its institutes , nih charged a working committee with determining how such trials are managed . the committee recommended that nih develop some agencywide guidance for all institutes to follow in managing these trials . the guidance was recommended for areas such as quality assurance , site monitoring , and the level of nih staff involvement . although some institutes have implemented some of the principles , nih believes adopting them agencywide is inappropriate . in the past , nih has done little centralized oversight and monitoring of the trials it funds and the institutes that sponsor them , except for tracking women's and minorities' participation in clinical trials . nih is , however , developing a database that it expects will allow for monitoring elements of clinical trials' progress and performance . in commenting on a draft of this report , nih agreed in general with our conclusions and noted that the report provides a balanced discussion of the relevant issues . ( see app .