we used h.r . 4 and the administration's proposal as examples of the range of options available . to assess the impact of the proposals on immigrants and their families , we interviewed officials from the ssi and afdc programs and from ins , researchers from public policy groups , and state and local government officials with information about immigrants' utilization of assistance programs . overall , immigrants as a group are more likely than citizens to be receiving ssi or afdc benefits . however , available data provide an incomplete picture of immigrant recipients , and even less is known about their sponsors . as noted earlier , immigrants account for an increasingly greater percentage of the ssi aged program . moreover , immigrant recipients are more likely than citizen recipients to be 75 years old or older . in 1993 , 26 percent of immigrants on ssi aged benefits were 75 years old or older ; in contrast , 15.3 percent of citizen ssi recipients were 75 years old or older . most immigrants receiving ssi are lawful permanent residents , and many have been in the country for over 5 years . among immigrants receiving ssi benefits in 1993 , over 76 percent were lawful permanent residents , 18 percent were refugees or asylees , and 6 percent were other prucol immigrants . ( see fig . of lawful permanent residents , over 56 percent had been in the country for 5 years or longer . about 10 percent of lawful permanent residents were 75 years old or older and had been in the country for 5 years or longer . over 14 percent of refugees had been in the country for 6 years or longer . questions have been raised about the growing numbers of elderly immigrants receiving ssi and the extent to which these immigrants entered the united states with a financial sponsor . while we cannot determine the extent to which immigrants receiving ssi are sponsored , ssa's data suggest that some immigrants apply for ssi benefits shortly after a deeming period would have expired . public policy has also played a role in immigrants' receipt of public assistance . refugees and asylees are categories of immigrants who are much more likely to be on welfare than citizens or other immigrants . by virtue of their refugee or asylee status alone , they qualify immediately for assistance programs that may be restricted to other immigrants . almost 83 percent of all immigrants receiving ssi or afdc in 1993 resided in four states: california , new york , florida , and texas . this is not surprising given that over 68 percent of all immigrants resided in these states . over one - half of the immigrants receiving these benefits lived in california . ( see table 2. ) as a percentage of all ssi recipients , immigrants receiving ssi benefits have increased dramatically . in total , immigrants received an estimated $3.3 billion in ssi benefits in 1993 . between 1983 and 1993 , the number of immigrants receiving aged benefits quadrupled ( 106,600 to 416,420 ) , while the number of citizens receiving aged benefits decreased by 25 percent ( 1,408,800 to 1,058,432 ) .