( app . i provides additional information on the medicare fee schedule. ) the social security amendments of 1994 required the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to revise the fee schedule by 1998 so that the practice expense rvus would reflect the relative amount of applicable resources physicians expend when they provide a service or perform a procedure . the congress required that the revision be budget neutral , so total medicare payments to physicians for practice expenses would not change . several medical specialty societies have urged hcfa to gather practice expense data using activity - based costing , a method that was developed for use by manufacturing companies in the 1980s and has subsequently been applied in some health care organizations . using this approach to identify costs for individual procedures involves several steps . first , all of a practice's costs are obtained from information such as financial statements and tax returns . next , the major processes within a practice , such as serving patients in the office , maintaining medical records , and billing , are identified by conducting on - site interviews and having staff complete worksheets that capture the time staff spend on their daily activities . costs are then identified with , or allocated to , each process and , in turn , to the procedure codes associated with the process . activity - based costing generally does not distinguish between individual procedure codes ; rather , it groups codes together and then assigns costs to the group of codes . as a result , it does not provide the specificity needed to adjust the medicare fee schedule . after the june 1997 publication of hcfa's proposed fee schedule revisions , hcfa used additional expert panels to review some of the data obtained from the 15 original panels . in october 1997 , hcfa convened 17 “validation” panels composed primarily of physicians and again organized by specialty . each panel was assigned between 14 and 36 procedures for which to review the original nonphysician labor , equipment , and supply estimates . the validation panels generally increased the estimates of nonphysician labor identified by the original cpeps . then , in december 1997 , hcfa convened a cross - specialty panel that included representatives from all the major medical specialty societies and medical directors from hcfa's claims processing contractors . hcfa asked this panel to reach consensus on the direct labor estimates for 57 high - cost , high - volume procedures previously reviewed by the cpep and validation panels . the cross - specialty panel failed to reach consensus , but it did provide hcfa with some insight into the reasons for differences among the estimates of previous panels . at this time , it is unclear what approach hcfa will take in preparing its next proposed role , which is due in may 1998 . hcfa has not yet decided whether to rely on the direct cost estimates developed by the original cpeps , the refinements made by the validation panels , or its own adjustments to the data ( which have come under strong criticism from some specialty groups ) .