ii. ) although these communities , through direct contracting , manage some of their own health services , they most often remain part of the rho network for other services , such as community health aide supervision and training , physician and dentist services , inpatient care , and management of referrals for specialty services obtained from private providers ( known as contract health care ) . one contractor that separated from an rho — ketchikan indian corporation ( kic ) — has assumed the management of a much broader scope of services . kic is the largest native community contractor , serving a native population of nearly 2,000 and with nearly $3.4 million in fiscal year 1998 funding — one quarter of the 6.5 percent share of alaska self - determination contract funding received by community contractors . shortfalls of this magnitude could make it difficult for tribes to continue to maintain the same level of health services . the risk is less for rhos , which also may have csc shortfalls but generally are in a better financial position than community contractors to manage these shortfalls because they manage large multimillion - dollar operations that can benefit from economies of scale and have multiple sources of revenue that can generate positive cash flow . the varying effects of substantial csc shortfalls on communities that contract directly with ihs can be seen in ketchikan and fort yukon — which are served by the two largest direct community contractors . in ketchikan , the large csc shortfall of over $500,000 a year has not had a negative impact on overall services to the communities involved because both the community contractor , kic , and the rho , southeast alaska regional health consortium ( searhc ) , were able — at least temporarily — to provide additional resources to make up for the funding gap . prior to october 1997 , searhc was managing the ketchikan indian health center to serve six native communities — ketchikan , saxman , and four outlying communities on prince of wales island . when the health center contract was split , kic received 58 percent of the funding to serve ketchikan natives and searhc retained the remainder to serve saxman and the other communities . loss of economies of scale occurred in two ways . first , additional clinic space was leased to operate two separate clinics . second , additional staff were needed to deliver the same level of services in two facilities . for example , the total number of clinical and administrative staff for the clinic before the split was 59.5 full time equivalents ( fte ) . after the split , the two clinics had a combined total of 68 ftes . most of the increase was for duplicated administrative functions , such as the need to have two clinic directors , two business office directors , and two computer programmers . both searhc and kic had the additional resources to initially absorb the additional costs . searhc is a large rho that manages many federal and state health programs and services for the benefit of alaska natives in southeast alaska .