response rate ( percent ) . because the estimates from this survey are based on a sample , each is subject to sampling error . they generally agreed with the content of the report . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . they also provided technical comments that we have addressed in the text of the report as appropriate . we conducted our work between april 1994 and february 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman , senate committee on finance ; the secretary of health and human services ; and other interested parties . states could also offer postsecondary education . activities directed toward providing an individual with a basic literacy level , defined as a level equivalent to at least eighth grade , ninth month . exposure to work: its purpose is to help participants move into regular public or private employment by allowing them ( as individuals not otherwise able to obtain employment ) to gain work experience and training and improve their employability . limited to positions that serve a useful public purpose in fields such as health , social service , environmental protection , education , urban and rural development , welfare , recreation , public facilities , public safety , and day care . education in english proficiency for an individual who is not sufficiently competent to understand , speak , read , or write the english language to allow employment commensurate with his or her employment goal . activities designed to prepare an individual to qualify for a high school equivalency certificate . activities that help prepare participants for work by assuring that they are familiar with general workplace expectations and exhibit work behavior and attitudes necessary to compete successfully in the labor market . activities such as counseling , job - seeking skills training , information dissemination , and support , possibly including telephone banks for participants to use to contact potential employers . may be offered as a participant's first activity upon enrollment and periodically thereafter , generally in combination with other education , training , or employment activities designed to increase an individual's prospects for employment . vocational training for a participant in technical job skills and equivalent knowledge and abilities in a specific occupational area , whether offered by postsecondary institutions , secondary schools , public and private agencies , or other organizations . training that provides participants the opportunity to engage in productive work: upon being hired by a public or private employer , a participant receives training while working , acquires the knowledge or skills essential to the full and adequate performance of that job , and receives compensation comparable to that of other employees performing the same or similar jobs .