ii. ) the average number of visits received per home health beneficiary has also increased dramatically since 1989 . recent hha growth has primarily taken place in proprietary agencies , while the percentage of more traditional nonprofit home health providers — visiting nurse associations and government agencies — has declined ( table 1 ) . in 1989 , approximately 35 percent of all medicare - certified hhas were proprietary . in 1994 , close to 50 percent of all hhas were in this category . ( see fig . ii.1 in app . ii for state breakdowns. ) this increased percentage of proprietary agencies was responsible for 83 percent of the growth in the number of hhas between 1989 and 1994 . a comparison of average visits per beneficiary receiving home health services in 1993 indicates that beneficiaries in certain hcfa regions — most notably in the atlanta , boston , and dallas regions — receive considerably more services on average than beneficiaries in other areas ( see table 2 ) . ( refer to fig . ii.3 in app . ii for data on total home health visits per medicare beneficiary by state. ) a further breakdown of these figures by ownership category indicates that in all regions , proprietary hhas provide many more services per case than voluntary or government - run agencies . ( see fig . ii.2 in app . ii for state breakdowns. ) on the national level , proprietary agencies have provided a significantly higher number of average visits per home health beneficiary since 1989 ( see fig . a recent study noted that some of the regional variation in services may reflect differences in the availability of substitute services . additionally , the study reported some regional differences in patient characteristics ; however , these differences did not seem to have a clear pattern that might partially explain variations in utilization . another study indicated that regional variation could in part be explained by patient characteristics . for instance , the study found that compared with medicare home health users nationally , beneficiaries in the east south central region were more likely to be frail , chronically ill , and in poorer health . the study also noted that home health care in the east south central region tended to be delivered outside large metropolitan counties and in counties that had unusually high percentages of elderly persons living in poverty ( both characteristics associated with higher than average home health use ) . while evidence might suggest that the availability of substitute services and beneficiary case - mix may explain some of the regional variation in utilization of home health services , why proprietary agencies consistently provide more visits in all regions is not clear . to learn more about the differences between care provided by proprietary and other types of hhas , we conducted an episode - of - care analysis for four diagnoses: diabetes , heart failure , hypertension , and hip fracture . ( see app . i for our methodology and app . iii for detailed results. )