objectives ? revise if needed statement balancing flexibility and accountability: grant program design in education and other areas needed ? oversight ? will contribution of federal funds be distinguishable ? to illustrate how the exhibit flows , let's consider how it would apply to the title vi innovative education program strategies grant program . the objectives of the grant , to support local education reform and innovation , are primarily fiscal , putting us on the upper decision path on our diagram . funds may be used to support local projects ( such as magnet schools ) , but title vi's purpose does not require that project - level performance objectives be set so we continue to the step of designing provisions to match fiscal objectives . title vi has such provisions , stating that grant funds may not be used to supplant funds from non - federal sources and the state must maintain prior levels of fiscal effort . to obtain information required for accountability , the program requires local districts to describe their intended uses of funds and how these will contribute to the grant's objectives of supporting reform . states , drawing on district records , must report biennially on general uses of funds , types of services furnished , and students served . as these data are of limited utility for program oversight , the congress mandated national evaluation reports on this program in 1986 and 1994 . the 1994 report provided information about federal share , the size of state and local grants , how funds were used , the minimal performance accountability requirements imposed by states , and the difficulty of evaluating a program that provides supplemental resources for other activities . to further illustrate , let's consider the safe and drug - free schools and communities grant , focusing on funding at the local level . grant funds support activities that serve national performance objectives of preventing violence in and around schools and the illegal use of alcohol , tobacco and drugs . the presence of these objectives puts us on the lower , performance - oriented path of the diagram . funded activities are not implemented through a national operating program , but rather through state and local programs — reflecting at least the hope that national objectives could be achieved through these programs . however — and here's an example of some of the federalism issues we mentioned earlier — some national program provisions do apply . local programs must be comprehensive and convey the message that the illegal use of alcohol and other drugs is wrong and harmful . these national requirements notwithstanding , the local education agencies are responsible for setting performance goals , deciding how to pursue them , and reporting to the state in terms of those goals . moving along the state and local path on our diagram , we come to the question of whether drug and violence prevention programs function as distinct projects or like a funding stream . a recent evaluation study — and here we jump ahead a little — suggests the latter .