iii ) . one of these two alternatives also eliminates the requirement that the effort factor be at least 95 percent and no more than 105 percent of the average effort of all states . table 1 compares the characteristics that define the current measure of effort in title i with the measures we propose as options a , b , and c. option b is more comprehensive than option a because it considers both the current level of effort and the change in effort for each state over time . option c is the same as option b , except that the effort factor is not constrained by the current requirement to be between 95 and 105 percent of the average effort . as reauthorized by p.l . 103-382 in october 1994 , these title i educational services may be financed by four funding formulas for this common purpose . the four formulas cover basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive program grants . see appendixes iii and iv for a description of the methods used to produce the alternatives for the effort and equity factors for title i's education finance incentive program . to the extent possible within the limitations of the data currently available , we took into account differences in student needs related to numbers of students who were poor , had limited english proficiency , or had disabilities . we also developed illustrative state allocations under current and alternative title i education finance incentive program formulas as well as under the targeted grant formula ( see app . v ) . the effort factor in the education finance incentive program provides additional title i aid to those states with education spending relative to their ability to pay that is higher than other states . current law defines this factor as the state's average per pupil expenditure divided by the state's average per capita income relative to that for the nation as a whole . in the current law , averages are determined using 3 years of data to minimize the effect of changes from year to year . however , no state's effort factor can be less than 95 percent of the nation's average or more than 105 percent . 103-382 , funds are to be allocated to states based on the state's number of children aged 5 through 17 multiplied by both the effort factor and the equity factor . each state is to be allotted at least 0.25 percent of the total appropriation . the effort factor in the current law , which considers states' education spending relative to their ability to pay , could be improved . first , the measure of ability to pay used in the law , per capita income , is not as comprehensive as the one we used: total taxable resources ( ttr ) . second , the current effort factor penalizes states with high proportions of school - age children . finally , the existing effort factor could more directly reward states for increasing their level of effort , not just for having high effort . we developed three alternative effort factors for title i's education finance incentive program using ttr as a measure of a state's ability to finance services .