houston , tex . los angeles , calif. miami - hialeah , fla. minneapolis - st. paul , minn. nassau - suffolk , n.y. new york , n.y. newark , n.j. oakland , calif. philadelphia , pa. phoenix , ariz. san antonio , tex . san bernardino , calif. san diego , calif. st. louis , mo . tampa - st. petersburg , fla. washington , d.c . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the program has had limited success in meeting its objectives . according to some state officials , stnap has been useful in helping states target resources and enhance service delivery . for example , new jersey reported using prevalence estimates , developed from an stnap contract , in its allocation formula for distributing alcohol treatment money to better reflect the distribution of need at the county level . iowa reported using its results to allocate funds based on objective estimates of need , which helped them target outreach efforts that offer the most potential for success . iowa officials also reported that they used stnap data to redesign the state's approach for providing tailored outreach and treatment services for women . data generated in new mexico were reportedly used to initiate substance abuse recognition and counseling training in public health offices and create specialized counseling for health care providers to create smoking and alcohol cessation programs for pregnant women . however , states have been slow in developing in - house capacity to assess need — one of stnap's objectives . according to csat , most states have been unable to develop sufficient capacity due to inadequate state - level resources and expertise and , as a result , have relied on outside consulting firms , local universities , or both . csat officials characterize these relationships as mixed and said that effective contracts with consultants and universities is dependent on the quality of state oversight . while contracts with consultants and universities can limit the development of in - house expertise and result in a lack of continuity and a sustained data infrastructure , they have allowed some states to establish and maintain a knowledge base and network . for example , while texas and south carolina used universities for data collection , they used in - house staff expertise for analyses and reporting . to further assist states in developing their in - house capacity to assess need , csat contracted with the national technical center ( ntc ) at harvard medical school to provide technical assistance . according to csat officials , states' reporting of results developed under stnap in block grant applications — the third objective of the program — has not yet been fully realized because most states have not completed their planned data collection and analyses . as of february 1998 , 19 states have contracts that have been completed or allowed to expire , with some work remaining on final reports .