( see fig . 8 for examples of such problems in home a. ) dhs surveyors classified home a's violations as posing potential for more than minimal harm to residents and , according to standard practice for deficiencies classified at this level , required the home to produce a corrective action plan . in contrast , we determined , on the basis of the problems shown in figure 8 , that this home had a pattern of poor care and classified this home's care for unaddressed nutrition and weight - loss problems , pressure sore problems , and incontinence problems as conditions demonstrating actual harm . for example , one home terminated on april 15 , 1997 , had two reasonable assurance surveys on april 25 and may 28 , 1997 . although the nursing home was not in substantial compliance at the time of the second survey , hcfa considered the deficiencies minor enough to reinstate the home on june 5 , 1997 . the consequence of termination — stopping reimbursement for the home's medicare and medicaid beneficiaries — was in effect for no longer than 3 weeks . about 3 months after reinstatement , however , the home was cited for harming residents . dhs surveyors investigating a complaint found immediate jeopardy violations as a result of a dangerously low number of nursing home staff . in addition , surveyors cited the facility for providing substandard care . residents who could not move independently , some with pressure sores , were left sitting in urine and feces for long periods of time ; some residents were not getting proper care for urinary tract infections ; and surveyors cited the home's infection control program as inadequate . by 1997 , california dhs officials recognized that the state , in combination with hcfa's regional office , had not dealt effectively with persistently and seriously noncompliant nursing homes using the obra 87 enforcement process . the process discouraged immediate application of enforcement actions . it allowed nursing homes to come back into compliance for a short period of time , escaping enforcement action altogether . in many instances , though , homes did not sustain compliance for a significant period of time . therefore , in july 1998 and with hcfa's agreement , dhs began a “focused enforcement” process that combines state and federal authority and action , targeting providers with the worst compliance records for special attention . as a start , dhs has identified about 34 homes with the worst compliance histories — generally two in each of its districts . officials intend to conduct standard surveys of these homes about every 6 months rather than every 9 to 15 months . in addition , dhs intends to conduct more complete on - site reviews of facilities for all complaints received about these homes . dhs and hcfa told us that they do not intend to accept such homes' self - reports of compliance without a revisit . dhs officials told us that the agency is developing procedures — consistent with hcfa regulations implementing obra 87 reforms — to ensure that , where appropriate , the state will immediately recommend and hcfa will impose civil monetary penalties and other strong sanctions to bring such homes into compliance and keep them compliant .