naval hospital . we estimated the facility's cost for ancillary , overhead , and other expenses as well as va's cost to obtain future veterans' health care under its existing sharing agreement with the u.s . naval hospital on guam . we conducted our review between march 1998 and october 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides more detail on our scope and methodology . guam and cnmi natives are u.s. citizens , and many serve in the u.s. military . upon discharge from the u.s. military , veterans , based on their eligibility , can obtain health care at va facilities or from non - va providers through va sharing agreements . guam is a 212-square - mile island located roughly 6,000 miles west of the continental united states and 1,500 miles southeast of japan . guam was ceded to the united states in 1898 and became a territory in 1950 . since its cession , it has had important u.s. military significance , given its strategic location in the pacific ocean . in 1995 , the population of guam was estimated at 149,249 . as of fiscal year 1997 , there were about 9,400 veterans living on guam and cnmi and about 20,000 military beneficiaries living on guam . cnmi is a self - governing commonwealth of the united states . the people of cnmi were granted u.s. citizenship in 1986 . cnmi consists of 14 islands with a total land area of about 184 square miles ; its main island of saipan is located about 100 miles northeast of guam . in 1995 , cnmi's population was estimated at 59,913 persons . naval hospital , however , would require much more demand for these procedures than currently exists in order to provide sufficient quality . while cnmi is currently considered part of va's domestic program , the director of va's health administration center , which administers the foreign medical program , recently requested a legal opinion from va's general counsel to determine whether veterans residing in cnmi are entitled to benefits under va's domestic program or whether they should be covered by va's foreign medical program . naval hospital health care systems , health care options on guam are limited . for example , there is only one other hospital on guam . however , both va and dod officials told us that veterans will continue to have access to outpatient and inpatient care through va , the u.s . va recently implemented a change that restricted access to va health care for some veterans in the pacific region . in october 1997 , va began phasing out the medical care offered to pacific region veterans in priority group 7 — veterans who have no compensable service - connected disabilities and annual incomes above the statutory threshold . this change affected veterans residing in va's pacific islands region , including about 30 veterans on guam . according to va officials , this change was made as a result of increasing medical costs and declining budgets ; these officials stated that va needed to make this change in order to continue serving pacific region veterans with service - connected disabilities .