we interviewed carrier and oig officials . we also reviewed several independent studies related to the provision of services and supplies to nursing facility patients done by oig and the senate special committee on aging . to examine the reasons inappropriate and abusive billings for services and supplies occur in the nursing facility setting , we reviewed carrier case files for each investigation , obtained court documents when applicable , and interviewed carrier and oig investigators working on those individual cases . we analyzed this information to try to identify the specific programmatic factors that make services for beneficiaries in nursing facilities vulnerable to fraud and abuse . finally , to identify options for removing opportunities for fraud and abuse , we reviewed the literature and held discussions with carrier , oig , and trade association officials to solicit their views on ways to minimize fraud and abusive billing practices in the nursing facility environment . we conducted our review between april 1994 and august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . following are summaries of fraud cases that were closed by the time we completed our review . the defendants pled guilty or were convicted of the charges brought against them . in august 1991 , a carrier received the first of three complaints from medicare beneficiaries alleging that an optometrist was billing medicare for more services than he actually provided . after reviewing the supporting medical records , however , the carrier determined that for these instances the services were documented as billed . in december 1991 , another beneficiary called the carrier and stated that she had not received the office services claimed by this optometrist and in fact had not seen any physician during the month he claimed services were provided . another complaint was received from the daughter of a beneficiary residing in a nursing home . the daughter stated that she had only authorized an eye examination , but the charges submitted to medicare were for multiple services provided for both eyes — although her father had only one eye . in january 1992 , the carrier's claims processing department alerted the carrier's program integrity unit of 98 suspicious claims submitted by this provider for services allegedly rendered in december to nursing home patients . all the claims cited exactly the same procedure codes and diagnoses ; the only differences were dates of service and beneficiary identification information . from this universe , the carrier randomly sampled 10 beneficiary records from two nursing homes and found that the nursing homes had no records documenting the services claimed by this optometrist . on may 21 , 1992 , the carrier summarized this information and referred the case to oig . by that time , medicare had paid this provider $117,534 since 1990 . oig notified the carrier in june 1992 that it would not pursue this case criminally but that it would retain jurisdiction for civil prosecution . at oig's request , the carrier placed this provider on 100-percent prepayment review by the end of july , which meant that every claim the provider submitted was reviewed before payment was issued .