( app . i provides additional details about the scope and methodology of our work ) . in 1975 , the congress created the federal child support enforcement program as title iv - d of the social security act . the program's original purpose was to strengthen state and local efforts for obtaining child support for families receiving afdc and for any non - afdc individuals who apply for child support services . figures i.1 and i.2 show the numbers and percentages of cases that closed each year during the period we reviewed . represents case closures from january through may 1997 . represents case closures from june through december 1992 . represents case closures from january through may 1997 . represents case closures from june through december 1992 . the most frequently noted reasons for closing a child support case were the custodial parent moving out of the state or country , the custodial and noncustodial parents' reuniting or the noncustodial parent being added to the welfare grant , the case being closed because the custodial parent refused to cooperate , or the state's failing to locate the noncustodial parent . collectively , these reasons accounted for about 48 and 40 percent , respectively , of the case closures in minnesota and washington . to arrive at the estimates presented in this report , in every state but virginia ( where we selected all families whose aid was terminated ) , we sampled from either a population of those who were terminated from afdc , or a pool of those who joined the afdc rolls in june 1992 . because we analyzed samples of cases to estimate characteristics of the entire population of such cases , our estimates of percentages and dollar amounts have standard errors associated with them . following is a description of the sizes of the standard errors for the estimates presented in this report . the standard error for the estimated mean support amount due and the estimated mean support amount collected varied by state , but for no state was it greater than $615 for the mean amount due and $759 for the mean amount collected . the standard error for the estimated percentage of noncustodial parents for whom either location , paternity establishment , or a support order was needed varied by state , but in no state did it exceed 13 percentage points . the standard error for the percentage of afdc families that received no support money varied by state but was in no state greater than 12.3 percentage points . the standard error for the percentage of the support order amounts due and received for families varied by state , but in no state did they exceed 13.7 percentage points . all of the standard errors were calculated at the 95-percent confidence level . this means that the chances are about 95 out of 100 that the range defined by the estimate , plus or minus the standard error , contains the true percentage or dollar figure we would have found if we had analyzed data from the entire population . location includes efforts at local , state , and federal levels to identify a noncustodial parent's address , social security number , place of employment , and other characteristics .