i and ii . washington , d.c.: advisory council on social security , 1997 . association of private pension and welfare plans.lookingtothefuture:a newperspectiveonthesocialsecurityproblem . washington , d.c.: appwp , mar . bender , keith a . “characteristics of individuals with integrated pensions.” socialsecuritybulletin , vol . 3 ( 1999 ) , pp . board of trustees , federal old - age and survivors insurance and disability insurance trust funds . erisa industry committee . thevitalconnection:ananalysisofthe impactofsocialsecurityreformonemployer - sponsoredretirement plans . washington , d.c.: erisa industry committee , july 1998 . feldstein , martin , and andrew samwick . “the transition path in privatizing social security,” in privatizingsocialsecurity , martin feldstein , ed . chicago , ill.: the university of chicago press , 1998 , pp . fields , gary s. , and olivia s. mitchell . “the effects of social security reforms on retirement ages and retirement incomes.” journalofpublic economics ( winter 1984 ) . gale , william . “the impact of pensions and 401 ( k ) s on saving: a critical assessment of the state of the literature,” paper prepared for the conference “erisa after 25 years: a framework for evaluating pension reform,” washington , d.c. , sept. 17 , 1999 . gebhardtsbauer , ron . socialsecurityoptionsandtheireffectson differentdemographicgroups . washington d.c.: american academy of actuaries , june 21 , 1999 . gregory , janice . “possible employer responses to social security reform,” in prospectsforsocialsecurityreform , o. mitchell , r. j. myers , and h. young , eds . philadelphia , penn . : university of pennsylvania press , 1997 , pp . gustman , alan , o. mitchell , and t. steinmeier . “the role of pensions in the labor market: a survey of the literature.” industrialandlaborrelations review , vol . 3 ( apr . 1994 ) , pp . ippolito , richard a . “the new pension economics: defined contribution plans and sorting,” in thefutureofprivateretirementplans . washington , d.c.: employee benefit research institute , 2000 . kollmann , geoffrey , ray schmitt , and michelle harman.effectofpension integrationonretirementbenefits , report to the congress ( 94-974 epw ) . washington , d.c.: congressional research service , dec. 6 , 1994 . lichtenstein , jules . socialsecurityreform:pensionplanintegrationwith socialsecurity . washington d.c.: american association of retired persons , oct. 1998 . luzadis , rebecca a. , and olivia s. mitchell . “explaining pension dynamics,” thejournalofhumanresources , vol . 4 ( 1991 ) , pp . mcgill , dan m. , kyle n. brown , john j. haley , and sylvester j. schieber . fundamentalsofprivatepensions , 7th ed . philadelphia , penn . : university of pennsylvania press , 1996 . mitchell , olivia s. “new trends in pension benefit and retirement provisions,” working paper no . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , oct. 1999 . “administrative costs in public and private retirement systems,” in privatizingsocialsecurity , martin feldstein , ed . chicago , ill.: the university of chicago press , 1998 , pp . olsen , kelly a. , and jack l. vanderhei . “potential consequences for employers of social security ‘privatization': policy research implications.” riskmanagementandinsurancereview ( summer 1997 ) , pp . palmer , bruce a . “retirement income replacement ratios: an update.” benefitsquarterly ( second quarter , 1994 ) , pp . schieber , sylvester j .