ii. ) many schools reported a need to change palliative care instruction , particularly in the area of clinical training . overall , 30 percent of schools reported a need to change their classroom curriculum in palliative care , and close to 50 percent reported wanting to provide students with more hands - on training experience in diagnosing and treating patients with pain due to chronic or terminal illness . evaluation processes vary in the extent to which they measure students' knowledge of palliative care issues . we discussed hhs' plans for awarding palliative care grants under section 781 with representatives responsible for administering these grants in the hrsa's bureau of health professions . we also reviewed hrsa's plans for funding section 781 projects in hrsa's 1998 and 1999 justification of estimates for appropriations committees . we discussed other federal and private palliative care research and education initiatives funded outside section 781 with hhs agencies and private entities involved in similar palliative care activities . hhs agencies or offices we spoke with included ahcpr , nih , the health care financing administration , and the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation . private entities we obtained information from regarding ongoing palliative care projects included foundations , such as the robert wood johnson foundation ; nonprofit organizations , such as the open society , the united hospital fund of new york , and the george washington university's center to improve care of the dying ; and professional associations , including ama's ethics institute , the american academy of hospice and palliative medicine , and the american board of hospice and palliative medicine . the federal and private palliative care projects we identified are examples of the various types of projects being conducted ; they are not intended to be a comprehensive listing of palliative care projects . we conducted a survey of all medical schools — both allopathic and osteopathic — in the united states . we asked each school about the extent to which their didactic — or classroom — instruction and clinical training addressed palliative care topics . we received responses from 125 — or 85 percent — of these schools . however , the ama provided us with related information reported in its annual survey of 7,787 residency programs accredited by the accreditation council for graduate medical education and combined specialty residency programs . the survey covers allopathic programs only . residency programs responding to this survey in 1996 reported whether the general subjects of end - of - life care and suicide were included in their curricula . see appendix i for a discussion of our scope and methodology . palliative care is an important and emerging issue for health care providers , educators , and the general public . as medical advances increase life expectancy , more and more people suffer from chronic and progressively disabling diseases that require treatment for depression and assistance with pain and symptom management . some recent studies have pointed to significant problems within the health care system that preclude the achievement of the best possible quality of life for patients and their families .