we disagree . va based their rehabilitation percentage on the number of veterans who left the program ( about 19,000 ) — a combination of veterans who dropped out or interrupted their program of services , as well as those who were rehabilitated — as opposed to the total number of eligible veterans ( about 74,000 ) . va's approach inflates the va rehabilitation rate . using va's approach , the state program would have an even higher rehabilitation rate — more than 60 percent . the fact remains , however , that of the 74,000 veterans found eligible for program services , 6,000 successfully completed the program . va also took exception with our discussion of its lack of focus on employment services . va contends it has consistently focused on the necessity of providing meaningful employment services , a goal that is outlined in policy directives and reinforced with comprehensive staff training . our report acknowledges that va issued guidance in 1992 that emphasized employment services . however , va staff that administered and implemented the program in the four locations we visited told us that they do not emphasize employment until near the end of a veteran's training . furthermore , the chairman of va's design team , an individual charged with evaluating and restructuring the program , told us that the primary reason for the program's low rehabilitation rate is va's lack of focus on employment services . regarding va's claim it provides comprehensive staff training , the program operations chief told us that other than a week - long seminar on employment services presented about 2 to 3 years ago , va headquarters has not sponsored staff training in employment assistance . further , as already reported , staff in the regional offices that we visited told us they are not adequately trained in job placement activities . va also took issue with our discussion of its lack of knowledge of the costs associated with providing rehabilitation services to individual veterans . va claims that it has this information and can retrieve it at any time , although doing so is a laborious process . however , we saw no evidence that va officials knew the costs associated with providing rehabilitation services . neither the chief of program operations nor officials located in the four regional offices that we visited could provide us with the costs associated with rehabilitating a veteran . instead , we were always directed to the case files and , in some regional offices , to the finance section to obtain this information . va also expressed concern that our random sample of program participant cases was not representative of the veterans that va serves . va asserted that “a more appropriate sample could readily come up with examples of veterans with more profound disabilities who are earning handsome salaries as a result of their participation in va's vocational rehabilitation program.” as we have pointed out , the results of our sample of 102 individual veteran case files are neither representative nor generalizable to all program participants .