the other half disagreed . judgments about the effect certain conditions may have on the ability to function , work , or earn money do not allow va to determine whether the program is compensating disabled veterans to an extent commensurate with their economic loss . if va compared estimates of loss in earnings , based on empirical data , for specific conditions with the ratings for these conditions , it could objectively determine whether the program was achieving this goal and was distributing disability compensation equitably . the average impairment in earning capacity associated with specific service - connected conditions can be estimated by calculating the difference between what veterans with those conditions earn , on average , and what they would have earned if they did not have those conditions . the average loss in earnings associated with specific service - connected conditions can be determined by using widely applied research designs for estimating the effect of one variable on another . a number of decisions would have to be made , however , with respect to an overall methodology for a study that would produce these estimates , and a number of options are related to each . each option has implications for the cost of such a study and the validity of its results . our work suggests that it could cost between $5 million and $10 million to conduct a study like this . some generally accepted research designs for estimating the effect of one variable on another can be used to estimate the average loss in earnings associated with specific service - connected conditions . these designs are widely applied . while no study that measures the effect of service - connected conditions on earnings loss will give absolutely definitive results , many studies have demonstrated that it is possible to produce acceptable estimates of the impact of one variable on another . these designs have been used in policy analyses to examine the factors affecting the growth of social security administration disability programs,the role vocational rehabilitation plays in the tendency of disabled persons to return to work , and the impact of job training on employment among ex - offenders . such designs have also been used in many studies that specifically measured the impact of such things as military service , functional impairments , and medical conditions such as epilepsy and arthritis on wages and earnings . va's ecvars is an example of one of these . it relied on a design that is often used in policy analysis and program evaluation to estimate the effect of service - connected conditions on the average earnings of veterans on the va disability rolls at that time . given that other studies have successfully employed methods for quantifying the effect functional impairment and specific disabilities have on earnings , these methods can also be applied to the question of how service - connected conditions affect disabled veterans' earning capacity . in deciding how to conduct a study to estimate the effect of disability on earning capacity , questions related to such things as scope and study design , data collection , and analysis would need to be addressed .