additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there are statistical methods of dealing with this problem . if they are not employed in the final analysis , then differences that are statistically significant by chance alone will occur more often than is considered acceptable by statistical convention . mpr's participation analysis of birth outcomes is part of mpr's attempt to determine the effect of participation in healthy start within program sites . it compares 1995 birth outcomes between participants and nonparticipants in each project area . participants in the program's prenatal activities are identified from program files , the minimum data set required of all healthy start sites , and their birth certificates are flagged . their birth outcomes are then compared with those of nonparticipants or participants with limited prenatal program involvement . this kind of analysis is limited by possible preexisting differences between participants and nonparticipants and by the very definition of participant . since participation in healthy start is voluntary , it is possible that participants systematically differ from nonparticipants . program providers may , for example , tend to attract persons who are especially knowledgeable about services or already well connected to the health care system . under these circumstances , program participants would be expected to have better outcomes even without healthy start . we believe these preliminary evaluation results were not conclusive . although the impact evaluation suggested that healthy start has not reduced infant mortality , such conclusions about the program would be premature because the impact evaluation does not include data from all the program sites or data from all the years of the program . moreover , the process evaluation indicates that program implementation in many communities was slow and , therefore , that the impact data analysis may not be representative of a mature healthy start program . the national evaluation's analysis of healthy start's effect on infant mortality and related outcomes is preliminary — mpr characterized its october 1997 report as a draft . because of problems obtaining data from some of the states' departments of health , only 9 of the 15 program sites to be evaluated were represented in the analysis . one limitation stems from the possibility that program and comparison site mothers will systematically differ in ways , such as poverty level , that affect outcomes but are not taken into account in the selection of comparison sites and are not available for use in statistically adjusting the data . such a difference could bias the estimation of the difference between program and comparison sites in outcomes . in addition , the analysis is related to only the first 3 of the 6 years of program operation . moreover , for illustrative purposes , mpr has limited its principal impact analysis to data from only the last of those 3 years , 1994 . however , if , as hrsa believes , fiscal year 1995 was the first fully operational year , even 1994 data may not reflect the communities' mature programs . to determine program impact , mpr is conducting two types of analysis: availability and participation .