we reviewed the brd in two forms . first , we selectively reviewed a version that is publicly available on the internet ( at http: / / ocean.dtic.mil / basis / matris / www / biowww / sf ) . second , dod supplied us with an electronic file that also identified the animal use category ( for example , research on infectious diseases ) on the 805 projects in the 1996 database . we reviewed all the projects in three animal use categories involving medical research — biological defense , combat casualty care , and ionizing radiation . these categories comprise approximately 22 percent of the 805 projects . we reviewed the summaries in these categories and compared the information contained in them with other sources , including dod's annual report to the congress on its animal care and use programs for 1996 . we interviewed officials from dod's office of the director of defense for research and engineering ; the armed forces radiobiology research institute ; the uniformed services university of the health sciences ; the office for naval research ; the naval medical research institute ; and walter reed army institute of research in the washington , d.c. , area . we also interviewed officials from the u.s. army medical research and materiel command in frederick , maryland ; the air force research laboratory and the u.s. army clinical investigations regulatory office in san antonio , texas ; and the army's landstuhl regional medical center in landstuhl , germany . we reviewed dod documents and reports relevant to animal care and use as well as related congressional reports . our review was not based on a random sample of records from the brd and , as a result , we have not drawn conclusions about the extent to which certain of our observations are present in the database as a whole . we conducted our review from october 1997 to october 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to other interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact us if you or your staff have questions concerning this report . kwai - cheung chan can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3652 . stephen backhus can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii . bruce d. layton , assistant director jaqueline arroyo , senior evaluator greg whitney , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . few project summaries identify the military or nonmilitary justification of the project . although some of the projects are directly tied to a military goal , such as developing more effective transfusion fluids for combat casualties , others are not tied to a military goal but are still being done under a specific congressional directive , such as dod's extensive breast cancer research program .