( see app . iv for a detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) our work was performed between august 1994 and december 1995 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 1968 , the congress added section 242 to the national housing act establishing the hospital mortgage insurance program . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . to reduce the potential financial losses associated with future insured mortgages , fha is considering risk sharing with the public and private sectors . however , the risk to the current portfolio remains . flaws in fha's methodology for estimating loan losses limit the reliability of fha's loan loss reserve estimate . the implications of health care trends for program hospitals were not factored into fha's methodology for estimating potential loan losses . in addition , the approach that fha used to determine default and loss rate assumptions was not reliable . fha did not consider the full loss exposure in estimating reserves for hospitals that it identified as having high default probabilities . as a result of these flaws , the loan loss reserve estimate could be understated or overstated . while fha has developed performance measures for some of its major programs in response to gpra , it has not developed performance measures for the hospital program . for example , hud commented that we found the program to be “consistent with and contributing towards the mission of hud.” however , this is not a conclusion of our report . our report cites the statements of hud officials that the program supports and is consistent with the department's mission . we concluded that hud's mission is broad enough to encompass the purpose of the hospital program , not that it contributes to the mission of hud . ( see p . hud also commented that it agreed with our concern that the proposed federal medicare and medicaid cuts could have a “significant adverse impact on the hospital industry , including some hospitals with mortgages insured by fha.” our report does not make a value judgment about the proposed federal medicare and medicaid reductions on the hospital industry or hospitals in the program . instead , we report that future changes in federal health care policies can restrict hospital revenues and increase risks to the program . ( see p . while hud commented that our report noted “many urban community and teaching hospitals need credit enhancement but cannot meet all of the standards of the private insurers,” we did not differentiate among which types of hospitals need credit enhancement . the unpaid principal balance on mortgages for these projects is about $4.2 billion or 87 percent of the portfolio's aggregate unpaid principal balance . also , 9 of the 10 largest hospital mortgages are in new york . these mortgages account for about $2.4 billion or 50 percent of the portfolio's total unpaid principal balance .