butler . “effect of deviance during adolescence on choice of jobs.” southern economics journal , vol . 2 ( 1993 ) , pp . ” or “are you unable to work because of a disability ? ” or “do you have a condition that limits the type or amount of work you can do ? ” in 1990 , the number of working - age individuals who reported they were unable to work or limited in work ranged from 12.9 million to 19.5 million ; the number reported as unable to work ranged from 6.6 million to 14.2 million . some definitions consider an individual disabled if he or she has one or more of a specified list of medical conditions . for example , vocational education programs define students as having a disability if they are “mentally retarded , hard of hearing , deaf , speech impaired , visually handicapped , seriously emotionally disturbed , orthopedically impaired , other health impaired , deaf - blind , multihandicapped , or have specific learning disabilities , who because of these impairments , need special education and related services , and cannot succeed in the regular vocational education program without special education assistance.” in addition , some functional definitions of disability specifically exclude certain conditions . for example , the definition of disability in the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) excludes psychoactive substance abuse , transsexualism , pedophilia , compulsive gambling , and kleptomania ( among other disorders ) . these definitions are presumably relatively straightforward because they require only an assessment of a medical condition , not an evaluation of an individual's ability to function with this impairment . however , a medical definition generally contains no information on the severity of the condition and ignores potentially debilitating conditions not included on the list . thus , a medically based approach may sometimes be as arbitrary as a more subjective definition . in addition , medically based definitions would presumably require certification and may be expensive to verify . relatively little up - to - date information on the prevalence of specific medical disorders exists in the united states . the data that are available , however , suggest that definitions of disability based on medical conditions may be quite distinct from definitions based on an individual's functional ability , and may classify large numbers of individuals as having a disability . for example , the 1993 national health interview survey ( nhis ) reported that , of americans aged 18 to 64 , 13.2 million were hearing impaired ; 5.8 million were visually impaired ; and 0.9 million had palsy , cerebral palsy , or mental retardation . fully 61 percent of the visually impaired and 65 percent of the hearing impaired reported no limitation in the kind or amount of work they could do — indicating that medical condition and self - perception of ability to work are distinct concepts . results from the national comorbidity survey administered between 1990 and 1992 indicated that during the previous 12 months as many as 29 percent of individuals may have had at least 1 of 14 psychiatric disorders , including major depression , anxiety disorders , and substance abuse .