we do not agree . under redesign , ssa plans to reduce medical determinations to a relatively small number of claims , while expanding the functional component of the decision - making process . because it is unlikely that the new decision methodology will eliminate all adjudicator judgment needed in making functional determinations , we continue to believe that ssa should proceed cautiously and test any new decision methods to determine their effects on consistency as well as award rates . in its comments , ssa stated that it is committed to using research results to dictate which , if any , changes will be made in the decision methodology . we support this commitment . the full text of ssa's comments and our response appear in appendix iii . in addition , ssa provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . ( see app . ii for more details on these studies' results. ) decisions in cases involving physical impairments clearly reflected differences in assessing rfc . table 3.1 presents data from ssa's dhqrp study on physical impairment cases in which aljs made awards on the basis of rfc assessments . the table compares the alj decisions with those of reviewers who used the dds approach and examined the written evidence available to the alj . these data indicate that aljs are significantly more likely than dds medical consultants to find that applicants have very limited work capacity . in the view of awarding aljs , 66 percent of the cases merited a “less than the full range of sedentary work” assessment — a classification that often leads to an award . in contrast , the medical consultants who performed the rfc assessment using the dds approach found that less than 6 percent of cases merited this classification . the dds and alj adjudicators also differed in the other classifications . in addition , high alj award rates for claimants with mental impairments often reflect different assessments of functional limitations . even alj mental impairment awards based on the listings reflect these differences because most such listings require adjudicators to assess functional limitations in addition to determining the claimant's medical condition . a study known as the bellmon report , which controlled for differences in evidence , also found that differing rfcs played a role in differing dds and alj decisions . this study found that dds and alj adjudicators reached different results even when presented with the same evidence . as part of the study , two groups of reviewers looked at selected cases . one group reviewed the cases as aljs would , and the other reviewed the cases as ddss would . reviewers using the alj approach concluded that 48 percent of the cases should have received awards ; reviewers using the dds approach concluded that only 13 percent of those same cases should have received awards . we identified specific differences in ddss' and aljs' approach to their decisions . first , medical staff have different roles at the two levels . in addition , ddss and aljs respond differently to ( 1 ) the opinions of claimants' physicians and ( 2 ) claimants' statements about symptoms such as pain .