stat . ยง8-533b.7 ( a ) , ( b ) . california law does not require the foster care agency to provide a period of family reunification efforts before beginning proceedings to terminate parental rights if the parent has a history of extensive , abusive , and chronic use of drugs or alcohol and has resisted prior treatment during a 3-year period immediately prior to the filing of the petition that brought the minor to the court's attention or has failed or refused to comply with a program of drug or alcohol treatment described in the case plan on at least two prior occasions , even though the programs identified were available and accessible . cal . welf . & inst . code ยง361.5 ( b ) ( 12 ) . illinois law does not require the foster care agency to provide a period of family reunification efforts before beginning proceedings to terminate parental rights if the foster child was prenatally substance - exposed and ( 1 ) the mother had prenatally substance - exposed at least one other child who was legally determined to have been neglected and ( 2 ) the mother had the opportunity to participate in a drug counseling , treatment , and rehabilitation program during that child's foster care episode . parental rights may also be terminated if the parent has failed to make reasonable efforts to correct the conditions that were the basis for the removal of the child from the parent or to make reasonable progress toward the return of the child to the parent within 9 months after the child was legally determined to have been neglected . failure to make reasonable progress toward return of the child includes the parent's failure to substantially fulfill his or her obligations under the service plan and correct the conditions that brought the child into foster care within 9 months after adjudication . 750 ill. comp . stat . 50 / 1 ( 1 ) ( m ) , ( r ) . louisiana law allows the termination of parental rights if ( 1 ) at least 1 year has elapsed since the foster child was removed from the parent's custody ; ( 2 ) there has been no substantial parental compliance with a case plan for services necessary for the safe return of the child ; and ( 3 ) despite earlier intervention , there is no reasonable expectation of significant improvement in the parent's condition or conduct in the near future , considering the child's age and needs for a stable and permanent home . la . ch . code art . lack of parental compliance with a case plan includes the parent's repeated failure to comply with the required program of treatment and rehabilitation services provided in the case plan , the lack of substantial improvement in redressing the problems preventing reunification , and the persistence of conditions that led to removal or similar potentially harmful conditions . la . ch . code art .