we noted this in the report . the physicians' groups differed on whether hcfa should include the costs of staff who accompany physicians to the hospital when calculating the practice expense rvus . representatives from the american college of physicians - american society of internal medicine and the american academy of family physicians believe that these costs should be excluded and noted that we agreed in our first report that hcfa appropriately excluded these costs from the cpep data since medicare pays for these expenses through other mechanisms . in our example , this would mean allocating the $2 billion cardiology cost pool to the procedures cardiologists perform , such as echocardiograms and cardiac stress tests . hcfa used two allocation approaches . hcfa treated the clinical labor , medical equipment , and medical supply expense categories as direct expenses and allocated them to procedures using the cpep data . hcfa used the cpep data on clinical labor by procedure to allocate the clinical labor cost pool to procedures , the cpep data on medical equipment by procedure to allocate the medical equipment cost pool to procedures , and the cpep data on medical supplies by procedure to allocate the medical supply cost pool to procedures . in cases in which two or more cpeps developed estimates for the same procedure , hcfa simply averaged the different cpeps' estimates . for example , if the cpep estimated that a cardiac stress test required five times more clinical labor than an echocardiogram , then an individual stress test would receive five times the dollars from the clinical labor cost pool . hcfa treated administrative labor , office expenses , and other expenses as indirect expenses and used a combination of the fee schedule's physician work rvus associated with a procedure and the direct practice expense estimates for clinical labor , medical equipment , and medical supplies to allocate the three indirect expense cost pools to the procedures performed by a specialty . the incurred costs reported on the sms survey for each type of practice expense were used to determine their proportion of the total for each specialty . the following formula summarizes how hcfa developed these estimates for each expense category: total annual practice expenses for treating medicare patients ( cost pool ) = ( average practice expenses / patient care hours ) x hours spent treating medicare patients for all procedures performed by the specialty hcfa developed ratios , for each specialty , of the average practice expenses incurred per hour of a physician's time spent in patient care activities for each of the six expense categories . estimates of the total annual physician practice expenses and average hours physicians worked per year in patient care activities were obtained from ama's 1995-97 sms surveys . hcfa estimated the number of hours physicians spent treating medicare patients by specialty . for each procedure , the number of times that procedure is performed by a specialty is multiplied by the amount of time physicians require to perform the procedure ; hcfa then summed the results for all procedures performed by the specialty . hcfa used its medicare claims data to determine medicare volume for procedures performed by different specialties .