ii ) . hhs generally agreed with our findings and representation of its current efforts to improve productivity . hhs also described planned efforts to reduce the “management superstructure of ori,” which should result in productivity gains . we incorporated technical comments provided by hhs , but did not include them in the appendix . investigative work is not ori's only responsibility . given the case backlog , however , ori's current staff allocation to investigations may not be sufficient even with the recent improvements ori has made . ori also needs a system to track the amount of time investigators spend on cases . generally , each investigator handles 6 to 10 initial allegations of misconduct , 1 to 3 investigations , and 1 to 4 oversight cases . some investigators we interviewed expressed occasional uncertainty about whether their use of time coincided with management's priorities . planning processes , such as routine staffing assessments , could help ori's management team systematically gauge the appropriate balance between ori's needs and resources . staffing assessments might also help identify ways to augment ori's skill base — for example , identifying the need for different disciplines and backgrounds among the staff , such as trained criminal investigators . we sought to obtain their views on ways in which ori could improve its handling of misconduct cases . such assessments might also help management determine ways to better use its administrative staff . appendix i describes our scope and methodology in more detail . ori is an independent group within hhs ; its director reports to the secretary . created from a merger of two offices within hhs , ori's mission is to oversee and direct phs research integrity activities , which it does primarily through its handling of scientific misconduct investigations . in fiscal year 1994 , ori had a total operating budget of $4 million and maintained a staff of about 50 employees ; currently , it has 43 employees . although ori investigates misconduct related to intramural research programs , about three - fourths of its caseload in 1994 related to oversight of extramural integrity reviews conducted by grantee institutions . ori generally monitors the progress of an extramural investigation and reviews the institution's final report . ori also presents the results of misconduct investigations in administrative hearings before the hhs departmental appeals board if ori's decisions are challenged . besides its investigative function , ori performs other research integrity activities . these efforts include developing model policies and procedures for handling allegations of scientific misconduct ; evaluating institutional policies and processes for conducting investigations ; investigating whistleblower retaliation complaints ; and promoting scientific integrity through educational initiatives and other collaborations with universities , medical schools , and professional societies . most allegations of scientific misconduct are made directly to the institutions conducting the research . responding to an allegation involves a two - step process: an inquiry and , if necessary , an investigation . institutions have the primary responsibility for responding to allegations involving extramural research ; ori's role in these instances is usually that of reviewing the institution's investigation report .