ii ) . in step one , an ssa field office determines if an applicant is currently engaged in sga . if an applicant is found not to be engaged in sga , the field office forwards the application to a state disability determination service ( dds ) office for processing through the remaining four steps until a determination of disability or no disability is reached . a dds office develops medical , functional , vocational , and other necessary evidence ; evaluates it ; and determines whether the applicant meets the disability criteria set forth in ssa regulations . once the dds has determined that the applicant meets the criteria , ssa calculates the benefits payable and makes the award . ssa pays the costs incurred by ddss in evaluating applications , including the expense of collecting medical evidence they request from hospitals , clinics , or other institutions . there are 54 ddss throughout the country employing about 12,000 full - time and 2,000 part - time employees . ssa reported that in fiscal year 1994 the ddss processed about 2.6 million initial claims , and the total dds budget was about $1.1 billion . applicants denied benefits after the initial dds review may request a reconsideration by the dds office . if still not satisfied , they can appeal to an administrative law judge . if denied again , they may appeal to the ssa appeals council and , later , to the federal district courts . once a person is on the disability rolls , disability benefits continue until one of three things happens: the beneficiary dies ; ssa determines that the beneficiary is no longer eligible for benefits ; or , for di beneficiaries , benefits convert to social security retirement benefits at age 65 . generally , a beneficiary loses eligibility for benefits under one of two conditions: ( 1 ) a beneficiary earns more income than allowed by program rules ( the monthly ceiling is $500 for disabled di beneficiaries and $960 for blind di beneficiaries ; for ssi , the ceiling varies from state to state — for example , $1,464 in pennsylvania and $1,855 in california ) or ( 2 ) ssa decides that a beneficiary's medical condition has improved to the point that he or she is no longer considered disabled and can now perform work at the sga level . in order to make this latter determination , ssa periodically performs continuing disability reviews . the law requires ssa to conduct such a review at least once every 3 years on di beneficiaries whose medical improvement is possible or expected . when medical improvement is not expected , ssa is required to schedule a continuing disability review at least once every 7 years . the social security act states that people applying for disability benefits should be promptly referred to state vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) agencies for services in order to maximize the number of such individuals who can return to productive activity .