additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . more serious consequences are also possible . according to a report on information management in the cook county , illinois , juvenile court , the presence of an automated information system that maintained critical case information in a usable format might have made a significant difference in a prominent case involving the death of a child . child welfare proceedings can be long and complex . according to experts in the juvenile dependency court process , to complete the demanding work of the court , there must be enough judicial officers and attorneys who possess sufficient expertise to ensure that children are protected and placed in a permanent home in a timely fashion . further , experts such as those at ncjfcj also report that judicial and attorney caseloads have risen at the same time that court demands , such as the number of hearings and parties involved in child maltreatment cases , have increased . the problem of large caseloads appeared in the cip assessments of three of the states we visited and was confirmed by local officials at four of the five local sites we visited . although formal caseload size standards do not exist , two juvenile court jurisdictions — hamilton county , ohio , and kent county , michigan — are recognized by experts and cited by aba as successful courts with appropriate judicial caseloads . hamilton county judicial officers each handled an average of 239 child protection cases in 1991 , while kent county judicial officers each handled approximately 181 cases in 1993 . court caseloads in four of the five sites we visited , however , often exceed these suggested levels . for example , the presiding judge at one site we visited handles approximately 1,000 cases per year . as part of its court improvement program , california studied judicial resources and found that many counties needed additional judges to meet the ratios in effect in hamilton county , ohio . juvenile dependency courts also experience high rates of attorney turnover , according to experts in the dependency court process and local officials in four of the five sites we visited . in its review of 25 state cip assessments and in a related study on attorney representation , ncjfcj found that frequent rotation of prosecutors and agency attorneys is a problem . california's cip assessment found rapid rotation of some county public defenders and noted that parents should not have to adjust to two to four attorneys over the life of a case . local attorneys in illinois , north carolina , and ohio confirmed that rapid turnover occurs among various attorneys in the dependency arena . experts agree that the parties to child maltreatment proceedings need consistent legal representation to ensure that the information these attorneys supply to the judge is complete and thorough . according to one expert , children , in particular , need a single representative to retain their history , including the reasons they entered the child welfare system .