for example , h.r . 4 requires states to provide work activities for an increasing percentage of those receiving cash assistance or face penalties of up to 5 percent of the state's block grant . the other programs are not jobs programs and are not operated by welfare agencies . whether afdc continues as an entitlement program or is converted into a block grant , program administrators at the county and local levels will be concerned with moving large numbers of welfare recipients into employment . our work highlights examples of programs that are well - focused on the ultimate goal of employment — stressing the importance of work for their participants and forging links with employers to identify jobs or create work opportunities where none is available . however , these programs appear more the exception than the rule . most programs appear to emphasize preparing participants for employment without also making strong efforts to help place their participants in jobs . while we acknowledge that some administrators face factors beyond their control that may limit program choices , including budget constraints and a lack of jobs , other programs facing similar constraints have taken steps that promote work more strongly for their participants . these steps include focusing staff and participants on the importance of employment , working more closely with employers to identify job openings , determining employers' needs , and helping match recipients' education and training activities to labor market demands . even programs that are well - focused on moving afdc recipients into employment have faced challenges , however . for example , the riverside county program strongly emphasized moving recipients quickly into jobs ; yet after 3 years , about 40 percent of its participants remained on afdc . many who became employed remained on afdc or , if off afdc , continued to receive other forms of public aid , including food stamps or federal housing assistance . and some of those who left afdc remained in poverty and at risk of returning to afdc . in those cases where unsubsidized employment is not available or the characteristics of participants do not make them readily employable , strategies like work supplementation or on - the - job training may help welfare recipients become employed . and where regular jobs or subsidized employment are not feasible , work - experience programs may serve as an alternative that promotes work for welfare recipients . administrators generally supported the use of these work activities . however , they believe that they need more flexibility to design work activities to meet the needs of their participants and local labor markets . in commenting on a draft of this report ( see app . see appendix ii for more information about our sample . the questionnaire and summaries of the responses are in appendix iii . for more information on jobs program implementation , we spoke with program administrators at hhs and the department of labor ; representatives of the national alliance of business and the american federation of state , county and municipal employees ; and welfare experts . we also reviewed hhs and congressional welfare reform proposals and analyzed economic data provided by the bureau of the census and the department of commerce .