satisfaction with care . this section contains 54 questions about overall satisfaction with care received at military and civilian facilities , and satisfaction with specific aspects of the care . demographic information . this section asks about age , education , gender , ethnicity and race , beneficiary group , and length of time in residence as well as other factors important to explaining health - related behaviors and opinions . the annual survey was designed by a working group composed of survey experts from health affairs , each of the three services , and a representative from the defense manpower data center . the questions and scales used in the annual survey were developed on the basis of a review of private sector surveys that had been extensively tested for reliability and validity . the survey is mailed to a random sample of beneficiaries selected from catchment areas in the united states , overseas , and in noncatchment areas . the 1996 annual survey was mailed to a sample population of 156,838 adult beneficiaries eligible for mhs health care . the survey sample was composed of the following beneficiary types: active duty , active duty family members , retirees under age 65 , retirees aged 65 or older , retiree family members under age 65 , and retiree family members aged 65 or older . beneficiaries were included in the sample regardless of whether they were users of military health care — either mtf care or dod - funded civilian care . health affairs has conducted the annual survey three times , at about 16- to 18-month intervals . the first survey was conducted in late 1994 and early 1995 . because it was conducted just before tricare started , it established a baseline against which changes in beneficiaries' ratings of their health care could be tracked following tricare's implementation . questions on tricare prime were added to the 1996 and the 1997 survey instruments to ( 1 ) gauge how beneficiaries perceive the program and ( 2 ) compare responses of beneficiaries enrolled in tricare prime and those who are not . health status . this section contains 36 questions , widely used and validated in the private sector , that measure distinct aspects of physical and emotional health . access to care . this section contains 25 questions that look at how easily beneficiaries enter the health care system ( process measures ) and whether they receive necessary care ( outcome measures ) . health affairs sends out several reports of the annual survey results . each tricare region receives one report that contains that region's results by catchment area and by beneficiary group . familiarity with benefits . this section contains 13 questions about whether beneficiaries have a source of information for various aspects of their health care benefit . health affairs sends each regional report to the lead agent , who is then responsible for distributing the results to the mtfs in that region . according to dod officials , it is important to get the information to the local level where local officials can use the information to make improvements . also , health affairs sends to each service surgeon general a summary - level report that includes results for each of that service's mtfs .