each is assigned to two or more schools . the district's technology personnel raised the following issues about school technology: competing education needs , leadership , taxpayer resistance , staffing needs , and the uncertainty of funding . gahanna officials said that many district needs were competing with technology for funding , particularly teachers' salaries , so it was critical to convince community leaders and other taxpayers that technology is important . in addition , several top district leadership changes in the past few years hurt the district's ability to establish technology as a funding priority , according to officials . how do districts plan to handle the ongoing costs of the technology they have acquired ? our study is based on the experiences of five school districts selected to illustrate the experiences of many districts in developing education technology programs . we asked state education agency officials in every state , as well as officials in other organizations , to identify districts that had established education technology programs and made some progress in implementing them . because we sought information on experiences that were likely to be relatively common among districts nationwide , we asked the officials to exclude districts that had benefited from extraordinary assistance , such as those receiving a major portion of their funding from a company or individual . we selected five districts that provided a cross section of districts in size , community type , geographic location , state assistance for education technology , state fiscal capacity , and state share of education funding . this report examines how five districts funded their technology goals and their difficulties in finding these resources . it does not evaluate the districts' technology goals or assess the effect of technology on students' academic progress . although education technology can encompass a wide range of tools , including cable television and distance learning , our discussions with school district officials focused on computers and peripherals and their connectivity to local and wide area networks and to the internet . we refer to these resources as computer - based technology . for a detailed description of our report's scope and methodology , see appendix i . the five districts chosen , shown in table 1 , range from a rural district in north carolina's furniture manufacturing region to the largest urban school districts in new hampshire and washington . these five districts were trying to do many things that other districts are doing — increase the number of computers available for instruction , build computer laboratories and classroom computer resources , and make internet access part of a teacher's instructional tool kit . although the districts selected are not statistically representative , they give insight to the experiences districts encounter in finding resources to implement education technology programs . in conducting the case studies , we interviewed officials at the school , district , and state levels , as well as others involved in funding technology , such as parents and members of local organizations helping to bring technology into schools . although we talked with several district officials , including superintendents , our most extensive interviews were with district - level technology directors who had primary responsibility for implementing the technology programs .