iii. ) in these same states , we met with 38 individuals , representing 32 different organizations , who prepare passes for disability benefit recipients . in addition , we spoke with the pass program liaison in each of the 10 ssa regional offices to learn about program trends nationwide . to determine the numbers and characteristics of passes and program participants , we analyzed an extract of the supplemental security record ( ssr ) , the main database of ssi participants . we also used data from the ssr , the master beneficiary record ( mbr ) of di beneficiaries , and ssa's master earnings file maintained for all workers to assess the current earnings and benefit status of former pass participants . we were unable to evaluate program impact , because most program participation has been recent , and ssa has only 4 years of historical data on the pass program , which includes no data on the outcomes of program participation . in addition , individuals self - select into the pass program , and may already be different from other ssi and di beneficiaries in ways that would affect their future employment and earnings . finally , we reviewed 380 randomly selected pass files in 17 field offices to gather additional data about passes , including the types of work goals and proposed purchases . we did not , however , verify that specific program participants complied with the goals and activities specified in their passes . for more information about our methodology , see appendix iv . we did our work between january and november 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ssa has not translated the pass program's goals of providing opportunities for participants to work into a well - defined program structure with specific objectives . confusion about program objectives has resulted in different and sometimes conflicting pass approvals and denials across field offices . in addition , ssa field office staff find it difficult to approve or deny passes because ssa headquarters has not developed clear criteria for evaluating passes . most field office staff do not have expertise or training in evaluating work opportunities for people with disabilities , whose needs are extremely diverse . reflecting this diversity , the passes we reviewed encompassed a wide array of work goals , from janitorial work to professional positions , and included expenditures ranging from business cards to new cars . finally , the pass program includes primarily di beneficiaries , many of whom use the pass program to gain eligibility for federal ssi payments . because ssa has not developed measures to evaluate how well the pass program is helping participants become or stay employed , the agency lacks adequate management data on pass use . for this reason , we could not accurately measure pass program impact . we did find that many former pass participants are earning enough income to at least reduce their ssi payments , compared with other ssi recipients , although many had worked prior to participating in the pass program . few , however , have earned enough to end ssi payments .