( see app . ii for a description of how ssa developed the statistical formulas used to estimate the likelihood of medical improvement. ) in recent years , for example , ssa's statistical formulas have shown that about 30 percent of di disabled workers under age 62 not permanently impaired had a low likelihood of benefit termination . therefore , ssa used mailers to process cdrs for this “low profile” group . as with the ddss , however , ssa stated that no field office resources paid for from cdr funding will be diverted away from cdrs to process unexpected increases in non - cdr caseloads . although ssa could , if needed , request additional funding to increase field offices' processing capacity , ssa's strategic plan for fiscal years 1997 through 2002 brings into question whether field office staffing can be expected to grow . ssa stated in its strategic plan that expected budgetary constraints have resulted in a forecast of no growth in the number of workyears available to ssa . consistent with this forecast , ssa has committed to reducing its overall staffing levels from approximately 65,000 to 62,000 as part of the governmentwide staff reduction plan . for fiscal year 1999 , ssa has planned an overall staff decrease of 1,700 . furthermore , ssa stated in its strategic plan that it could be facing a critical loss of knowledge and experience over the next 5 years because nearly 20 percent of its employees will be eligible for regular retirement between fiscal years 1997 and 2002 . more than 57 percent of ssa employees are over age 45 and , therefore , will be reaching retirement age over the next 10 years . with such a large number of employees becoming eligible for retirement , ssa stated in the strategic plan that it could face a challenge if these employees choose to retire even at the historical rate of retirement for eligible employees . ssa is conducting a detailed analysis of retirement patterns in order to predict when staff will retire and which offices or geographic areas will be most affected . ssa plans to publish the results of this study during fiscal year 1998 . in response to field offices' concerns about their ability to keep pace with increasing cdr workloads , ssa is taking several actions to help field offices process , manage , and track their cdr workloads . ssa's first action is designed to achieve an even flow of cdr cases from ssa case file repositories to field offices and subsequently to ddss . to do this , beginning in july 1998 , ssa planned to release blocks of cdr cases to the field offices every month , alternating between di and ssi , which results in six releases of di cases and six releases of ssi cases each year . ssa took this action to deal with concerns that cdr cases were released too infrequently to ensure an even and steady workload of cdr cases flowing through field offices to ddss . ssa is also working to implement in its field offices an automated case management system for di cdrs similar to the system that is already available to field offices for managing and tracking the ssi cdr caseload .