iii ) . dod said that one of its first priorities will be the development of a definition and scope of dod telemedicine activities . dod also agreed to establish departmentwide goals and objectives and prioritize investments as part of its strategic telemedicine plan . according to dod , many pieces of this plan are already in place . va commented that it would be beneficial for dod to include va in its development of an operational strategy for telemedicine activities ( see app . iv ) . after subsequent discussions with hhs officials regarding agency comments , hhs generally agreed with the concept of our recommendation for jwgt to play a leadership role in proposing national goals and objectives ( see app . v ) . hhs was concerned that a governmentwide strategy could be overly prescriptive . our recommendation was not intended to imply that jwgt direct federal agencies investments in telemedicine initiatives but rather that jwgt develop a roadmap for federal agencies to use as a guide for their investments . hhs also stated that it might be better to require individual departments to develop their own strategies before an overarching federal strategy is proposed . we believe that individual strategies should be developed but that these strategies would not ensure an interagency commitment to common goals and objectives or serve as a guide to prevent duplicative investment efforts . we further believe that some agencies , such as dod and va , might be in a better position than others to move forward with individual strategies , whereas other agencies would benefit from an overall federal plan to help develop their individual strategies . hhs commented that jwgt had accomplished much of what we were recommending . we believe that jwgt should be commended for its efforts toward fulfilling the reporting requirements to the vice president and the congress . many indirect benefits toward informal coordination of federal telemedicine activities are occurring . however , drafts of jwgt reports to the vice president and the congress provided to us do not reflect a proposal for the type of governmentwide strategy we are recommending for agencies to maximize their telemedicine investments . rather , these draft reports mostly reflect information on issues to be pursued related to barriers , such as physician licensure , that may prevent the widespread application of telemedicine . our draft report recommended that jwgt membership be expanded to include private and state representation . hhs expressed concerns about implementing this portion of the recommendation due to requirements in the federal advisory committee act . according to hhs , the act would require reimbursement for expenses of any state or private sector representative to attend the group's bimonthly meetings and could otherwise impair jwgt's operations . as an alternative , hhs suggested the addition of an annual telemedicine summit with state and private participation to jwgt's activities . we believe the specific vehicle chosen is not important as long as it improves the interaction of federal , state , and private sectors along the lines noted in our recommendations . accordingly , we modified our recommendation by deleting suggestions to expand jwgt beyond federal agency membership . a breakdown of this funding is unavailable .