family . divorce or legal separation from or the death of an insured worker , medicare entitlement for a covered employee resulting in the loss of employer - provided coverage to a dependent , or loss of dependent child status . generally , a work - related event provides benefits for 18 months . however , in the case of separation or reduction in hours as a result of a disability , coverage can be extended for an additional 11 months if the disability is determined under the social security act and existed during the first 60 days of cobra coverage . the cost for those additional 11 months rises from 102 percent to 150 percent of the applicable premium . third , using a life - cycle model of retirement that incorporates the value of retiree health benefits and also includes information on pension accruals , gustman and steinmeier found that employer - based coverage lowers male retirement age by about 1.3 months . the authors acknowledged that their methodology may tend to underestimate the effect of health benefits on retirement . furthermore , a 1994 study by madrian reported that individuals with access to health insurance retired between 5 and 16 months earlier than those lacking coverage and that the probability of retiring before age 65 was between 7 and 15 percentage points higher for individuals with retiree health insurance . shortcomings of the study included ( 1 ) an inconclusive attempt to control for participation in a pension plan and ( 2 ) the fact that the results were based on the recollections of individuals who had been retired as long as 15 years and had to recall their pension and health insurance status at the time of retirement . finally , a 1993 study by gruber and madrian focused on the early retirement impact of state and federal cobra coverage . they found that continuation mandates have an effect on retirement among men aged 55 to 64 . specifically , 1 year of coverage raised the probability of being retired by 1.1 percentage point . however , they also reported that this additional year of coverage raises the probability of being insured by 6 percentage points , suggesting that many of these individuals would have retired in the absence of such coverage . finally , contrary to basic intuition , the effects are not necessarily the strongest at older ages but decline with age . using data from the march 1997 cps and 1995 and 1996 information on insurance premiums , we estimated the percentage of median income that a 55- to 64-year - old would have to commit to health insurance under a number of possible scenarios , including purchasing coverage through the individual market in a community - rated state ( vermont ) as well as one that had no restrictions on the premiums that could be charged ( colorado ) using 1996 rates for a commonly purchased health insurance product and cost sharing under employer - based coverage using 1995 peat marwick estimates of the lowest , highest , and average retiree contribution . while no official affordability standard exists , research suggests that older americans commit a much higher percentage of their income to health insurance than do younger age groups .