additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . va provides most substance abuse programs directly . however , it does rely on some non - va facilities , such as community residential facilities , to provide some services . figure 1 shows the locations and types of va substance abuse programs provided as of october 1 , 1994 . like other providers , va uses a variety of approaches in treating veterans with substance abuse disorders . table 2 describes the treatment approaches used in va programs . as part of the president's national drug policy program , va received $105 million annually in recurring funds in fiscal years 1990 to 1993 . va used these funds to expand substance abuse treatment services to more eligible veterans . veterans in the medical and surgical units were older than those in the treatment units . although both va and non - va substance abuse treatment officials agree that patient data collected through the asi would be useful in determining the proper treatment and its efficacy , some are concerned that it may be too expensive and time consuming to administer . the revised performance measures will be used to evaluate individual substance abuse treatment programs and compare them with each other as well as with non - va programs . for example , va is already piloting a performance monitoring system developed by its program evaluation and research center . the system ranks , according to cost and utilization data , the relative performance of mental health and substance abuse units among the medical centers and 22 visns . to ensure that the comparisons fairly assess program performance , va intends to account for veteran characteristics , such as other coexisting medical or psychiatric diseases , that might affect the outcome of the substance abuse treatment . va's current and planned initiatives to monitor program performance compare with those used or planned by non - va providers and managed behavioral health care organizations we contacted . for example , one large managed behavioral health company that has used outcome measures since 1993 collects information about readmission , complaints , and patient and provider satisfaction , among other data . a large local provider had no systematic outcome measurement efforts under way at the time of our study , but it would provide data for requested state or federal studies . such data might include detoxification use , employment , housing , and treatment service use .