ii. ) this form does not refer to specific treatments except for artificial nutrition and hydration and relief from pain . the other sections of this govern the effect of this or any other writing used to create an advance health - care directive.an individual may complete or modify all or any part of the following form: you have the right to give instructions about your own health care . are advance directives binding on all physicians and institutions ? what about “futile” treatment or assisted suicide ? some individuals are concerned that an advance directive that complies with the requirements of one state may not be honored in another state . although we could not document such a problem , evidence suggests that an advance directive should be honored in any state , regardless of where it was originally executed . the statutes of 29 states explicitly recognize the validity of living wills that are in accord with either laws of their own state or another state . similarly , 29 state statutes recognize the powers of health care agents appointed by documents executed in other states . even beyond state statutes , a living will should be valid in any state because cruzan and a long tradition of state courts have found that the constitutional right to refuse medical treatment is not lost upon incapacity . just as a competent person has the right to refuse unwanted medical treatment in any state , an incompetent person's previously articulated wish should also be honored in any state . on the other hand , we are unaware of any court that has held there is a constitutional right to appoint a health care agent although , in her concurrence in cruzan , justice o'connor speculated that there may be such a right . thus , an agent who attempts to exercise authority in one of the 22 states without a reciprocity provision in its health care agent statute is more apt to encounter some justifiable resistance . courts have consistently held that a clearly and convincingly expressed oral statement of an individual's treatment wishes should be honored . however , in part because psda defines “advance directive” to include only written instructions , medical personnel may erroneously assume that an incompetent individual's previously expressed wishes must be in writing to have legal effect . some states include a detailed form in their statute for use in drafting an advance directive , which may reinforce the belief that only written instructions are valid . however , if a patient's clearly expressed treatment wishes generally must be followed even if they are not in writing , it should not matter whether written instructions follow the detailed form included in a state law . the psda definition of advance directives states that the form directives take may be specified by state statute or precedents set in court decisions . this has resulted in seriously ill patients being resuscitated against their stated wishes and over the objections of their families . to address this issue , 25 states authorize nonhospital do - not - resuscitate orders . ( such orders , however , cover a narrower spectrum of treatments than typical living wills. )