the purpose of the survey was twofold . first , we wanted to determine the total number of states and localities operating or considering managed care projects or initiatives nationwide and , for those projects in operation , obtain a description of the types of managed care arrangements being used . second , because some locations have more than one ongoing managed care initiative , we wanted to obtain detailed program information on the initiative that is serving the most children . in february 1998 , we mailed a copy of the survey to the child welfare director in each of the 50 states and the district of columbia . we also mailed the survey to child welfare officials in 43 localities we had identified as possibly implementing or considering managed care initiatives . we learned of those officials by telephoning the state child welfare directors in the 13 county - administered states and asking them to identify the applicable localities in their states . we received responses from 48 state agencies , the district of columbia , and all the local agencies . on the basis of the returned surveys and telephone contacts with several local agency officials , we excluded from our analyses 17 counties and 1 district that either ( 1 ) were implementing a multiple - county initiative and chose to designate one county as the survey respondent , or ( 2 ) were neither implementing nor considering managed care arrangements in their child welfare systems at the time of our survey . hence , for our adjusted population size of 76 state and local agencies , the 74 valid responses resulted in an overall response rate of 97 percent . from these responses , we obtained general information on 36 initiatives and more detailed information on the 27 initiatives serving the most children in each location . we did not verify the information obtained through the survey . however , we conducted telephone interviews with state and local respondents to clarify responses , as needed , and obtained additional information about program and population coverage and available descriptive documentation . in addition , we obtained more detailed information about ongoing managed care efforts at four locations . we selected four locations — kansas , massachusetts , boulder county in colorado , and sarasota county in florida — to obtain more detailed information about the events and activities surrounding the locations' decision to implement managed care in their child welfare systems , the process of planning and designing the initiative , the rationale behind changing service delivery and financial arrangements , contracting and subcontracting processes and management , monitoring and accountability activities , results to date , implementation challenges , and lessons learned . on the basis of the relevant literature and in consultation with child welfare experts , we selected these four locations because they were implementing different managed care models , had different circumstances leading to their initiative's design , and provided examples of both state - and local - level efforts . at each location , we interviewed officials from the state and local child welfare agencies as well as representatives from the primary managed care contractors and subcontractors , and reviewed pertinent documentation .