the report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight no later than 60 days after the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and members of congress , and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to other interested parties . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the social security administration ( ssa ) administers three federal cash payment programs: the old age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) program , the disability insurance ( di ) program , and the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program . oasi and di are social insurance programs authorized under title ii of the social security act that pay monthly benefits to eligible individuals or their families based on average annual earnings in covered employment . these payments are made from the oasi and di trust funds , which accumulate income derived from the mandatory payment of employment taxes . claimants who disagree with an alj denial may request that the case be reviewed by ssa's appeals council . after all ssa administrative remedies are exhausted , a claimant has further appeal rights within the federal court system , up to and including the u.s. supreme court . ssa field staff are responsible for determining an individual's financial eligibility for ssi benefits . to meet the financial requirements , individuals may not have combined income greater than the current maximum monthly benefit of $494 ( $741 for a couple ) , or have resources worth more than $2,000 ( $3,000 for a couple ) . during the initial application process at ssa field offices , individuals are required to report any information that may affect their eligibility for benefits . similarly , once individuals receive ssi benefits , they are required to timely report events such as changes in income , resources , marital status , or living arrangements to ssa field office staff . to a significant extent , ssa depends on program applicants and recipients to accurately report important eligibility information . however , to determine whether recipients remain financially eligible for ssi benefits , ssa periodically conducts redeterminations . these are reviews of financial eligibility factors such as income , resources , and living arrangements . recipients are reviewed at least every 6 years , but reviews may be more frequent if ssa determines that changes in eligibility are likely . ssa also uses computer matches to determine recipients' continuing financial eligibility . matches compare ssi payment records against recipient financial information contained in the payment files of third parties , such as other federal and state government agencies .