( see app . i for an ssa organization chart and app . ii for an oha organization chart ) . oha's chief alj reports directly to the associate commissioner for hearings and appeals and is responsible for managing about 5,000 hearing office employees located in 10 regions . each oha region is headed by a regional chief alj ( rcalj ) , who is responsible for the operations of hearing offices in his or her respective region . in every hearing office , a hearing office chief alj ( hocalj ) oversees day - to - day office operations and provides guidance to aljs , professional staff , and support personnel . due to the rapid growth in oha backlogs and case - processing times and their impact on public service , in july 1994 the former chairman , and now ranking minority member , of the house committee on ways and means asked us to examine ssa's efforts to address the problem . more specifically , the objectives of our assignment were to determine ( 1 ) those factors contributing to the growth in the backlog of appealed cases , ( 2 ) what steps ssa has taken in the past to address this backlog problem , ( 3 ) what ssa is currently doing to reduce the appellate backlog , and ( 4 ) what needs to be done in the long term to make the disability appeals process more timely and efficient . in conducting our review , we analyzed data on oha workloads , backlogs , and processing times ; reviewed over 50 government and nongovernment studies conducted over the past 20 years on the disability determination and appeals process ( see app . iv ) ; examined ssa's previous initiatives to address oha backlogs and improve the hearings and appeals process ; and reviewed ssa's short - term disability plan ( stdp ) and the agency's longer - term plan for a new disability claim process ( redesign plan ) . to supplement information obtained from the various reports and initiatives outlined above , we interviewed key ssa and oha headquarters and regional management officials , as well as managers responsible for the development and implementation of ssa's stdp and redesign plan ; obtained the views of hearing office officials — chief aljs , supervisory staff - attorneys , and hearing office managers — regarding ssa's previous and current efforts to improve program efficiency and address oha's pending case backlog ; and interviewed officials at state disability determination services in florida , georgia , massachusetts , new york , and texas to obtain their views on the status and expected impacts of the stdp initiatives . our review was performed at ssa and oha headquarters ; four ssa regions — atlanta , boston , dallas , and new york ; and five oha regions — atlanta , boston , dallas , new york , and philadelphia . by examining workload and performance indicators , we judgmentally selected regions and oha hearing offices that would provide us with varied workload levels as well as varied experiences in managing their workloads . the selected offices also provided us with some geographical dispersion .