ii ) . in its response , labor concurred with the intent of our recommendation to issue national enforcement guidance specifying the actions whd inspectors should take during agricultural inspections to verify a child's age or employment status ( see app . iii ) . labor has , in fact , provided additional guidance on this matter on the regional level in at least two regions , and the department said it will determine if additional guidance is needed . we believe this recently issued guidance includes the additional procedures necessary to better detect illegal child labor in agriculture . at this time , however , the guidance has only been distributed to particular whd local offices . although this represents a positive first step toward implementing our recommendation , we still believe that this guidance needs to be issued to all whd inspectors so they can systematically and consistently take these actions to adequately detect illegal child labor in agriculture . labor also concurred with our recommendation aimed at ensuring that coordination procedures specified in existing agreements with federal and state agencies are followed , recorded , and tracked . it said that whd does have specific procedures for responding to and issuing case referrals and is now streamlining this process . as we reported , however , whether these procedures are followed is not always evident . ideally , in streamlining these procedures and implementing this recommendation , whd will focus on documenting adherence to these procedures to preclude the communication problems we detected among whd and other agencies . regarding our recommendations to develop a method for identifying the number of flsa child labor record - keeping violations and to test the feasibility of collecting data on children's involvement in other violations , labor acknowledged that such data may be beneficial but identified cost and the practicality of collecting such information as major issues requiring consideration . we agree that these are important issues , but given the results act environment that seeks to encourage data - driven measurable goals and objectives , the emphasis whd has placed on detecting illegal agricultural child labor and whd's efforts to revise its databases to better reflect enforcement activities and outcomes , we still believe that collecting this information — even on a limited basis — would enhance the agency's efforts to protect children from exploitation in the work place . in addition , the lack of data contributes to the general lack of information about the nature , magnitude , and dynamics of illegal child labor in the united states . only whd , as an enforcement agency tasked with protecting children , can collect these kind of data . although naws may be useful for understanding some aspects of the child labor problem , its self - reporting nature and sampling limitations make it less appropriate for grasping issues concerning illegal employment of children . labor did not directly comment on our recommendation to develop and analyze data on msfwp services and outcomes for children aged 14 to 17 to determine the number of these children served , services provided , and outcomes achieved by these children . labor said , however , that this information is included in the aggregated data collected on all participants aged 14 to 22 .