ii. ) the mcos' reported financial conditions would have been worse except for supplemental payments , which are likely to be reduced in 1995 . without these payments , all of the hmos would have incurred losses . the mcos' 1994 financial statements included more than $100 million in both actual and anticipated supplemental payments for ( 1 ) a supplement to capitation rates paid for 1994 , ( 2 ) the first 30 days of care to formerly uninsured enrollees , and ( 3 ) adverse selection . the state requires hmos to be licensed as such . the primary contractual distinctions between these types of organizations are that ( 1 ) administrative fees and operating profits are restricted for ppos but not for hmos and ( 2 ) the tenncare bureau required on january 1 , 1994 , that hmos assign each of their enrollees to a primary care physician responsible for managing and coordinating the enrollee's care ; the contract with ppos allows them until january 1 , 1997 , to assign enrollees to primary care physicians . most enrollees have a choice of four mcos , and enrollees in metropolitan areas have a choice of as many as seven . figure 1 shows the geographic divisions of the state and the number of mcos participating in each division . the two largest mcos , bluecross blueshield and access medplus , operate statewide and account for 73 percent of enrollees . table 1 lists each mco and shows the type of contract , number of enrollees , and percent of total enrollees . the table lists mcos in descending order according to the percentage of total tenncare enrollees in the mco . in addition to making capitated payments to mcos , tenncare seeks to encourage managed care in several ways . tenncare requires that by 1997 , all mcos assign their enrollees to primary care physicians responsible for managing and coordinating enrollee care . as of february 1995 , mcos had assigned approximately half of all enrollees to primary care physicians . tenncare promotes continuity of care by requiring enrollees to stay with the same mco for a year , by providing extended enrollment periods to many medicaid eligibles , and by allowing persons to continue in tenncare as “uninsured” if they lose their medicaid eligibility . tenncare also encourages preventive care by not allowing deductibles and copayments for preventive care services . tenncare provides for incentive payments to physicians and allows several types of supplemental payments to hospitals based on the availability of unallocated funds . tenncare's design provides for two types of annual incentive payments to participating physicians: one to physicians that have a greater than average tenncare patient load and another to physicians whose practices are at least 10 percent tenncare to pay a portion of their malpractice insurance premiums . subject to the availability of unallocated funds , tenncare may also make supplemental payments to hospitals for graduate medical education and care provided to those eligible for , but not enrolled in , tenncare as well as payments to hospitals that provide care to large numbers of tenncare or indigent persons . however , because of the recency of the changes , their impact on the problems we identify is uncertain at this time .