i for more detail. ) neither individual disputed the accuracy of the data we presented , but both disagreed with some of our specific conclusions . the survey committee chair commented that the report's tone is not balanced and would likely lead readers to think that public pension underfunding is a larger problem than it really is . we do not agree that this report is biased in tone or content . we can calculate the number of employees represented by plans with complete data , but we cannot generalize anything about the plans with incomplete answers or assess any resulting bias in the results . still , as the footnotes detail , the plans with complete data generally represented a substantial share of the employees in responding plans . the limitations of incomplete data were greatest for comparisons between 1990 and 1992 . therefore , we present this analysis primarily for illustration . we did not adjust the ppcc data to standardize actuarial cost methods and assumptions . state and local governments may have many legitimate reasons for choosing various cost methods and assumptions , and we did not evaluate their choices . for example , among various investment restrictions , some plans are not allowed to invest in stocks while others are ; therefore , plans' assumed rate of return on investments should differ . in our previous analysis of this database , we used a measure called projected benefit obligation ( pbo ) for the pension plans' liabilities . at the time , the governmental accounting standards board ( gasb ) required that state and local plans report this measure . in 1994 , gasb changed its policy to require a measure called actuarial accrued liability ( aal ) , primarily responding to many requests from plans that did not use the pbo measure . also , many officials felt that the pbo underestimates plan liabilities . in accordance with gasb's change in policy , our current analysis also used the aal measure ; the ppcc database includes both pbo and aal data , when reported . our analysis confirmed that pbo generally yields higher funding ratios and therefore suggests a lower degree of underfunding . since our previous analysis used the pbo measure and our current analysis used the aal measure , funding ratios and related statistics should not be compared between the two reports . the trend analysis in this report , however , does make a valid comparison over time , using aal for both the 1990 and 1992 data . the following individuals made major contributions to this report: dea m. crittenden , evaluator - in - charge ; kenneth c. stockbridge , evaluator ; lawrence charron , evaluator ; and sharon fucinari , computer specialist . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o .