iii. ) during its recent initiative to identify current prisoners , ssa identified local officials who know what data are available and can be provided . ssa was unaware of most of these payments . the number of ssi recipients who received ssi while in jail , including those with representative payees and those with redeterminations , raises numerous questions , including whether payments were obtained fraudulently . ssa's recent initiative — to obtain better information on ssi recipients currently in county and local jails — is a positive step . however , the effort is not comprehensive enough . in general , ssa has begun to obtain information on current prisoners and new admissions . but ssa has not attempted to develop information , when available , on ssi recipients who may have been incarcerated and received payments in prior years . we found that this information is available and can provide ssa the means to identify and initiate recovery of many more erroneous payments . in order to identify ssi recipients who have been erroneously paid in prior years , we recommend that the commissioner of ssa direct ssa field offices to obtain information from county and local jails on former prisoners . ssa should then process this information to ( 1 ) determine if it made erroneous payments to any of these former prisoners , ( 2 ) establish overpayments for the ones it paid , and ( 3 ) attempt to recover all erroneous payments . ssa commented on a draft of our report in a letter , dated july 16 , 1996 , and acknowledged that investigation of the productivity of securing information on former prisoners appears desirable and worthy of further examination . however , ssa expressed concerns about the availability of data , the potential negative effect of requests for more data on existing reporting arrangements with county and local jail officials , the cost - effectiveness of processing data on former prisoners who may no longer be receiving ssi payments , and other matters . ssa believes these concerns need to be resolved before implementing our recommendations . ( the full text of ssa's comments is included in app . it should not be difficult or time - consuming , therefore , for ssa to contact these officials and determine if information on former prisoners is available . in addition , to identify information on former prisoners , ssa need not establish that “the majority” of county and local jail systems have such information , given that the largest jail systems account for the majority of prisoners . during the course of its initiative , ssa expanded the number of agreements with local correctional facilities to report prisoner information . according to ssa , some of these facilities were initially reluctant to enter into these agreements because ssa does not have the authority to pay for this information . however , unlike information on current prisoners , which requires monthly or quarterly reporting , information on former prisoners only requires a onetime effort by the local jail systems . therefore , ssa need not assume that requesting such data will jeopardize existing agreements .