our report has been changed to reflect this . we disagree with ssa's statement that the headquarters reporting system is designed to capture the number and names of individuals . we found that the documents forwarded to headquarters and retained as system source documents do not routinely identify the name and number of individuals charging union time . we did not attempt to verify this figure . postal service records show that during fiscal year 1995 , union representatives at the postal service reported spending 1.7 million hours of official time on the early stages of grievance processing and handling . this number includes neither substantial amounts of official time spent on employee involvement programs similar to ssa's partnership activities , which are paid for by the postal service , nor official time spent on activities such as employee involvement training and ulp charges . table 2 shows the reported amount of time and cost devoted to union activities and the bargaining unit size of each organization . in fiscal year 1995 , the postal service reported spending $29 million in basic pay on grievance processing and handling for the 1.7 million hours . irs did not develop cost data for union operations . see appendix ii for additional discussion of union activities at other agencies . union operations in private industry vary widely . in addition to bargaining over working conditions , as ssa unions do , unions in private industry bargain over wages , hours , and benefits . in discussions with national labor relations board officials , we were told that some private - sector firms do not pay their employees' salaries for the time they spend performing union activities , and other firms pay for at least some of the time . for example , our review of 10 contracts revealed that 7 provided for employers to pay company employees , acting as union representatives , to perform certain union functions in addition to their company duties . a 1995 bna publication summarizing basic patterns in private industry union contracts reported that over 50 percent of the 400 labor contracts bna analyzed guaranteed pay to employees engaged in union activity on company time . bna reported that , in 22 percent of the cases with such pay guarantees , management limited the number of hours it would pay for . bna also reported that 22 percent of the contracts specifically prohibited conducting union activities on company time . private - sector employers negotiate company time with pay for union representatives to handle grievances more frequently than they do for contract negotiations . of the contracts reviewed by bna , 50 percent guaranteed pay for union representatives to present , investigate , or handle grievances . this practice was reported as occurring twice as often in manufacturing as in nonmanufacturing businesses . bna reported that only 9 percent of the contracts guaranteed pay for employees to negotiate contracts . forty - five percent of the private - sector contracts guaranteeing employees pay when they conduct union activities on company time place restrictions on representatives . bna reported that in 22 percent of the cases with such pay guarantees , management limited the number of hours that it would pay for .