i for more details. ) aap guidance recommends that most mothers and newborns have a 48-hour hospital stay to complete testing and monitoring . it further states that the length of stay should be a decision made by the mother and her doctor and not a policy established by health plans . “the fact that a short hospital stay for healthy term infants can be accomplished does not mean that it is appropriate for every mother and infant . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . they recognize that an early discharge may be acceptable for some women and newborns if appropriate follow - up services are promptly provided . consistent with aap / acog guidelines , states generally provide such exceptions where follow - up care , such as home visits , parent education , and performance of clinical tests , is available . states with maternity care requirements provide that the authority to make decisions on postpartum stays rests with the attending physician , patient , or both . in 11 states , early discharge is permitted only upon the recommendation of the attending physician and then only if the mother consents or is at least consulted . seven other states provide for the decision to be made by the attending physician , usually based on medical necessity or whether the mother and newborn meet the aap / acog guidelines . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . in kentucky , new york , and new jersey , the decision about when to go home rests solely with the mother . under the original maryland law , the insurer could choose to cover less than a 48- to 96-hour stay if a newborn met the aap / acog criteria for medical stability and at least one postpartum home visit ( including newborn screening ) was authorized . because the home visit was much less expensive than another day of hospital care , many insurers chose early discharge . this was of such concern to maryland legislators that the law was subsequently amended to provide that the decision regarding length of stay be made by the mother after conferring with her physician . where state requirements provide for physicians to decide how long a hospital stay is needed , a physician can determine , on the basis of medical necessity , that early discharge is not appropriate or a stay beyond the days stipulated in the law is required .