we did not verify the accuracy of the information provided . federal law does not prohibit such disclosure of ssns . brokers buy information from public and private sources in various markets throughout the nation . the information may include public records of bankruptcy , tax liens , civil judgments , criminal histories , deaths , real estate ownership , driving histories , voter registration , and professional licenses . this information may also include privately owned information such as telephone directories and copyrighted publications , which are often made public , and certain information from consumer credit reports . generally , each record provides details about the specific event for which it was created as well as some personal identifying data — for example , an individual's name ; date of birth ; current and prior addresses ; telephone number ; and , sometimes , ssn . an information broker official told us that not every record his organization buys includes an ssn and that public records are more likely to contain ssns than those from nonpublic sources . brokers may provide their services ( that is , information products ) to a variety of customers either over private networks or over the internet . brokers that provide information over private networks generally limit their services to businesses that establish accounts with them . brokers providing services over the internet generally offer their services to the public at large . law firms , businesses , law enforcement agencies , research organizations , and individuals are among those who use brokers' services . for example , lawyers , debt collectors , and private investigators may request information on an individual's bank accounts and real estate holdings for use in civil or divorce proceedings ; automobile insurers may want information on whether insurance applicants have been involved in accidents or have been issued traffic citations ; employers may want background checks on new hires ; pension plan administrators may want information to locate pension beneficiaries ; and individuals may ask for information to help locate birth parents . when requesting information , customers may ask for nationwide database searches or searches of only specific geographical areas . information brokers' databases can be searched by identifiers that may include ssns ; brokers may also include ssns along with information they provide customers . when possible , information brokers retrieve data by ssn because it is more likely to produce records unique to the individual than other identifiers are . three national credit bureaus serve as clearinghouses , receiving charge and payment transaction information from businesses that grant consumer credit and providing businesses consumer credit reports . officials representing a bank and a credit card company — businesses that provide credit — told us that because it serves their interests for credit bureaus to have the most to up - to - date consumer payment histories , businesses in their industries voluntarily report customers' charge and payment transactions , accompanied by ssns , to credit bureaus . ssns are one of the principal identifiers credit bureaus use to update individuals' credit records with the monthly reports of credit and payment activity creditors send them . in addition , credit bureaus use ssns provided by customers to retrieve credit reports on individuals .