to analyze h.r . 3728 and the companion district act we used , in part , a study of the bill that was done for dcrb by milliman & robertson , inc. , its actuarial consultants . somewhat smaller federal savings under the bill would be obtained with annual payments of $72.1 million and $92.1 million . in terms of the district's contributions as a percentage of payroll , the changes are less dramatic ( see table 4.2 ) . the effect of a constant federal payment of $52.1 million would be to increase the district's contributions as a percentage of payroll by about 5 percentage points from the 45 percent under h.r . given the district's current fiscal situation , however , a question arises as to the amounts that the district could realistically be expected to contribute in future years . for example , the 5-percentage point increase in the district's percentage of payroll in 2005 , with a constant $52.1 million federal payment , equates to an additional district contribution of about $45 million that year , for a total of $448.2 million . in contrast , the comparable increases under a constant federal payment of $92.1 million amount to a much more modest $13.1 million . ( see app . ii. ) however , an annual federal payment of $102.1 million — present value of about $1.46 billion — would also stabilize the district's contributions at about 45 percent of payroll . however , to ensure presidential approval of the reform act , the congress agreed to fund less than the full amount of these retirees' share: 80 percent of service retirements and 33-1 / 3 percent of disability retirements . this approach , however , inequitably burdens future taxpayers by requiring them to help eliminate a greater share of a liability incurred by much earlier generations . instead , the unfunded liability could be eliminated with annual federal payments of a constant amount . constant annual federal payments of about $102.1 million through 2035 would achieve the same results as the bill in terms of stabilizing the district's contributions at about 45 percent of payroll from the year 2005 through 2035 . also , such payments would cost the federal government $40 million less overall than the total federal payments under h.r . if the congress wishes to change the law to increase federal payments to the three district pension plans , it should consider authorizing a constant annual payment rather than the escalating payments provided for in h.r . when the congress created the district's plans for police officers and firefighters , teachers , and judges , it provided for funding them on a pay - as - you - go basis . among other things , the senate bill required annual federal payments of $80 million for 25 years and included tougher standards for disability benefits . the federal payments were intended to amortize the unfunded liability of about $1.05 billion for retirements that had occurred before home rule ; this liability was deemed to be the federal share of the total unfunded liability of about $2.09 billion that had been incurred up to that time .