see app . v for the distribution of enforcement actions by ins region . ins officials told us that relatively few worksite enforcement resources are assigned to agriculture because almost all of their investigations are complaint - driven and they receive relatively few complaints from agricultural employers . only about 5 percent of the 4,600 investigations completed in fiscal year 1996 involved employers in agricultural production or services . furthermore , fewer than 700 workers , about 4 percent of all employees at those worksites , were arrested during ins' enforcement operations at these agricultural worksites . even these numbers overstate the potential impact of ins activity on the need for h - 2a workers because about 40 percent of these “agricultural” employers appear to be employed in industries that are not defined as agricultural under h - 2a — landscapers , lawn maintenance firms , veterinarians , and kennels . ins officials told us that these totals represent a reduction rather than an increase in ins enforcement efforts directed at agricultural employers . until 1995 , the border patrol played a significant role in worksite enforcement on farms through “farm and ranch checks.” in fiscal year 1995 , most of these resources were refocused on explicit border control activities . this redirection of resources sharply reduced border patrol involvement in worksite enforcement — from approximately 30 percent of the total worksite enforcement resources to less than 5 percent . border patrol officials we talked with unanimously stated that with current resources their enforcement activities could have no significant impact on the agricultural workforce . officials told us that agricultural employers who comply with the law are not likely to be targeted for enforcement efforts , given the need to focus on apprehending aliens and identifying employers who have engaged in criminal acts . law - abiding agricultural employers are not a priority target for ins inspections . ins develops a national targeting plan annually to target worksite inspections in response to complaints or leads . the fiscal year 1997 plan identifies 15 industries in which large numbers of illegal aliens have been employed , 2 of which hire farmworkers — “general farm and field crops” and “farm labor and management.” ins focuses primarily on employers in these 15 industries that are “abusive” — that is , employers known to have intentionally hired illegal workers ; to have been involved in criminal violations like alien smuggling and harboring ; to be repeat offenders ; or to have subjected their employees to unlawfully substandard working conditions , housing , or wages . ins' secondary focus is on abusive employers in industries , other than these 15 , with histories of illegal immigration activity . the fiscal year 1997 plan for worksite enforcement was based on leads or complaints , targeting employers that are the subjects of a concrete allegation or for which evidence exists of abuse or violations of irca . major violators are employers in industries or locations with a history of reliance upon unauthorized labor who employ unauthorized foreign workers and violate criminal statutes , violate other regulatory requirements , or continually depend upon unauthorized labor .