pp . drucker , p.f . “the sickness of government.” the age of discontinuity: guidelines to changing our society . new york: harper and row , 1969 . pp . eggers , w.d. , and r. ng . ( 3 ) what are the federal policy implications of state and local social service privatization ? to answer these questions , we reviewed and synthesized selected studies and articles on social service privatization . in addition , we interviewed state and local officials in five states that have gained some experience in the privatization of social services ( california , massachusetts , texas , virginia , and wisconsin ) , as well as officials from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , national associations and advocacy groups , unions , and contractors . we focused on the four social service programs mentioned above . hhs establishes policies and oversees state administration of all four programs . appendix i contains a more complete discussion of our scope and methodology . the four social service programs included in our review — child care , child welfare services , child support enforcement , and the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant — provide a broad range of services and benefits for children and families . while each program is administered by hhs' administration for children and families , primary responsibility for operating these programs rests with state governments . within many states , local governments operate social service programs with considerable autonomy . the major goals , services , and federal funding for the four programs are described below . federally funded child care services consist primarily of subsidized care for children of low - income families while their parents are working , seeking work , or attending training or education . other subsidized child care activities include providing information , referrals , and counseling to help families locate and select child care programs and training for child care providers . ( 2 ) what are the key issues surrounding state and local privatized social services ? state child care agencies can provide child care directly , arrange for care with providers through contracts or vouchers , provide cash or vouchers in advance to families , reimburse families , or use other arrangements . two settings for which states pay for care are family day care , under which care is provided for a small group of children in the caregiver's home , and center care , under which establishments care for a group of children in a nonresidential setting , such as nonprofit centers sponsored by schools or religious organizations and for - profit centers that may be independent or members of a chain . in fiscal year 1996 , about $2 billion was distributed to states to assist low - income families obtain child care so they could work or attend training or education . the primary federal child care subsidy program is the child care development block grant ( ccdbg ) . under ccdbg , states are not required to provide state funds to match federal funding .