military officer . they are already familiar with the military corporate culture , which enhances their credibility and allows them to progress more rapidly into leadership positions . civilian graduates are less equipped to do so and , in many cases , have no interest in doing so.” “ graduates . seem to adjust better to field conditions when deployed for operations or exercises . among other topics , this course covers medical care while under fire , hostage survival , effects of ballistic wounds , and evidence preservation . the staff also provides consultation to law enforcement agencies . another mission of this center is maintaining the wound data and munitions effectiveness team , which contains information on the tactical engagement , weapons employed , resulting injuries , and treatment of approximately 8,000 vietnam combat casualties . its collection of photographs , x rays , recovered bullets , and other data is the only one of its kind . center for traumatic stress studies: this center conducts research , maintains archives of medical literature , and provides consultation for psychiatric responses to trauma and disasters . staff also collect on - site data to facilitate longitudinal follow - up on disasters and traumatic events . to illustrate , in 1992 a university psychiatrist traveled to florida within 48 hours of hurricane andrew to provide emotional assistance to base personnel and evacuees from homestead air base . to increase its knowledge in helping future victims , the university has surveyed participants in military engagements ( such as the gulf war ) and natural disasters ( such as hurricane andrew ) to identify their emotional problems and how to help them . centers for preventive medicine and public health: these centers develop databases and analytic methodologies , and prepare curricula for and evaluate processes and outcomes in clinical practice . they serve program managers and policymakers in dod , other federal agencies , local governments , and private organizations concerned with health policies and services . figure 3.1 shows these averages . in contrast , figure 3.2 shows that university students had average undergraduate gpas that were slightly below the national average , higher than army scholarship program entrants , and equivalent to navy scholarship program entrants . university graduates compare favorably with other medical school graduates in their performance on the united states medical licensing examination ( usmle ) and in their evaluations from internships at military medical treatment facilities . military medical commanders believe that university graduates perform as well or better clinically than other military physicians . dod data indicate that university graduates are cited for fewer adverse clinical privileging actions than other military physicians . all students seeking medical licensure take the three steps of the usmle , administered by the national board of medical examiners . part 1 tests the student's ability to apply knowledge of the basic biomedical sciences , part 2 assesses the student's application of clinical capabilities under supervision , and part 3 measures the candidate's use of medical knowledge deemed appropriate for the unsupervised practice of general medicine . the most recent university class to have completed all three parts of the usmle is the class that graduated in 1993 .