ii ) . in conducting the case studies , we primarily relied on the opinions of the officials we interviewed and the supporting documentation they provided . to select states to study , we first asked experts in education finance to identify states that had implemented finance equity reforms . then , for each state identified , we contacted state education officials or reviewed relevant materials on the state's school finance system to obtain information on the state's finance formulas , school finance legislation , revenue - raising strategies , and limitations , if any , on discretionary spending on local districts . the courts rejected two approaches passed by the texas state legislature before accepting a third , which has been in place since 1993 . key characteristics of the new approach are ( 1 ) a mechanism for equalizing property wealth among districts and ( 2 ) revenue limits for all districts through a cap on property tax rates . included in the approach is transferring part of wealthy districts' property tax revenue to less wealthy districts . districts were given a choice of five options for disposing of excess wealth . most chose to simply write a check to the state . caps were also placed on property tax rates . finally , the level of state support to districts was linked to a formula that accounted for the districts' revenue - raising ability and tax effort . texas officials interviewed , who included former legislators , state officials , educators , and others involved in the years of legal and political controversy and the results that followed , believed that the new system has achieved greater equity . however , they also cite several concerns that could undermine the state's efforts to achieve equity , such as taxpayer resistance to the higher property taxes that have resulted . funding for the 3.6 million students in texas's 1,046 school districts totaled $19.5 billion in school year 1993-94 . of this , $17.3 billion was budgeted by local school districts . the largest share of the district - budgeted revenue , 50.4 percent , came from localities . the remainder came from the state ( 41.6 percent ) and the federal government ( 8 percent ) . part of the remaining $2.2 billion was used for items not budgeted by local districts such as textbook purchases and state matching contributions to the teacher retirement fund ; the remainder was due to district underbudgeting of the revenue they actually received . between 1985 and 1995 , local funding increased by 117 percent , while state funding increased by 60 percent . at the state level , elementary and secondary education is the largest item in the state budget ( about 26 percent in fiscal year 1994 ) . the primary source of state revenue for education is the sales tax ; taxes on oil and gas production , corporation franchises , and tobacco and alcohol ; lottery proceeds , interest and dividends , funds from the available school fund,and other state fees and taxes provide the rest of the education revenue . at the local level , virtually all of the revenue is raised through property taxes .