( app . ii provides a detailed description of fda's report evaluation process. ) for years , fda's implementation and enforcement of the medical device reporting regulation have concerned the congress . studies issued by our office , the former office of technology assessment , and the office of inspector general of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) have found significant weaknesses in fda's ability to gather information about medical devices in use . in february 1985 , an infant was disconnected from its apnea monitor but the electrodes with the lead wires were left attached to the infant . a sibling plugged the lead into the power cord , electrocuting the infant . cdrh assembled a committee of experts to investigate the hazard . at that time , about 50,000 apnea monitors — of 20 different models — were on the market . the committee decided that a voluntary plan of action would be most effective because of the speed with which it could be implemented . in june 1985 , cdrh issued a safety alert summarizing the reported events and outlining steps to guard against future incidents . cdrh also sent letters to 31 manufacturers of breathing frequency monitors and heart monitors for home use requesting that each firm evaluate its device for the electrode problem and , when necessary , consider design changes to prevent insertion of the lead connectors into ac power cords or outlets . all 31 device firms either changed their lead designs or explained to cdrh why their device did not present a hazard . an fda analysis also shows that many other adverse event reports were used to resolve device problems . for example , fda reported that from 1985 through 1995 , 1,099 of its 4,365 classified recalls ( 25 percent ) were associated with event reports . fda also reports using information in adverse event reports for other health - related purposes , including identifying areas in which user education can be improved , analyzing premarket approval applications , developing medical device standards , and monitoring device problems in foreign countries . in the near future , cdrh expects to have better data on corrective actions taken by manufacturers in response to user facility reports . the final medical device reporting regulation requires manufacturers to list on the form 3500a a corrective action taken — such as a recall , repair , relabeling , or other modification — for each device associated with an adverse event report . according to a cdrh official , manufacturers are now also required to refer to the user facility's unique reporting number when submitting an adverse event report . maintaining reliable productivity indicators on the length of time fda takes to process , review , and initiate action on device problems and on the time that passes before manufacturers correct the problems would better ensure that serious device problems are receiving prompt attention . it would also allow fda to better measure its adverse event reporting system's performance as an early warning system . however , cdrh does not have statistics available on these areas of performance . thus , fda has no reliable way of knowing how long it takes to respond to reported device problems .