iii ) . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the commissioner of the food and drug administration , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . how should large image receptors be evaluated ? fda procedures currently require that phantom images be checked using the receptor that is more commonly used by the facility . since facilities use small image receptors for most mammograms , these receptors are typically tested during an inspection . although facilities may use large image receptors for some women , fda does not require that the large image receptor be tested and does not have specific criteria for evaluating the phantom images of the large receptor . inconsistent phantom image scoring and lack of standards for evaluating large image receptors can affect inspection results , as can be seen in the example of a 1995 inspection of a large mobile mammography facility headquartered in north carolina and operating in five states . the facility is reported to perform over 20,000 mammograms a year . a state inspector cited the facility for multiple problems based on the viewing conditions at the facility and images from the small receptor . although it was not required by fda , the inspector also evaluated the phantom images from the large image receptor and noted in the remarks section of the inspection report that , for three of four mammography units , these images did not pass the review . an fda inspector conducted a follow - up inspection , also using the viewing conditions at the facility and images from both the small and large image receptors . this inspector cited the facility for many violations related to both the small and large image receptors . finally , four reviewers at fda headquarters examined these same images away from the facility and together found fewer violations related to both the small and large image receptors than the state inspector and the fda inspector had found . the reviewers , however , did confirm the serious violations related to the large image receptor that were found by the state inspector and the fda inspector . although this facility was cited for serious violations related to the large image receptor as a result of the follow - up inspection , fda officials told us that , because of the lack of inspection criteria , imposing strong sanctions on the basis of phantom image failures from the large receptor could prove problematic . according to fda , standards for testing the large receptor have not yet been developed because the technical issues relating to the receptor have not yet been resolved by the scientific and medical community . we discussed this case with senior fda officials , who said that they plan to both provide additional training and guidance to minimize the variability in phantom image scoring and study the development of standards for evaluating images from the large image receptor . another issue raised by the inspections of the facility discussed above is how to proceed if the phantom image test suggests serious problems with image quality . fda views phantom image failures as early indications of potential problems deserving further investigation .