this was true for all the health categories . the weighed average cost for beneficiaries who returned to ffs was 79 percent more than those who stayed on in an hmo . ( see table 8. ) the low prior costs of those who enrolled in an hmo and remained there for more than 6 months are in sharp contrast to costs for those who stayed in ffs continuously for the 24-month period ( as shown in table 4 ) . longer - term hmo enrollees had far lower preenrollment costs than the ffs stayers , with cost differences ranging from 20 percent lower among beneficiaries with multiple chronic conditions to 34 percent lower for those with none of the conditions . compared with healthier beneficiaries , california medicare beneficiaries with selected chronic conditions were less likely to enroll in hmos and more likely to rapidly disenroll from hmos . this pattern was evident despite the fact that california hmos' coverage of more services ( particularly preventive care and prescription drugs ) with less cost - sharing would be expected to attract beneficiaries with chronic conditions . furthermore , the debate about the better health status of hmo enrollees hinges on a subtle point , but one that has significant cost implications . that is , beneficiaries grouped within health status categories — the presence of zero , one , or multiple chronic conditions — incur a range of costs depending on the severity of their chronic condition ( s ) or the presence of other conditions ( not accounted for in this analysis ) . those at the low end tend to be the new hmo enrollees , whereas those at the high end are likely to remain in ffs . thus , this study helps explain a pattern of favorable selection in california medicare hmos despite the presence of some new enrollees with chronic conditions . we provided copies of a draft of this report to health care analysts at hcfa , the physician payment review commission , and the prospective payment assessment commission . they generally agreed with the information presented and offered some technical suggestions that we incorporated where appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to interested parties and make copies available to others on request . please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7119 if you or your staff have any questions . other major contributors to this report include rosamond katz , robert deroy , and rajiv mukerji . this appendix describes our ( 1 ) scope and data sources , ( 2 ) methodology for identifying medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) beneficiaries with selected chronic conditions , and ( 3 ) methodology for analyzing the health maintenance organization ( hmo ) enrollment and disenrollment patterns of ffs beneficiaries . our study is an analysis of hmo enrollment and disenrollment patterns in 14 counties in california from january 1993 through june 1995 . we chose california because it has been the hub of medicare hmo activity nationwide .