hewitt associates . this company collects information on benefits provided by major u.s. employers ( many with over 5,000 employees ) and has published reports on major companies' benefits . the robert wood johnson foundation . the foundation studied health insurance coverage in 10 states by surveying over 22,000 establishments . the bureau of the census' cps . the cps is a nationally representative survey that is the official source of government statistics on employment and unemployment . every march the bureau collects additional information on health insurance coverage . we used the cps to measure private insurance coverage and private dependent insurance coverage in 1989 , 1991 , 1993 , and 1995 . because of certain methodological changes implemented in march 1995 and continued in march 1996 ( which affected the 1994 and 1995 data ) , including changes in the questionnaire , we considered it more appropriate to compare private insurance coverage , rather than make such comparisons for employment - based insurance coverage in 1995 to earlier years . we did not independently verify data from these sources . the private surveys are proprietary , and dol and the bureau of the census conduct their own validity and reliability checks of their data . we checked some of our cps analyses against published census data and have consulted with the bureau of the census to ensure accurate analyses of its data files . for the march 1995 cps , the bureau of the census implemented a number of changes in an effort to improve the accuracy and ease of administering the survey . these changes include moving to a computer - assisted telephone interviewing system and reordering and rewording survey questions on health insurance . the earlier questionnaire asked people ( 1 ) if they had private insurance , ( 2 ) if they were the policyholder , ( 3 ) if the insurance was obtained through their employment , and ( 4 ) who else was covered as a dependent . the new questionnaire asks ( 1 ) if they have private insurance through an employer or union ; ( 2 ) who is the policyholder ; ( 3 ) who else is covered ; and ( 4 ) if they have purchased individual health insurance and , if so , additional people who are covered by this policy . these changes appear to affect how people answer questions about their insurance coverage , which can affect estimates of insurance coverage . these changes also can affect the comparability of 1994 and subsequent years' estimates with previous years' estimates . when the 1994 data were released , officials at census stated that the 1994 estimate of overall private insurance agreed well with previous years' estimates . however , the number of people who report that their private insurance coverage comes from their employer or union increased , while the number who reported that their private insurance was individually purchased decreased . therefore , because these apparent differences may be due to the questionnaire change — rather than actual changes in the composition of private health insurance coverage — comparisons of employment - based insurance coverage in 1994 and 1995 with previous years may not be appropriate to understand trends in coverage .