iv. ) for various reasons , several states were unable to provide details on state - retained funds , subgrant data , or both for 1 or more years . we reviewed title iii of the goals 2000: educate america act and analyzed regulations pertinent to the program . this review provided the foundation from which we analyzed the information collected . we surveyed goals 2000 coordinators in all states . we also collected national , state , and district documents about the program , including a description of each of the 16,375 subgrants reported made with funds from fiscal years 1994 through 1997 . to obtain in - depth and specific information about how the program has been used to promote education reform , we made site visits to 10 states , where we interviewed state and district officials . we also obtained and reviewed various state and federal audit reports relevant to the examination of goals 2000 expenditures and obtained financial data from states on the funds they elected to retain at the state level . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between november 1997 and october 1998 . ( see app . i for further details of our scope and methodology and a list of states we visited. ) the goals 2000: educate america act , which became law in 1994 and was amended in 1996 , is intended to promote coordinated improvements in the nation's education system at the state and local levels . to comply with this component of the law , states' subgrant programs require districts to compete directly against one another for funding or compete against a standard set of criteria established by the state to determine levels of funding for individual applicants . some states weigh districts' subgrant proposals against one another and against standard criteria . prior to the 1996 amendments , goals 2000 was criticized as being too directive and intrusive in state and local education activities . the act initially required that states submit their education reform plans to the secretary of education for review and approval before they could become eligible for grants . the omnibus consolidated rescissions and appropriations act of 1996 amended the law by providing an alternative grant application process that did not include the secretary of education's approval of a state's education reform plan and eliminated some requirements for state reporting of information to the department of education . the amendment also allowed local districts in certain states to apply directly to the department for goals 2000 funds , even if their state did not participate at the state level . as a result of the 1996 changes , the goals 2000 program is essentially a funding - stream grant program with fiscal objectives . these types of grants differ from performance - related grants , which have more immediate , concrete , and readily measurable objectives . funding - stream grant programs often confine the federal role to providing funds and give broad discretion to the grantee . they are also the least likely of various grant types to have performance information .