ii ) . the dudley street neighborhood — located about 2 miles south of boston's major financial and cultural districts — was once a thriving business and residential district . over a period of nearly 30 years , the neighborhood was effectively isolated from the rest of the city and experienced financial disinvestment , arson , influxes of poor residents , and illegal garbage dumping . twenty - seven percent of the households in the neighborhood receive public assistance , compared with 12 percent in boston as a whole . the dudley street neighborhood initiative ( dsni ) began in 1984 as a nonprofit community organizing and planning entity . it collaborates with neighborhood residents , nonprofit organizations , foundations , and city agencies to meet its planned housing , economic , and social service objectives ( see app . 8101 et . seq .

 ) , a public nonprofit corporation . nrc's mission included the revitalization of declining lower - income neighborhoods and the provision of affordable housing . nrc works with local organizations that are known collectively as neighborworks . there are several different types of neighborworks organizations , including neighborhood housing services ( nhs ) . nhss are partnerships of local business leaders , local government officials , and neighborhood residents that function as nrc's main vehicle for revitalizing distressed neighborhoods . a major new federal initiative to assist urban and rural communities in their revitalization efforts — the empowerment zones and enterprise communities ( ez / ec ) program — was adopted in 1993 under the omnibus budget reconciliation act . this program promotes the comprehensive revitalization of distressed communities by funding broad , community - based strategic plans . the bulk of the benefits under the program go to nine areas — six urban and three rural — designated as empowerment zones . considerably fewer benefits are available to the 95 areas — 65 urban and 30 rural — designated as enterprise communities . although the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and the department of agriculture were responsible for designating the areas , the president also established the community enterprise board — a federal , cabinet - level entity — to assist in implementing the ez / ec program . the board is composed of the vice president , who serves as its chair ; the president's assistants for domestic policy and economic policy , who each serve as vice chairs ; the secretaries of 10 cabinet departments ; and the heads of several other agencies . in addition , the board is tasked with advising the president on how federal programs can be better coordinated across agencies to respond to the needs of distressed communities . community development initiatives typically rely on a patchwork of different funding and technical support sources from both the public and the private sectors . federal funds generally flow through state and local governments in the form of block grants or go directly to community organizations in the form of categorical , or program - specific , funding . additional funding — often to support specific programs or projects — is available directly from state and local governments . private funding and technical assistance come from a myriad of sources , including intermediaries and foundations .