( see app . ii for a description of the different financial risks ccrcs assume. ) in the 11 ccrcs we visited — all of which assume residents' risk for long - term care costs — entry fees ranged from a low of $34,000 for a studio apartment for one individual to a high of $439,600 for a two - bedroom home for a couple . monthly fees in the 11 communities ranged from $1,383 for an individual to $4,267 for a couple . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . ccrc officials told us that they encourage interaction because social isolation is associated with poorer health and functioning among the elderly . they also said that the physical layout of ccrcs fosters social interaction and is an integral part of the ccrc model . residents live next door to each other and may see each other frequently through visits or while eating in congregate settings , checking mail , and engaging in a wide range of ccrc activities . recreational , educational , cultural , and volunteer activities are frequently initiated , planned , and organized by residents . officials said that arranging and participating in these kinds of activities are an important part of residents' social interaction in the community . activities may include on - campus lectures , movies , musical performances , woodworking , flower arranging , photography , and civic and charitable activities . many of the ccrcs we visited attempt to maintain their residents' health and functioning through disease prevention and early detection of health problems . these activities are carried out by nurses , social workers and physicians who may be either affiliated with or independent of the ccrc . most ccrcs we visited encourage immunizations against common preventable diseases , such as flu and pneumonia , to reduce illness and possible fatalities . they may encourage immunization in a number of ways , including inoculation clinics , seminars , distribution of printed materials , and reminders from medical staff when a resident makes an outpatient visit or has a medical examination . most of the ccrcs we visited encourage early detection of health problems through periodic medical exams and other health assessments . ccrc officials told us that these exams and assessments help staff and residents to be more proactive in using effective medical treatments and changing lifestyles to slow or reverse the loss of good health and function . a combination of physicians , nurse practitioners , and social workers may conduct elements of these exams and assessments , which may include periodic inventories of prescription drugs used by a resident to assess potential unwanted side effects from drug interactions , examination of an individual's ease in walking or getting out of a chair , and observation of changes in an individual's mental state . ccrc medical exams may include testing blood pressure for hypertension and blood glucose levels for diabetes .