( app . i contains detailed information on how these two sites were selected. ) ntpic is one of 14 substate grantees in tennessee . incorporated as a nonprofit , private organization in 1992 , ntpic has a staff of 55 responsible for providing services for edwaa , other jtpa , and selected federal programs for 11 counties in the state . our case studies are not generalizable to all employers . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from june 1995 to march 1996 . because no comprehensive data exist on the number and characteristics of u.s. training programs , accounting for every training program that exists is impossible . however , the literature revealed three broad contexts of training programs by funding source: federally funded , state - funded , and privately funded ( by an employer , a group of employers , or an employer in collaboration with a union ) . typically , federally funded programs target specific populations of unemployed or underemployed workers ; state - and privately funded programs target employers and their existing workforce ( and in some cases , new hires ) . we narrowed down the selection of programs and sites within each of these different types and selected six sites , which are listed in table i.1 . federally funded ( jtpa title iii ) . we reported in 1995 that about 163 federal employment training programs are operated by 15 different agencies . the largest single federally funded training program was operated by labor under jtpa . at a cost of almost $5 billion in fiscal year 1995 , this program targeted specific groups of unemployed workers for training and other assistance they needed to obtain stable employment . about $1.2 billion of this funding was targeted to dislocated workers — those who become unemployed due to plant closings or permanent layoffs . nta said one of the key benefits it provides to small employers is doing the paperwork for them . nta officials believed that the primary hurdles to participation in such programs are the application and monitoring procedures . they have seen employers walk away from a nearly completed application process , exasperated by rule changes and the need to continually revise proposals . the three employer surveys illustrate many of these definitional differences . each survey asked employers about training and generally found that larger work places provide more training than smaller work places . differences in survey sampling frames and methodology , format , and scope , however , make a detailed comparative analysis difficult . regarding sampling frame and methodology , all three of the recent employer surveys were a sample of business establishments , which bls defines as economic units that produce goods or services and are engaged predominantly in one type of economic activity . the use of establishments could be problematic because a small establishment could actually be part of a large employer or a fairly large establishment could actually be part of a relatively small employer . finally , an establishment and an employer could be one and the same . moreover , the universes from which the samples of establishments were drawn differed , as did the sampling methodology .