ii ) . the lenders we spoke with agreed that fdlp loan consolidation problems have created difficulties for them . how have these problems affected lenders ? what steps are education and eds taking to correct these problems ? as agreed with your offices , we judgmentally selected four ffelp lenders and reviewed between 8 and 13 examples from each lender that illustrated problems lenders said they were experiencing in the direct loan consolidation process — a total of 40 examples . we reviewed supporting documents and discussed each example with representatives from the lenders . these officials also generally described their problems with the consolidation process . we also met with education and eds representatives to discuss the problems that lenders raised , the specific examples the lenders provided , the reasons for the problems , and the steps education and eds said they were taking to address the problems . the information regarding these examples and the problems they illustrate are specific to the lenders we contacted and cannot be generalized to all ffelp lenders , nor can we make judgments regarding the overall frequency or extent of these problems in the program as a whole . to avoid duplicating work currently being performed by education's office of the inspector general , we did not conduct an evaluation of the entire fdlp consolidation program . we conducted our review from september 1997 to march 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . fdlp loan consolidation begins with a borrower sending eds an application for a consolidation loan . the borrower lists each loan he or she wants to consolidate and the party holding or servicing the loan — the fdlp servicing center for fdlp loans and private lenders for ffelp loans . for fdlp loans , eds obtains balance information from the servicing center . for ffelp loans , eds sends a verification certificate to each lender to verify each loan and the amount owed . lenders complete the verification information and return the certificates . upon receiving and validating all loan verification information , eds sends a promissory note to the borrower for signature . after the borrower signs and returns the note , eds pays off each lender for the underlying ffelp loans and records the consolidation loan for servicing purposes . according to education officials , eds sends new loan transactions to the central fdlp database , managed by computer data systems , incorporated / afsa data corporation ( cdsi / afsa ) , the education contractor that services all direct loans . fdlp consolidations were first made available in march 1995 when cdsi / afsa operated the consolidation program along with its other direct loan servicing responsibilities . education subsequently awarded a contract to eds to take over fdlp loan origination operations , including consolidation processing . eds began operating the consolidation program and processing fdlp consolidation loans in september 1996 . eds' responsibilities included obtaining verification certificate information , generating promissory notes , ensuring that the promissory notes were returned , and making payments to lenders . but beginning shortly after september 1996 , a backlog of unprocessed consolidation loan applications developed and grew steadily .