ii . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable donna e. shalala , secretary of health and human services ; the honorable nancy - ann min deparle , administrator of hcfa ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7114 or laura a. dummit on ( 202 ) 512-7119 . other major contributors to this report included james c. cosgrove , hannah f. fein , jim s. hahn , and richard m. lipinski . we developed a methodology to estimate how much medicare would have spent on each medicare+choice plan enrollee if he or she received services under the traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) arrangement in 1998.the difference between the estimated ffs costs of a plan's enrollees and medicare's payments to that plan is a measure of excess ( or under - ) payment . the aggregate excess payments we report are the sum of the excess payments made to the 210 plans in our sample . these plans served approximately 87 percent of all beneficiaries in medicare+choice plans in 1998 . we excluded plans that had relatively few new enrollees ( typically , small plans ) , so our aggregate excess payment amount is not an estimate of national excess payments . to conduct our analysis , we obtained hcfa data from the following sources: ( 1 ) the standard analytic file , a repository of claims information ; ( 2 ) the continuous medicare history sample ( cmhs ) , a database that contains longitudinal cost and enrollment information on a sample of medicare beneficiaries from 1974 to the present ; ( 3 ) the group health plan file , a database that contains health plan enrollment information ; and ( 4 ) the 1997 adjusted average per capita cost ( aapcc ) rate book and accompanying worksheets , which contain summary demographic and cost information on medicare beneficiaries in each county , and the 1998 payment rate file . we classified medicare+choice enrollees into two groups — survivors ( beneficiaries who did not die in 1998 ) and decedents ( beneficiaries who died in 1998 ) — and developed slightly different methodologies to estimate ffs costs for each group . although relatively few beneficiaries die each year , their health care costs before death tend to be high and may follow a different pattern than other beneficiaries' costs . we then aggregated the estimated ffs costs by plan and compared them to medicare+choice payments to estimate excess plan payments . to estimate the ffs costs of plan enrollees who survived 1998 , we analyzed the 1997 ffs costs of beneficiaries who switched from ffs to a plan between 1997 and 1998 . we then extrapolated from their cost patterns to estimate the ffs costs of all plan enrollees .