( see fig . historically , hcfa has done little to address beneficiaries' need for comparable and unbiased information about medicare managed care plans . in 1996 , we reported that beneficiaries received little or no comparable information on medicare health maintenance organizations and that the lack of information standards made it difficult for beneficiaries to compare plans' member literature . at that time , we recommended that hcfa produce plan comparison charts and require plans to use standard formats and terminology in key aspects of their marketing materials . when mcos did include the addendum , the document did not always clearly indicate that its information superseded the information contained in other documents . in addition , some mcos did not provide dates on their literature , which obscured the fact that the literature was outdated . adequate preenrollment benefit information will become even more crucial in 2001 , as bba's annual enrollment provisions begin to take effect in 2002 and medicare beneficiaries are no longer able to disenroll on a monthly basis . to help beneficiaries make informed choices , bba requires hcfa to provide beneficiaries with summary plan information before the annual november enrollment period . furthermore , new regulations now require mcos to issue letters by mid - october each year describing benefit changes that will be effective january 1 of the following year . mcos must send these annual notification letters to all enrollees , and to any prospective enrollees upon request . however , hcfa has not required mcos to provide more complete member literature prior to enrollment . as a result , beneficiaries still might not have the information they need to make sound enrollment choices . additionally , beneficiaries enrolling in plans before 2002 may be unaware that their plans may be terminating services shortly after the beneficiaries have enrolled . a plan must notify its members at least 60 to 90 days before it ends services . however , there is no requirement that a terminating plan stop advertising and enrolling new members , with the result that in 1998 , some beneficiaries unknowingly joined plans that soon exited the medicare program . for example , one mco notified its members in may 1998 of its intent to end services in several ohio counties . the mco continued to advertise and enroll new beneficiaries without informing them that plan services would end on december 31 , 1998 . after inquiries from beneficiaries , the mco ceased marketing activities in july . although these marketing activities angered many beneficiaries , the mco was operating within hcfa's notification requirements . some beneficiaries do not receive important information about plan benefits and restrictions even after they have enrolled in a plan . because hcfa's instructions regarding benefit disclosure are vague , mcos vary in the amount of information they provide to beneficiaries . some organizations we reviewed provided relatively complete descriptions of plan coverage in a member policy booklet or similar document . however , other mcos did not disclose important restrictions in any member literature . in fact , mcos that adopt hcfa's suggested disclosure language will send beneficiaries to an information dead end .