each has developed a network of providers . for example , the swedishamerican health alliance system includes 3 hospitals and 22 primary care sites in the rockford metropolitan area and operates or is affiliated with many retail pharmacies , acute - care centers , and home - care and long - term care facilities in the rockford area . ( see fig . veterans living in urban areas with no va medical facilities , such as salem , oregon , often travel long distances to obtain va health care . private providers are often nearby . va operates no hospital or outpatient clinic in the salem primary metropolitan statistical area , which encompasses two counties with about 46,000 veterans . the salem metropolitan area , situated in va's portland , oregon , service area , covers 27 counties in northwest oregon and southwest washington . in 1993 , about 600 veterans from the salem metropolitan area received va inpatient services , and about 2,700 received va outpatient services . these veterans had to travel from 20 to over 70 miles to get to the portland facility . many private medical facilities are located in the salem metropolitan area , typically , according to officials of these facilities , within 20 minutes of salem residents . one of oregon's largest hospitals — a 454-bed facility that serves as a referral point for smaller hospitals in surrounding communities — is located within the salem city limits , and there are three smaller hospitals in the metropolitan area as well . physicians are widely distributed and within easy reach of most residents . in addition , the area has several private - sector managed care plans that have developed networks of providers to make care convenient for their enrollees . ods health plans , for example , offers its enrollees a choice of 4 hospitals and 56 primary care sites in salem . ( see fig . veterans living in rural areas served by a single va medical center , such as central georgia , often travel long distances to obtain care in va facilities because such facilities often serve large geographic areas . private facilities scattered throughout the rural areas may be more convenient . va operates a medical center in dublin , georgia , a rural community about 135 miles southeast of atlanta . the medical center is the only va medical facility in a 52-county area with about 130,000 veterans . the facility provides primary and secondary medical , surgical , and psychiatric care , as well as extended - care services . in 1993 , about 3,700 veterans in the dublin service area received va inpatient services , and about 14,000 received va outpatient services . the veterans came from as far away as 70 miles to the north , 150 miles to the east , 100 miles to the south , and 140 miles to the west . moreover , veterans needing highly specialized care are referred to the va medical center in augusta , georgia , about a 2-1 / 2-hour drive from dublin .