ii ) . irs made several general comments primarily concerning technical terms . irs pointed out the distinction between the tax - favored status of 401 ( k ) plans and the tax - deferred status of 457 plans . we clarified these differences throughout the report . irs emphasized the fact that 457 plan deferrals may be treated as invested in a certain way , but in fact there is no requirement to invest such amounts . as a result , if the sponsor becomes insolvent , the rights of participants in a 457 plan are no greater than other general , unsecured creditors . irs also pointed out that most state and local governments have basic pension plans for employees and 457 plans are additional plans . we refer to them as supplemental plans to reflect this relationship . irs suggested that we should clarify that only state and local governments can offer nonqualified plans to their rank - and - file employees , which we did . irs clarified some features of rabbi trusts that we did not include in the report , though the major feature of a rabbi trust — the inability of the sponsor to have access to the assets therein — is the focus of chapter 3 . irs also made technical comments that we incorporated into our report where appropriate . the mere promise of the employer to pay will have been fulfilled . additionally , under the qualified plan rules , a transfer of nonqualified , unfunded plan amounts into a qualified , funded plan could disqualify the qualified plan and make funds in it immediately taxable to the participants . if a participant cannot transfer the deferred amounts to another 457 plan or chooses not to do so , he or she must , after leaving employment , select a date to begin receiving benefits . selecting the date may be difficult because the employee's retirement date may be years in the future . under current law , potential bankruptcies and financial difficulties of other state and local governments pose similar risks to the salary deferrals that employees have made under 457 plans . apart from the greater risk to plan participants , as compared with other salary reduction plans , employees who participate in 457 plans are treated differently from those in 401 ( k ) and 403 ( b ) plans . for example , as a result of irc provisions , the maximum annual amount that may be deferred under an eligible 457 plan is notably less than the maximum annual amount that may be contributed to 401 ( k ) and 403 ( b ) plans . further , those deferred amount limits are not indexed for inflation . this is particularly noteworthy because a 457 plan is often the only deferred compensation plan available to most state and local employees to supplement their regular government pension . other disadvantages occur because of differences between nonqualified , unfunded and qualified , funded plans . for example , participants who leave employment before retirement have limited portability for their funds .