( see app . our work was conducted between january and may 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . studies have shown that uninsured children are less likely than insured children to get needed health and preventive care . the lack of such care can adversely affect children's health status throughout their lives . this means that poor children under 13 years old are now eligible and , year by year , more poor children will become eligible until all poor children under 19 years old will be eligible in 2002 . states have the option to expand age and income eligibility beyond this mandate for pregnant women , infants , or children , and 40 states have done so . ( see table ii.2 for states that have expanded eligibility beyond federal requirements. ) because children on afdc are entitled to medicaid coverage , census assigns medicaid coverage to afdc children even if their parents do not report them as receiving medicaid . this partially explains why medicaid coverage may have appeared to decrease . department of health and human services' data also show a small drop in the average monthly enrollment of children in afdc between calendar years 1993 and 1994 , although because of the differences between months included in calendar years and fiscal years , the drop does not show up in fiscal year data until fiscal year 1995 . in fiscal year 1995 , average monthly enrollment of children continued to drop . medicaid coverage also may have appeared to decrease because census changed the sample frame — or types of families that census interviews — from one based on the 1980 census to one based on the 1990 census . because the march 1995 cps was a transitional one for the sample frame , half the families were chosen based on the 1980 frame and half were chosen based on the 1990 frame . the percentage of children on medicaid was lower in the half chosen from the 1990 frame ( 22.3 percent ) than the half chosen from the 1980 frame ( 23.4 percent ) . while the sample chosen from the 1990 frame should be a more accurate report of medicaid coverage , the differences between the two parts of the sample indicate that reported differences between 1993 and 1994 medicaid coverage levels may be due in part to sampling frame changes rather than actual changes in coverage . other types of health insurance coverage did not appear to be affected much by sampling frame differences . health insurance coverage estimates for workers with private insurance or with champus were almost the same in the two halves of the sample frame . another issue with the 1993 estimate of children with medicaid coverage — which census informed us has been resolved — concerns miscoding . last year , census officials discovered some children appeared to be miscoded as receiving medicaid . census officials attempted to fix this through editing the cps data tape , but the edited 1993 data tape may still contain inadvertently included data that show some children in the group with medicaid who should not be in that group . according to census , the coding issue was resolved for the 1994 estimates .