ii ) . the basic view was that there seems to be little reason to put new incentives in place to reallocate capital from its existing uses . moving beyond the economic analysis framework implies that the issue becomes one of competing political values about how to allocate resources . in our discussions with infrastructure commission officials , it was noted that the rationale for the proposals was based more on “policy” considerations than on a strictly economic justification . in this regard , the infrastructure commission's rationale seems more rooted in the view that capital should be reallocated to public investment ( in infrastructure ) , and the proposed entities and incentives are justified as an effort to implement that objective . this means that the justification for an expanded government role to encourage investment in infrastructure can depend on the values expressed by the voters . in other words , if individuals perceive a problem with infrastructure and want it to be addressed , then government may be chosen as the means to meet this demand . the institutions and public processes for making infrastructure investment decisions should then be the focus of analysis and debate . private pension plan managers and financial market experts we spoke with confirmed that private pension plans are not active investors in the domestic infrastructure finance market for many of the reasons that the infrastructure commission and others cited . for example , they noted the lack of available investment opportunities at competitive rates of return . some market participants suggested a role for defined contribution pension plans and the desirability of finding “niches” for pension plan investment in infrastructure . their points seem broadly in line with some of the proposals that the infrastructure commission made . other market participants expressed concern about efforts to induce a reallocation of pension capital . some pension plan managers were concerned that pressures to invest in infrastructure or other etis would ultimately affect their ability to comply with their fiduciary responsibilities under erisa . they believed that even dol's interpretive bulletin 94-1 ( which states that the selection of an eti will not violate erisa rules if the general fiduciary standards are met ) did not provide any new information and that dol's interpretation would simply subject the private pension plans to a higher level of government scrutiny . other experts noted there are alternative mechanisms that do not involve pension plans but may help increase infrastructure investment . earlier , we discussed the fundamental disincentive for pension plan investment in infrastructure that results from the tax - exempt status of the plans and the use of tax - exempt municipal bonds as a common vehicle to finance infrastructure . the financial return to the pension plan is simply too low , which leads to concerns , as the counsel to the infrastructure commission noted , in evaluating whether these investments meet fiduciary standards . in our discussions with market participants , other disincentives for pension plan involvement were noted . in many respects , the infrastructure commission's proposals attempt to respond to these concerns .