iii ) . michigan's comments largely focused on the implementation of initiatives taken in 1998 to correct problems that we discuss in the report . ii through app . v ) ; texas provided oral comments . in general , hcfa and the states concurred with our findings and recommendations and cited steps being taken to strengthen enforcement of medicare and medicaid requirements . they also suggested technical changes , which we included in the report where appropriate . hcfa commented that our findings underscore the need for the agency's recent initiatives and will help sharpen the focus on areas that still need to be addressed . in its response ( see app . ii ) , hcfa generally agreed with our four recommendations and cited specific steps that it was planning to address them . hcfa concurred with our recommendation to shorten the delay in adjudicating appeals but also noted that it does not oversee the department's appeals board . hcfa pointed out that the president's fiscal year 2000 budget includes funds to double the number of administrative law judges that hear appeals for the board . we recognize that hcfa does not have administrative oversight of appeals board activities , but it does have the key role in monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of civil monetary penalties as a sanction . our recommendation was made with this latter role in mind . regarding our recommendation for a better management information system , hcfa stated that a major system redesign is being undertaken . hcfa stated that the redesign was a long - term project but that it had plans for interim steps to make the existing system more useful to both state and hcfa offices . also , concerning our recommendation to improve its referral process , hcfa indicated that it would reiterate to the states the need to use civil monetary penalties in serious cases of past noncompliance . hcfa also concurred with two specific steps that we recommended to strengthen termination as a sanction but did not concur with the third — using a longer reasonable assurance period before reinstating the home . hcfa pointed out that a long reasonable assurance period would not be appropriate if the home were terminated because it ran out of time correcting a minor deficiency that was corrected shortly after termination . this recommendation was based on evidence that a short reasonable assurance period appears to be given without attention to a home's past performance . for example , four of the six reinstated homes in our sample were given reasonable assurance periods of 30 days or less . most had repeated and serious deficiencies — those causing actual harm to patients . our earlier work in california also showed that reinstated homes were often cited soon after reinstatement with new deficiencies that harmed residents . the intent of this recommendation is to help accomplish the stated purpose of the reasonable assurance provision — that there be some assurance that the cause for termination has been removed and will not recur . in response to hcfa's comment , we revised the recommendation to clarify this intent .