( see app . ii for a copy of the public health service's comments. ) the public health service did not agree , however , that either nci or the clinical investigators were remiss for not ensuring that concurrent medications were recorded on research forms . nci and calgb documents provided that data on concurrent medications would be recorded on research forms . this allegation was echoed in the popular media . this report responds to your request that we provide further information about the nci - sponsored clinical trials of hydrazine sulfate . it provides background on the trials , including information on protocol design and data management procedures . it also discusses how nci and the trials' investigators dealt with the issue of potential incompatibility with certain agents , the extent to which patients may have received these agents , and how this issue was reported . to obtain information for this report , we reviewed nci's policy guidance for conducting clinical trials of investigational agents . we also reviewed agency memorandums pertaining to protocol development for the hydrazine sulfate clinical trials and related correspondence . for each of the hydrazine sulfate clinical trials , we visited the research facilities and reviewed a sample of the research records documenting patient medications , including concurrent antiemetic ( antinauseant and antivomiting ) and barbiturate medications . we discussed the conduct of these trials with nci officials and investigators , food and drug administration ( fda ) officials , and proponents of hydrazine sulfate therapy to obtain their perspectives on the issues involved . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is in appendix i . nci , within the national institutes of health ( nih ) , public health service , department of health and human services , is the world's largest sponsor of clinical trials in cancer treatment research . nci spends about 20 percent of its research budget on clinical trials . using its clinical trials network that includes cooperative groups , nci funds therapeutic research that includes evaluating the safety and efficacy of investigational drugs in large multicenter clinical trials . nci also sponsors therapeutic drug development through the submission of investigational new drug ( ind ) applications to fda . fda is responsible for ensuring the safety of the public in matters related to clinical research with investigational drugs . fda regulations define the terms under which clinical research may proceed . through the inds , fda reviews the experimental rationale for conducting clinical drug trials , including results of animal toxicology studies , manufacturing data , purity and stability information , and an initial plan for clinical investigation . the responsibility for monitoring the trials rests with the sponsor . unexplained weight loss and physical deterioration of the body ( cachexia ) commonly accompany advanced cancer . moreover , cachexia is associated with decreased survival . for example , data have shown that in patients with lung cancer , weight loss is associated with a 50-percent reduction in survival time . joseph gold , m.d. , director of the syracuse cancer research institute in new york , proposed a theory to explain why cachexia commonly accompanies advanced cancer .