( see app . i for more detail on our methodology. ) one reason for doing so was to reduce the costly fee - based payments for nursing services . the kansas city missouri hospital , on the other hand , terminated its hbhc program in 1994 and referred some of its hbhc patients to community - based providers . a former hbhc official told us that hospital administrators believed that it was less costly to pay for community - based services than for an hbhc program . respondents to our questionnaire also expressed very different views regarding costs and why they either have or do not have an hbhc program . over three - fourths of the questionnaire respondents with an hbhc program stated that one reason their medical center has an hbhc program is that it is less costly than purchasing fee - based services . medicare has the primary responsibility for ensuring that quality care is furnished under its home health care benefit . medicare requires community - based providers to have internal quality assurance programs . moreover , medicare requires va physicians referring patients to prepare and review plans of care . all hbhc programs are accredited by the joint commission on accreditation of healthcare organizations ( jcaho ) and are subject to a performance review every 3 years . jcaho staff apply standards contained in their accreditation manual for home care to evaluate how well the home health care provider assessed the patient's service needs , planned for the patient's care , and monitored the patient's response to the care provided . before 1995 , jcaho's reviews did not measure actual outcomes of care but instead focused on processes and the capacity of a provider to deliver quality care . jcaho's 1995 standards , however , place more emphasis on outcomes of care . community - based home health care providers that are certified to treat medicare beneficiaries are assessed at least once every 15 months by a state survey agency ( usually a component of the state health department ) , by jcaho , or by the national league for nursing's community health accreditation program ( chap ) . these surveys are intended to ensure that medicare beneficiaries receive care from qualified home health care providers . state survey agencies , under contract with the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) , which administers medicare , survey community - based providers to determine if they meet medicare's conditions of participation . these conditions cover such topics as acceptance of patients , medical supervision , and skilled nursing services . survey staff visit home health care providers and examine organizational , functional , personnel , and patient records and visit with patients in their homes to evaluate the quality and scope of services provided . conversely , approximately half of the respondents without an hbhc program said that one reason they do not have an hbhc program is that it would be more costly than community - based care purchased under the fee - based program . respondents to our questionnaire also expressed very different views on whether hbhc was more cost effective as compared with community - based care .