iii. ) alabama's targeting efforts and state share of total funding reduced the local funding gap between the lowest and highest poverty groups from about 66 percent to about 19 percent . the localities provided about 27 percent of total funding for education ; the state provided about 68 percent ; federal funds provided about 5 percent . alaska's state funding had the effect of providing districts with an additional $1.81 per poor student for every $1 provided to each student . when federal funding was added to the state funding , the combined effect provided an additional $2.42 per poor student . ( to compare these amounts with those of other states , see table iii.6 in app . iii. ) alaska's targeting efforts and state share of total funding more than eliminated the 2-percent local funding gap between the lowest and highest poverty groups . consequently , the lowest poverty group had about 19 percent less funding than the highest poverty group . the lowest poverty group had about 22 percent less funding after the addition of federal funding . ( to compare the total funding gap with those of other states , see table v.2 in app . v. for the funding gap results using a regression analysis , see table v.1. ) the size of the local funding gap is partly determined by differences in districts' local tax efforts . in alaska , districts with the highest proportions of poor students made more effort to raise local revenue than districts with the lowest proportions of poor students . specifically , districts in the highest poverty group made a tax effort that was 240 percent of that made in districts in the lowest poverty group . to put the state's school finance system in perspective , table viii.2 presents demographic data for school year 1991-92 for five groups with districts of increasing proportions of poor students . table viii.3 presents data on how local , state , and federal funds were distributed among the five groups of alaska districts . ( fig . viii.1 provides table information in graphic form. ) table viii.2: demographic information for districts of increasing proportions of poor students , school year 1991-92 local funding raised for every $1,000 of district income . percent difference ( group 1 compared with group 5 ) federal impact aid is considered part of local funding . not applicable to our analysis . an alaska education official reported that the state had not targeted more funding to high - poverty districts since school year 1991-92 . more information on changes in alaska's school finance system made between 1991-92 and 1995-96 and such changes in other states appears in table liv.1 . information on changes in federal funding between 1991-92 and 1994-95 appears in table lv.1 . additional technical information about alaska appears in appendixes iii and iv . average total funding per weighted pupil targeting to poor students ( added amount allocated per poor student for every dollar allocated for each student ) total funding weight ( effect of combined state and federal funding ) as table ix.1 shows , in school year 1991-92 , total funding ( local , state , and federal funding combined ) per weighted pupil in arizona averaged $4,959 .