the veterans are now using the clinic because it is more accessible . about one - half of the veterans we interviewed said that as long as va paid for the care , they were not bothered by the fact that the care they received was given at the access point rather than at a va facility . while the va hospital officials with whom we spoke did not anticipate having to ration care , they said that if it became necessary they would do so on a first - come , first - served basis rather than limiting care on the basis of va eligibility criteria . this could result in a situation where veterans who have been using the va system could be denied care at the access point if they sought care after an access point had enrolled its maximum number of veterans . simultaneously , veterans who had never used va health services before going to the access point would continue to use the clinic if they had been enrolled before the maximum number of enrollees had been reached . va's plans to establish access points could represent a defining moment for its health care system as it prepares to move into the 21st century . the results of this action could range from improving access for a modest number of current or new users who live the greatest distances from va facilities or in medically underserved areas to opening hundreds of access points and expanding va's market share by attracting hundreds of thousands of new users . va's growth potential is , in essence , limited by the availability of resources and statutory authority , new veteran users' willingness to be referred to va hospitals , and other health care providers' willingness to contract with va hospitals . although va should be commended for encouraging hospital directors to serve veterans using their facilities in the most convenient way possible , va did not establish access points in conformance with applicable statutory authority . in addition , va has not developed a plan to ensure that hospitals establish access points in an affordable manner . if developed , such a plan should articulate the number of new access points to be established , target populations to be served , time frames to begin operations , and related costs and funding sources . it should also articulate specific travel times or distances that represent reasonable veteran travel goals that hospitals could use in locating access points . given the uncertainty surrounding resource needs for new access points , such a plan should also articulate clear goals for the target populations to be served . we visited these hospitals and three of their new access points . during these visits , we interviewed va hospital officials and reviewed records relating to the operations of their access points . in view of the recent congressional action , we have deleted our recommendation from this final report . va did not agree that it is necessary to provide the congress with a report solely on va's overall plans for systemwide establishment of access points . va believes that the 22 networks' efforts to develop 1-year tactical and 2- or 3-year strategic plans will serve the same purpose .