iii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) implementation of human subject protections , ( 2 ) identify whether weaknesses exist in va's system for protecting human subjects , and ( 3 ) assess va's actions to improve human subject protections at those sites affected by sanctions imposed by regulatory agencies and throughout va's health care system . to achieve these objectives , we reviewed va , food and drug administration ( fda ) , and department of health and human services ( hhs ) regulations and va policies for the protection of human subjects ; interviewed va research officials ; visited selected va medical centers to assess local implementation of these standards ; and visited va medical centers affected by research restrictions . we also interviewed officials from the office for human research protections ( ohrp ) and reviewed hhs guidance . we reviewed records of congressional hearings ; reports on human subject protections , including those issued by the hhs office of inspector general , the institute of medicine , and the national bioethics advisory commission ; and the literature on the history of human subject protections . to assess va's implementation of human subject protections , we conducted site visits at eight va medical centers: atlanta , ga. ; baltimore , md . ; cleveland , ohio ; dallas , tex . ; louisville , ky. ; providence , r.i. ; seattle , wash. ; and washington , d.c. we selected sites to reflect major differences in va research programs ( see table 1 ) . first , we selected medical centers that differed in the number of studies they conduct with human subjects . second , we selected medical centers that differed in the institutions responsible for operating the committee tasked with reviewing each study to assess its protections for human subjects board ( irb ) . third , we selected facilities that differed in the assurance arrangements they had with ohrp . some institutions had filed a legally binding commitment to comply with federal regulations called a multiple project assurance with ohrp ; other institutions had not . our results from these eight medical centers cannot be generalized to other sites . at each site , we interviewed local research personnel , including the associate chief of staff for research and development , the irb chair , and staff responsible for providing administrative support to the irb . we attended an irb meeting at six sites ( atlanta , cleveland , dallas , providence , seattle , and washington , d.c ) . we also reviewed written procedures describing how the irb and institution implement human subject protections and a sample of four to seven sets of irb minutes from the last 2 years ( december 1997 through october 1999 ) at each site . we randomly selected a sample of 15 to 22 projects at each site for detailed analysis . to ensure that our selection included research on potentially vulnerable participants , we oversampled studies designed to provide information about psychiatric conditions that can affect decision - making capacity , such as dementia , schizophrenia , and depression .