ii. ) ora believes laboratory consolidation is necessary to meet its pressing need to streamline and improve operations . although consolidation may achieve efficiencies , the evidence ora provided to us appears to have overstated the magnitude of the future benefits . for example , ora may have overestimated its costs for replacing several labs . as we stated in this report , ora provided revised cost estimates in july 1995 for several of its laboratories , including changing the requirements for expanding the atlanta lab to 39,000 square feet . even with the larger space estimate for atlanta , the overall space in atlanta at full capacity would only be about 450 square feet per analyst , significantly less than 650 square feet as stated above . we have acknowledged in our report ora's september 12 , 1995 , consultant's report . our concern with the requirement of 650 square feet per analyst is , however , that it significantly exceeds the amount of space being proposed for mega - labs in atlanta and seattle and relatively new laboratory space occupied in san francisco ( 1994 ) and kansas city ( 1991 ) . ora has not provided us any explanation of why existing space in its newest facilities ( san francisco and kansas city ) and its proposed mega - labs in atlanta and seattle is inadequate . according to data that ora provided to us , the kansas city , seattle , and san francisco laboratories have an analyst capacity of 60 , 65 , and 70 , respectively . using the laboratory square footage figures in the table in hhs' letter , the square footage per analyst is significantly less than that stated by fda when considering the capacity for which these laboratories were built . for example , the san francisco laboratory , fda's newest lab , has only 369 square feet per analyst . we have noted in our report that ora's latest attempt ( july 1995 ) at estimating lease costs for several of its laboratories was methodologically better than its previous two efforts . since we did not review the laboratory consolidation efforts of the environmental protection agency , we cannot comment on the relevance of mitre's analyses to fda's consolidation plans . furthermore , we are not asserting that fda should not consolidate its laboratories . hhs' comments expand the set of criteria that ora previously provided us . hhs has maintained that ora considered waag's criteria along with the listed criteria in its comments . however , no evidence exists on how ora considered any set of criteria . ora appears to have based site selection mainly on the availability of construction funds or congressional indications that such funds would be available for specific sites . we were only pointing out one element of waag's comprehensive criteria . we were not implying that fda managers were not concerned with staff recruiting and retention . the documentation provided to us by fda dealt with its schedule to replace equipment . this action may occur whether ora consolidates its labs or not . as we discuss in this report , we recognize that certain equipment will need to be replaced .