none . home health agencies , hospice agencies , and independent vendors . home health and hospice agencies shall be licensed by the agency for health care administration in accordance with chapter 400 , part iv or part vi , f.s . independent vendors must be registered as homemakers with the agency for health care administration in accordance with section 400.509 , f.s . background screening required for independents . independent vendors and agencies . licensure / registration is not required . independent vendors must have at least 1 year of experience working in a medical , psychiatric , nursing , or child care setting or in working with developmentally disabled persons . college or vocational / technical training that equals at least 30 semester hours , 45 quarter hours , or 720 classroom hours may substitute for the required experience . agency employees providing this service must meet the same requirements . background screening required of agency employees who perform this service and of independent vendors . occupational therapists , occupational therapy aides , and occupational therapy assistants . occupational therapists , aides , and assistants may provide this service as independent vendors or as employees of licensed home health or hospice agencies . occupational therapists , occupational therapy aides , and occupational therapy assistants shall be licensed by the department of business and professional regulation in accordance with chapter 468 , part iii , f.s . and may perform services only within the scope of their licenses . home health and hospice agencies shall be licensed by the agency for health care administration in accordance with chapter 400 , part iv or part vi , f.s . none . home health and hospice agencies and independent vendors . home health and hospice agencies shall be licensed by the agency for health care administration in accordance with chapter 400 , part iv or part vi , f.s . independent vendors are not required to be licensed or registered . independent vendors shall have at least 1 year of experience working in a medical , psychiatric , nursing , or child care setting or working with developmentally disabled persons . college or vocational / technical training that equals at least 30 semester hours , 45 quarter hours , or 720 classroom hours may substitute for the required experience . background screening is required of independent vendors . electrical contractors and alarm system contractors . electrical contractors and alarm system contractors must be licensed by the department of business and professional regulation in accordance with chapter 489 , part ii , f.s . none . physical therapist and physical therapist assistants . physical therapist and assistants may provide this service as independent vendors or as employees of licensed home health or hospice agencies . physical therapists and therapist assistants shall be licensed by the department of business and professional regulation in accordance with chapter 486 , f.s. , and may perform services only within the scope of their licenses . home health and hospice agencies shall be licensed by the agency for health care administration in accordance with chapter 400 , part iv or part vi , f.s . none . registered nurses and licensed practical nurses .