mt . vernon , ill. paducah , ky. paragould , ark . richards - gebaur / belton , mo . st. joseph , mo . how many current users in each network do not have reasonable access to vha primary care ? of those veterans , how many have service - connected disabilities ( highest priority for care ) ? how many current users will obtain reasonable access through the establishment of new clinics in the next 5 years ? of those veterans , how many have service - connected disabilities ? how many newly established clinics meet vha's performance goals and objectives ? network business plans , proposals , and responses to our surveys failed to provide adequate information to answer these key questions . information available suggests considerable variation among networks , which raises concerns about the equity of veterans' access to care even though networks have improved access for thousands of current users . this is because networks started at different access levels and have established clinics at widely varying rates . moreover , networks appear to be planning without regard to the priorities . as a result , they will spend limited resources on lower priority new users in 1997 and 1998 , while improved access for thousands of higher priority current users will not be available until 2000 and beyond . in order to avoid such potential undesirable situations , and consistent with gpra , vha would need to establish results - oriented goals to ensure that each network affords reasonable access to vha primary care for a minimum percentage of current users by 2002 with the intent of equalizing access systemwide to the maximum extent practical , establishes clinics so as to provide veterans improved access consistent with statutory priorities for care , and evaluates its clinics' performance using a consistent set of minimal criteria . require networks to plan and propose new community - based clinics in a manner that ensures that veterans with highest statutory priorities achieve reasonable access as quickly as possible , consistent with the requirements of the veteran health care reform act of 1996 ( p.l . establish minimum criteria that all networks are to use annually for evaluating new clinics' performance . require networks to annually report their evaluation results to the capital budgeting and oversight service , a unit within va , and to others for their use in reviewing proposals for new clinics and other purposes . in commenting on our draft report , vha officials generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . to improve planning , actions are being taken to incorporate in networks' business plans information on current users' access to care now and by 2002 . while agreeing that there is variation in access , vha pointed out that it was not clear that a national target for access is required to focus networks . vha bases this response on its preliminary analysis of clinic data , which indicates that by 2002 , 80 percent of high - priority veterans will , on average , have improved access to care .