additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the emea also performs several other functions . it coordinates commission and member states' responsibilities for verifying industry compliance with good manufacturing , laboratory , and clinical practices . central agency within the eu that supports the cpmp in its scientific evaluations of pharmaceutical products . the emea also verifies compliance with eu good clinical practices and good manufacturing practices and provides technical support to the member states' national marketing authorities . formerly known as the european community , the eu was established by treaty to create a single market . the eu currently consists of 15 countries commonly referred to as member states . the 15 member states are austria , belgium , denmark , finland , france , germany , greece , ireland , italy , luxembourg , the netherlands , portugal , spain , sweden , and the united kingdom . the regulatory authority in each member state that is responsible for the approval of new human and veterinary pharmaceutical products in that member state . national marketing authorities also inspect manufacturing facilities , monitor quality control , and perform pharmacovigilance activities . the size and structure of each national marketing authority vary among member states . the process of collecting information on adverse drug reactions at the pre - and postmarketing stages , scientifically evaluating these adverse drug reaction reports , and making the regulatory decisions that result from this analysis . a cpmp member selected to lead the scientific evaluation of a new drug application and discuss its merits and shortcomings before the cpmp . it also provides technical assistance for maintaining a database on pharmaceutical products for public use and assists the commission and member states in providing information about pharmaceutical products to the public . in addition , the emea is in the process of developing ways to electronically transmit data between its administrative arm , the secretariat , and the national marketing authorities to track the flow of information during the review process . the emea also translates all documents into the 11 languages used in the member states . some of the member states , particularly the united kingdom , would like the emea to be fully financed by industry fees . other member states have resisted a total fee - based financing scheme because they view industry support of a public health agency as a conflict of interest . consequently , they want the commission to maintain oversight responsibility of the emea through its funding mechanism . the member states and commission agree that the emea's financing should be reviewed in about 3 years , with the objective of increasing the proportion of the budget financed by the industry . however , according to a senior commission official , the commission is likely to retain its oversight control by funding at least 20 percent of the emea budget in the future . we obtained comments on a draft of this report from the emea , fda , representatives of the european - based pharmaceutical industry , and experts in international drug regulatory policies .