the student then receives the loan from the lender . the guaranty agency guarantees the loan against default . the guaranty agency is the intermediary between education and the lender , insuring the loan against default and making certain that the lender and the school meet program requirements . the lender is responsible for servicing and collecting the loan , and , if the student defaults on the loan , the lender files a claim with the guaranty agency for reimbursement of most of its loss.education reimburses guaranty agencies for most of their claims paid to lenders for defaulted loans and for some of their administrative costs . most lenders contract with a third - party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers . hea designates which entities are eligible to make ffelp loans to students . in general , an eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances , a national or state chartered bank , a mutual savings bank , a savings and loan association , a stock savings bank , or a credit union ; a pension fund as defined in the employee retirement income security an insurance company that is subject to examination and supervision by an agency of the united states or a state ; in any state , a single agency of the state or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state ; under certain circumstances , an eligible institution ; under certain circumstances , the student loan marketing association or the holding company of the student loan marketing association , including any subsidiary of the holding company , or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market ; under certain circumstances , a guaranty agency ; a rural rehabilitation corporation ; under certain circumstances , any nonprofit private agency functioning in any state as a secondary market ; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank . the majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these eligible lender categories . however , organizations that do not meet hea criteria may still participate in ffelp by contracting with an eligible lender to serve as its trustee.these ineligible lenders fall into two categories: ( 1 ) secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and ( 2 ) private companies that wish to make and hold student loans . ineligible lenders generally contract with trustees for three purposes . first , ineligible lenders contract with trustees to allow the ineligible to originate student loans or to purchase them from another originating lender . second , ineligibles use trustees to securitize portfolios of student loans.third , trustees are used when ineligibles need to raise the capital necessary to make or purchase student loans without securitizing other loans . for example , some secondary markets raise capital by selling tax - exempt bonds to investors . this report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student loans . at ffelp's outset the government expected to share the program's financial risks with state - designated guaranty agencies . however , when states failed to establish such agencies , the congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation .