thank you for your help . about what proportion of employees at this establishment are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement ? ( enter percentage ) 7 . for the remainder of the questionnaire , please consider your employee discrimination complaint resolution policies and practices as they relate to only those employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement . for those employees who were hired before that date , does this policy begin to apply to them when their status changes ( for example , promotion , transfer , position change ) ? ( check one ) ( n=5 ) question in this section are about negotiation . by "negotiation," we mean a discussion of a complaint by the parties and , if appropriate , their counsel with the goal of setting the terms of a resolution . negotiation does not require involvement of a neutral party . negotiation could include an "open door" policy . 65.6% yes 2 . does this establishment have a policy to use negotiation as a method to resolve discrimination complaints that arise under federal equal employment status ? ( check one ) ( n=1448 ) . is this establishment considering instituting a policy to use negotiation to resolve discrimination complaints ? ( check one ) ( n=301 ) 15 . for this section , our questions are about fact finding . by "fact finding," we mean having a neutral party ( either someone within the company or external to the company ) investigate a complaint and develop findings that may form the basis for resolution . are the employees at this business establishment covered or not covered by collective bargaining agreements ? does this establishment have a policy to use fact finding as a method to resolve discrimination complaints that arise under federal equal employment statutes ? ( check one ) ( n=1496 ) for the purposes of this survey , we would like you to respond for this business establishment alone , even if it is part of a larger organization.if this establishment is a corporate headquarters , please respond only for the corporate headquarters level of the organization . if you have any questions about this questionnaire , please call mr. bob sampson collect at ( 202 ) 512-7251 . ( check one ) ( n=241 ) 17 . for this section , our questions are about peer review . by "peer review," we mean a panel of employees or employees and managers working together to resolve employment complaints . does this policy apply to all those not covered by a collective bargaining agreement or only to those in certain positions or located in certain divisions or departments ? ( check one ) ( n=1199 ) does this establishment have a policy to use peer review as a method to resolve discrimination complaints ? ( check one ) ( n=1447 ) 1 . 0.8% only those in certain positions or certain 18 . is this establishment considering instituting a policy to use peer review to resolve discrimination complaints ? ( check one ) ( n=1136 ) does this policy apply to only those who were hired on or after a certain date ?