we disagree . our report clearly recognizes that states and hhs have made some progress in implementing jobs and that some programs have achieved noteworthy results . we also recognize that programs have made progress in serving those at risk of long welfare stays and that jobs holds potential as a means to help afdc recipients get jobs and leave afdc . however , while some progress has been made , we believe that the issues we identified in the report are common among jobs programs nationwide and are ones that the congress will confront as it considers welfare reform . these issues include the small portion of the afdc caseload served , the lack of focus on employment as the goal , and the challenge of serving the hard to serve . hhs also raised other concerns ( also see app . ii ) and provided technical comments that we have addressed in the text of the report as appropriate . to learn about jobs outcomes , we addressed the following questions: ( 1 ) what outcome data exist on the number of jobs participants who are finding employment and leaving welfare ? ( 2 ) to what extent are hhs and the states monitoring jobs program outcomes and using performance standards ? to assess overall program objectives , operating philosophies , and performance monitoring practices , we surveyed the jobs program directors in the 50 states . we analyzed data on client outcomes that the states report to hhs as well as outcome data reported on the questionnaire . we discussed with hhs officials their approach to jobs performance monitoring and issues related to establishing national performance standards for jobs . we also consulted other experts about the latter . ( 2 ) what are the barriers to expanding such efforts ? ( 3 ) how might these barriers be overcome ? welfare reform proposals , however , would require many more welfare recipients to participate in education or training as well as require them to find work after 2 years . should such proposals be enacted , many more welfare parents will need child care subsidies . yet only a small fraction of eligible parents have received child care subsidies . furthermore , the fragmented nature of the child care funding streams , with entitlements to some client categories , time limits on others , and activity limits on others , produces unintended gaps in services . this limits the ability of low - income families to become self - sufficient . finally , as states deplete funds for welfare clients , they often turn to funds earmarked for the child care needs of the working poor , putting the working poor at greater risk of welfare dependency . for all of these reasons , gao believes that welfare reform's goal of economic independence for the poor could be undermined if the problems in the child care subsidy system are not adequately addressed . jobs and jtpa: tracking spending , outcomes , and program performance ( gao / hehs - 94-177 , july 15 , 1994 ) . this report provides information on jobs and jtpa , which congress is considering consolidating .