through a grant from a.l . mailman family foundation and primerica , its parents service project uses family child care homes as the parents' point of entry for delivery of various social services . the network was funded from 1987 through 1990 with grants from the ford foundation that totaled approximately $300,000 . since then , it has received a total of approximately $120,000 in ccdbg money , which has required the network to curtail some services . save the children is an international nonprofit organization whose mission is to improve the lives of poor children and their families . it was founded in 1932 and works in appalachia , in several southern states , and selected inner - city areas as well as in 43 other countries . the foundation center for phenomenological research is a nonprofit organization formed in 1974 to help small community organizations strengthen their operations . in 1980 , it won its first contract to run a state - funded child care program ; currently it runs child care programs in approximately two dozen locations , primarily in california . the site we visited was its sacramento delta and ilocer migrant and seasonal farmworker family child care project , which supports 20 providers serving approximately 160 children from migrant agricultural workers' families . the goal of the foundation center is to provide quality child care to infants , toddlers , and preschoolers and their families and to improve the children's school readiness and long - term academic achievement . the foundation center provides health services to the children and their families and a full - day education program for the children , and also supports family child care providers . the foundation center gives providers employment benefits , including sick and vacation leave , and health insurance ; recruits and places eligible children in providers' homes , helping to complete paperwork requirements for child care funding and usda's food program ; provides training in the providers' native languages using the montessori curriculum so that providers can earn the american montessori society teaching credential ; and equips each provider's home with culturally and developmentally appropriate furniture , materials , and toys . additionally , all children and their families receive free yearly health exams , immunizations , medications , referrals , and follow - up , and are linked to other social services they may need . the foundation center's family child care projects are funded with state dollars through california's general child care funds . the only federal assistance the foundation center receives is as a food sponsor through usda's food program . it receives a total of approximately $9 million a year from these sources to serve 2,300 children at 20 sites , including family child care projects , in 9 california counties . in 1992 , hhs began a demonstration project to determine if family child care could be a viable way to deliver the comprehensive services that are required of head start programs . currently , hhs has funded , for 3 years , 17 head start family child care demonstration project sites across the country . the demonstration , which includes only 4-year - olds , requires family child care providers to meet the head start performance standards .