ii. ) ergonomics staff assess how well a control is working and , if necessary , continue to address the problem job . ( a discussion of prioritization appears below. ) in addition , the ergonomics team leader “walks the floor,” so he is accessible to employees should they be experiencing discomfort . as evidence of employee interest , the team leader said many associates voice their ideas informally for how jobs might be controlled or changed to reduce exposure to ergonomic hazards . the facility also has a suggestion system that awards employees for suggestions regarding any aspect of the facility's operations , including ergonomic improvements . there are several ways in which the ergonomics team learns that a job might be a problem . the following methods for identifying problem jobs are incidence - based ; that is , they are based on employee reports of injury or discomfort or employee requests for assistance: information from incident reports , which are completed whenever an accident or “near miss” incident has occurred or whenever an employee reports symptoms to a supervisor or the facility nurse ( who is a member of the ergonomics team ) , is provided to the ergonomics team if ergonomic hazards appear to be involved . periodic walk - through audits by amp's third - party insurance administrator alert the facility to opportunities to address ergonomic hazards . in some cases , insurance representatives may look specifically at those areas where workers' compensation costs are high . employees can bring up any discomfort they are experiencing with members of the ergonomics team , their representative on the local safety committee , their supervisor , or their human resources representative ; ergonomics team members themselves identify problem jobs on the basis of symptoms they are experiencing or complaints they have heard from fellow employees . the suggestion system also may provide information on potential problem jobs . requests to the ergonomics team to address a problem job can also come from management of the facility or business group , the departments , the local safety committee , or one of the other 17 vam teams at tower city . prioritization of problem jobs is done by the ergonomics team . once the ergonomics team is alerted that a job may be a problem , the team prioritizes which jobs it will analyze . each team member is asked to identify the two or three jobs he or she feels are most important to address . the problem jobs are then ranked on the basis of how many team members have identified them as important . jobs in which msds have already occurred are typically given the highest priority . because the team identifies its own priorities , this process also serves the purpose of keeping the team focused and interested . as indicated previously , individual team members are assigned to “champion” each selected project . facility officials described their process for analyzing problem jobs and developing controls as “intentionally flexible” and “informal.” analysis of a problem job might involve simply analyzing a particular job element or task that is thought to be the source of the problem .