background on the tricare program is in appendix i . the northwest region was the first region to begin enrolling beneficiaries in march 1995 . three regions , the golden gate region , the hawaii - pacific region , and region nine , began enrolling beneficiaries in october 1995 , followed by the southwest region in november 1995 . while the contract has been awarded for the southeast and gulf south regions , they are not scheduled to begin health care delivery under tricare until july 1996 . figure 1 shows the dod regions covered by the seven managed care support contracts . the shaded areas are the regions where tricare has been implemented in various stages as of march 1996 . dod has experienced difficulties in awarding its managed care support contracts . each of the contracts awarded thus far has been protested . the protest of the first contract , encompassing the golden gate region , hawaii - pacific region , and region nine , was sustained , and dod was required to recompete the contract . the protests for the northwest region's and southwest region's contracts and the contract including both the southeast and gulf south regions were denied . last year , in response to congressional concerns about dod's difficulties with an early contract award covering california and hawaii for which gaosustained a protest , we reviewed problems identified by the bid protest experience . we reported that while dod had taken steps to improve future contract awards , several areas of concern remained . among our recommendations — which dod agreed to adopt — were that dod consider the potential effects on competition of such large tricare contracts and weigh alternative award approaches to help ensure competition during the next procurement round . we also urged that dod try to simplify the next round's solicitation requirements and seek to incorporate best - practice , managed care techniques in the contracts . we further recommended that dod establish general qualification requirements for its board members who evaluate contractors' proposals . we plan to follow up on these issues and begin a study of how well dod's contractors are performing under the current contracts . despite unanticipated obstacles , dod's early implementation of tricare is progressing in line with dod expectations . dod has enrolled large numbers of beneficiaries in tricare prime , including many of the active duty dependents dod particularly wants to enroll . it has also succeeded in encouraging tricare prime enrollees to select military health care providers — the source of care that dod believes is more cost - effective than civilian - provided care . in addition , dod is addressing implementation problems that early on caused confusion for beneficiaries and difficulties for military health care managers . as dod intended through its marketing efforts , many beneficiaries have enrolled in tricare prime , particularly the target population of active duty dependents that tends to rely heavily on the dod health care system . as of january 31 — after almost 12 months of operation in the northwest region and fewer than 4 months in four other regions — more than 400,000 people had enrolled in tricare prime .