consistent . i want to have a tool for the employees to make that decision . if the employees are making that decision , they are going to change the marketplace . they are going to improve the quality of the system because the doctors and the hospitals are going to have to alter their practices because of the information that has been gathered and is presented and understood by employees . how's your quality of life after you've had this ? ” “the number one thing people ask . when they're considering an hmo . is not like gee , ‘am i going to get that mammogram,' it's ‘what if i get sick , am i going to die , are they going to take care of me ? '” both employers and individual consumers stated that although data reflecting the outcomes may be the best measure of provider quality , it is very difficult to know whether outcomes result from quality of care or factors such as the patient's condition or lifestyle choices . “the government should prescribe some standards and force providers to adhere to these standards in the publishing of information . the government should say , ‘you're going to code this disease this way , and you do it consistently and uniformly . '” individual consumers stated that the way the information was presented was very important to them . for example , some wanted to have providers or plans compared side - by - side on one or two pages . consumers using the procedure - specific reports uniformly praised the table format that provided this kind of direct comparison . ( see fig . 2 for an example of a table providing a comparison of providers from a procedure - specific report. ) some individual consumers wanted the information to cover a wider geographic area , and others emphasized the need for community - specific data . for example , some pennsylvania consumers stated that the report card for that state pertained only to providers in pennsylvania . consumers living in philadelphia would like to have had this type of information for surrounding states because their providers , while close to their homes , were located in other states . the same concern came up in a midwestern city that bordered two states . “hav some report card concepts that the employees could understand the information , user friendly . they are then making intelligent decisions as far as where to get their health care . empower the people to make the decision.” “if we are going to have value - based purchasing which would drive a competitive marketplace in health care , we have to involve consumers who make the ultimate choice . therefore the information has to be relevant for them.” “i think it's not speaking to how they make decisions . i think we'd overwhelm them . also , i don't know if the data we'd be giving them would be the complete picture.” “i've been in health care benefits for 15 years . i don't know how to make the choice . what happens to poor harry the huffer working on the shop floor when you give him .