we disagreed . we obtained our information in may 1995 , late enough in the programs' operating year for them to predict available resources and participant levels . ( in contrast , the corporation's funding was committed to the programs at the start of the operating year before any participation rates were known ; therefore , we chose to adjust the amount of these funds. ) the corporation stated that it is not certain that all of the resources in the “state and local” category are from public sources . evidence we obtained showed that about 90 percent of the resources were clearly from public sources ; the remaining 10 percent were from public postsecondary institutions . given the reliance of public postsecondary institutions on public support , it was therefore appropriate in our view to categorize the resources they contributed to americorps*usa programs as public . in any event , our sensitivity analysis showed that categorizing resources from public postsecondary institutions as private resources had very little impact on our estimate ( see app . iii ) . in addition to those named above , the following individuals made important contributions to this report: c. jeff appel , nancy k. kintner - meyer , and james w. spaulding assisted in collecting and analyzing the data and writing the report ; jill w. schamberger helped administer the data collection instrument ; susan c. donna verified site visit information ; edmund l. kelley helped conduct site visits ; lena g. bartoli wrote computer programs to aid in our analysis ; steven r. machlin performed statistical analyses and provided methodological advice on sampling errors ; and leslie d. albin did the editing . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . some of the participants themselves are veterans . a third of the original participants were bilingual , speaking a total of six languages . half were pursuing law enforcement careers . program officials projected that 90 percent will use the education award . the program budgeted for 20 full - time and 10 part - time participants ; at the time of our visit , the program had 18 full - time and 11 part - time participants .