training . cdc provides public health and medical personnel with training on a wide range of topics . the training is offered through such means as interactive audio - or video - conferences , computer - assisted instruction , seminars , and hands - on workshops . since 1989 , cdc has offered laboratory training through a collaboration with aphl . an aphl and cdc assessment identified the need for training on current advances in food microbiology , fungal and viral infections , rabies , tuberculosis , and new and emerging pathogens . to meet these needs , cdc developed a series of courses incorporating hands - on experience , offered in various locations around the country . state laboratory directors and epidemiologists indicated they use cdc training extensively , and most said they participated in cdc - sponsored training in 1997 . grant programs . cdc's various grant and staffing assistance programs provide at least some support to the infectious diseases surveillance programs of all states . in fiscal year 1998 , ncid distributed $31.2 million of its $185.7 million budget to state and local health agencies for infectious diseases programs . ncid supports three major grant programs that aid state surveillance programs for emerging infectious diseases ( see table 2 ) .together these three grant programs provided about $20 million to state and local health departments in fiscal year 1997 . eip and elc grants , designed to strengthen and enhance state surveillance abilities , are components of cdc's overall plan to address emerging infectious diseases . funding for regional laboratory networks . to help with both state - specific and nationwide control and prevention efforts , cdc has sponsored development of regional laboratory networks that give states access to molecular testing services that may not be available in their own state laboratory . the two main laboratory networks are pulsenet , which currently focuses on e. coli o157:h7 , and the tuberculosis genotyping network ( see table 3 ) . staffing assistance . cdc provides a small number of staff resources to assist state infectious diseases programs through 2-year epidemic intelligence service ( eis ) placements and fellowships in state or local health departments or laboratories . about one - fourth of the 60 to 80 eis participants selected each year work in state and local health departments . additionally , by february 1998 , cdc had trained 18 laboratory fellows to work in state , local , and federal public health laboratories through its emerging infectious diseases laboratory fellow program , a collaborative effort with aphl ; cdc plans to make 9 emerging diseases laboratory fellowships available through aphl and the cdc foundation . one goal of the fellowships is to strengthen the relationship of public health laboratories to infectious diseases and drug - resistance surveillance , prevention , and control efforts . information sharing . over the past several decades , cdc has developed and made available to states several general and disease - specific information management and reporting programs . virtually all states use two of these programs to report data on some infectious diseases to cdc — the public health laboratory information system ( phlis ) and the national electronic telecommunications system for surveillance ( netss ) .