the state continues to provide other services . policy studies , inc . currently , the contractor's share of the county caseload is estimated by the state child support director to be about 40 percent . the state legislature has authorized the creation of two new district offices in addition to those listed . the new district offices that would serve areas yet to be determined are to be established in state fiscal year 1997 and state fiscal year 1998 . unless otherwise noted , the source for all demographic data in this appendix is u.s. bureau of the census , county and city data book 1994 ( washington , d.c.: u.s. bureau of the census , 1994 ) . located in the norfolk - virginia beach - newport news metropolitan area , the hampton district office serves both suburban and rural areas . in 1992 , the population in hampton was about 137,000 . located in the same metropolitan area , the portsmouth district office serves portsmouth city , with a 1992 population of about 105,000 . in 1989 , the median income in hampton was $30,144 and in portsmouth , $24,601 . in 1989 , 8.8 percent of the families in hampton had incomes below the poverty level , compared with 14.9 percent in portsmouth . like portsmouth , in 1992 , hampton was among the top 25 counties / jurisdictions in the country in federal civilian employment . hampton's june 1994 caseload of 15,000 was about 42 percent afdc and 58 percent non - afdc . at the same time , portsmouth served a caseload of about 14,000 , about 51 percent of which were afdc cases and 49 percent non - afdc . to further assure comparability of cases between the two offices , we excluded cases that ( 1 ) closed and did not reopen during the 18-month period ; ( 2 ) were forwarded to other states to be worked because the noncustodial parent resided out of state ; ( 3 ) needed specialized services , usually medical support only ; or ( 4 ) were mistaken referrals , duplicate cases , or otherwise inappropriate for analysis . table i.3 shows the number of cases in our original cohorts for each pair of offices , the number of cases excluded , and the number of cases remaining for analysis of outcomes . in each state , we gathered case data for analysis by reviewing case files or automated case management data . additionally , each state provided collections and administrative cost data for the cost - effectiveness analysis , and tennessee provided the data for the analysis of the twentieth judicial district's performance before and after privatization . we did not verify the state - provided data . the results of our review represent the performance of these offices on a small set of new cases for an abbreviated time period and do not necessarily represent long - term public and private performance overall within these states . however , because both new and existing cases must be equally served , the results can be viewed as a reasonable indication of the overall performance of these offices for that time period .