( see fig . medicare's risk contract program was designed to save medicare money by paying hmos 95 percent of the amount medicare estimated it would spend on similar beneficiaries in the fee - for - service sector . it was believed that hmos would have lower costs because of their greater emphasis on preventive health services and their incentive to eliminate unnecessary services . the base capitation rate in each county — the amount an hmo receives each month for enrolling an average - cost beneficiary — is determined by law , largely on the basis of medicare's per capita fee - for - service spending . an hmo planned to classify the entire residential community as an institution . however , the residential community's manager disagreed that the independent living facility constituted an institution . although the hmo ultimately chose not to classify those beneficiaries living in the independent facility as institutionalized , no hcfa policy would have prevented such classification . facilities of this nature pose continued challenges in appropriately determining which beneficiaries should be classified as institutionalized for payment purposes . even though some regional hcfa officials felt that some facilities should not have been classified as institutions , these officials believed they had little basis for challenging any classification . in a 1995 memorandum to hcfa headquarters , for example , the director of a hcfa region's managed care operations noted that “the manual provides no guidance regarding the level of care provided to residents [needed to qualify for institutional status]” and that “hcfa has the obligation to provide better guidance to plans regarding the types of facilities which may be designated as ‘institutions. '” on july 24 , 1997 , hcfa issued a policy letter that narrowed the definition of eligible institutions effective january 1 , 1998 . the letter cited a history of interpretation problems in using the broader definition as well as the concerns we , the hhs inspector general , and the agency itself have raised about the potential for making improper payments to hmos . under the new definition , only specified medicare - or medicaid - certified institutions are included , thus limiting eligibility to institutions qualifying under the social security act , such as skilled nursing and nursing facilities ; intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded ; and psychiatric , rehabilitation , long - term care , and swing - bed hospitals . tying eligibility to certain medicare - and medicaid - certified institutions effectively rules out eligibility for independent or low - level assisted living facilities . in principle , this change could significantly improve hcfa's ability to ensure that the higher capitation rate is being paid on behalf of only those beneficiaries likely to have higher health care needs and costs . however , in practice , the collocation of independent living arrangements with eligible institutions and hcfa's infrequent and narrow review of hmo records , as discussed in the next section , may limit the practical impact of hcfa's new policy . the process hcfa uses to verify that hmos appropriately claim the institutional payment rate is inadequate . hcfa relies on the hmos themselves to identify and report the names of beneficiaries for whom the hmos should receive the institutional rate .