( see app . ii for a description of the 12 diagnosis - related groups. ) to address whether hcfa's rcl exception process ensures that snfs granted exceptions actually furnish atypical services , we reviewed hcfa's statutory authority and responsibilities for establishing and administering medicare's snf rcl exception process and hcfa's regulations and guidance to intermediaries for reviewing exception requests filed by snfs . in particular , we reviewed the current snf exception request review process that was set out in hcfa's transmittal 378 instructions issued in july 1994 . we also discussed the snf exception process with hcfa officials in the bureau of policy development . do patients in snfs granted exceptions receive appropriate care ? what information does hcfa gather to assess rcl exception requests , and does its process ensure that snfs are furnishing atypical services before granting rcl exceptions ? to identify growth in snf use and its relation to hospital use , we obtained and analyzed hcfa data on medicare beneficiary use of services in both settings . we also reviewed a number of studies and reports related to this area . to assess whether hospital length of stay was different when hospitals have snf units , we examined changes in length of stay between fiscal years 1991 and 1994 for all medicare patients and for 12 diagnoses that are likely to result in posthospital care . we visited 10 intermediaries to determine the snf exception request review process employed by each and verify that their reviews complied with the guidance laid out in transmittal 378 and subsequent written correspondence . in november 1995 , hcfa provided us with a database that contained information on 1,379 approved exception requests . the 10 intermediaries processed 789 , or 57 percent , of these exceptions . the intermediaries we visited included five that processed more than 50 exception requests , two that processed fewer than 20 requests , and three participating in hcfa's experiment giving final approval authority to intermediaries . two of the five selected high volume intermediaries also participated in the pilot project . to answer the questions about snf patient characteristics and facility services , we analyzed ( 1 ) a compilation of hcfa - required resident assessment data ( known as the minimum data set ( mds ) ) about each nursing home resident in maine , missouri , ohio , and washington for calendar year 1994 and ( 2 ) medicare claims file data for 1992 and 1994 . in addition , for maine and ohio , we applied a hcfa method for classifying nursing home patients into homogenous groups according to common health characteristics and the amount and type of resources they use . to provide additional information on patient and facility characteristics , we visited five snfs that had received exceptions in the past and continue to apply for exceptions . we chose these snfs , located in california , illinois , indiana , massachusetts , and washington , with input from state officials and local nursing home ombudsmen . to respond to this request , we addressed the following questions: how have snf costs and use grown in relation to hospital use ?