preston . “differential reinforcement of sustained cocaine abstinence in intravenous polydrug abusers.” in l.s . harris , ed . problems of drug dependence 1994: proceedings of the 56th annual scientific meeting , the college on problems of drug dependence , national institute on drug abuse research monograph #153 . rockville , md . : national institute on drug abuse , 1995 , p. 212 . silverman , k. , c.j . following are the responses of the 20 treatment experts to the gao question , “what important knowledge gaps remain in our understanding of cocaine treatment effectiveness in each of the following two areas: cognitive / behavioral and pharmacological interventions ? ” relevant individual response items were placed into six clinical and methodological categories: cognitive / behavioral issues , pharmacological issues , the cognitive / behavioral and pharmacological synergy , clinical assessment / outcome issues , population subgroup treatment issues , and methodological issues . the frequency count for each category is also provided . identifying important components of promising treatment practices , developing and testing contingency contracting strategies , recognizing the triggers of relapse , determining appropriate intensity and duration of treatment protocols , assessing the utility of low - intensity treatments , defining and increasing important aspects of social and community support , and codifying appropriate treatment practices . categorical frequency: 12 . developing drugs to diminish the craving for cocaine ; developing drugs to block the effects of cocaine ; developing maintenance medication for continued relapse prevention ; examining the utility of multiple untried drugs indicated in the physician's desk reference ; longitudinally testing the effects of drugs ; assessing human toxicity effects of drugs found useful in animal experiments ; developing detoxification medication ; and further investigating vaccines , agonists , and antagonists . categorical frequency: 14 . smith , m. “acupuncture treatment for crack: clinical survey of 1,500 patients treated.” american journal of acupuncture , vol . 16 ( 1988 ) , pp . vocci , f. , b. tai , j. wilkins , t. kosten , j. cornish , j. hill , s. li , h. kraemer , c. wright , and p. bridge . “the development of pharmacotherapy for cocaine addiction: bupropion as a case study.” paper presented at the college on problems of drug dependence annual scientific meeting , 1994 . walsh , s. , j. sullivan , and g. bigelow . “fluoxetine effects on cocaine responses: a double - blind laboratory assessment in humans.” the college on problems of drug dependence annual scientific meeting abstracts , 1994 . washton , a. , and n. stone - washton . “outpatient treatment of cocaine and crack addiction: a clinical perspective.” national institute on drug abuse research monographs # 135 . rockville , md . : national institute on drug abuse , 1993 , pp . wells , e. , p. peterson , r. gainey , j. david hawkins , and r. catalano . “outpatient treatment for cocaine abuse: a controlled comparison of relapse prevention and twelve - step approaches.” american journal of drug and alcohol abuse , vol . 1 ( 1994 ) , pp . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . “the matrix model of outpatient stimulant abuse treatment: evidence of efficacy.” journal of addictive diseases , vol .