( see app . i for the ssa organization charts for before and after the transition. ) we believe that ssa has reasonably planned for these changes . our assessment of the transition activities , combined with the review of the ssa and hhs interagency agreement , indicates that the organizational changes should be completed on march 31 , 1995 . an acting general counsel will be designated to head the office until a permanent appointment is made . the ssa office of inspector general will conduct audits and investigations of the agency's programs and operations . the inspector general will report directly to the commissioner to ensure objectivity and independence from internal agency pressures . the hhs inspector general has agreed to act as ssa's inspector general until a permanent inspector general has been confirmed . ssa expects that additional organizational changes will occur in conjunction with the transition . for example , ssa plans to merge the functions of its offices of programs and policy and external affairs . the new office of programs , policy , evaluation and communications will be responsible for research , policy analysis , and program evaluation . ssa's office of legislation and congressional affairs will also be repositioned to report directly to the commissioner . this office will facilitate a working relationship between ssa and the executive and legislative branches . ssa plans to establish a washington , d.c. , office to facilitate a closer working relationship with the congress and the executive branch . staffing in the washington office is estimated at 150 to 200 permanent employees , including the commissioner , principal deputy commissioner , legislative liaison staff , inspector general , the general counsel , and research and statistics personnel . the agency has defined needed space requirements and acquired temporary office space . it should obtain permanent space by early 1996 . ssa also plans to decentralize and transfer more management authority from its headquarters to its regional offices . following the transition , regional commissioners will have direct authority over public affairs and personnel administration in their respective regions . these functions are currently managed by ssa's headquarters or by hhs . ssa has also indicated that , where possible , some of the approximately 1,143 ftes identified for transfer may be shifted to local offices and telephone service centers to strengthen service . social security: staff reductions and service quality ( gao / hrd - 89-106br , june 16 , 1989 ) . social security administration: stable leadership and better management needed to improve effectiveness ( gao / hrd - 87-39 , mar . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .