not applicable . because many states pay ssi state supplements and all states share in medicaid , ssi cdrs also result in states realizing ssi and medicaid savings . because benefit levels vary across states , the present value of savings also varies . table iv.2 shows , for the five states with the largest total state supplement payments in fiscal year 1994 , a range of over $10,000 in the present value of ssi supplement savings . states' savings also vary because the size of their recipient populations differ . table iv.2 shows the wide variation in potential state savings based on ( 1 ) the number of disabled individuals currently receiving state ssi supplements and due and overdue for cdrs and ( 2 ) ssa's current estimates of a 5-percent benefit termination rate . the present value of state medicaid savings would average about $11,100 for adults and $4,800 for children . fiscal year 1994 total supplements paid ( in millions ) . in addition to those named above , the following persons made important contributions to this report: chris c. crissman , assistant director ; kerry gail dunn , senior evaluator ; julian m. fogle , senior evaluator ; ann lee , senior evaluator ; elizabeth a. olivarez , evaluator ; susan k. riggio , evaluator ; and ann t. walker , evaluator ( database manager ) . social security disability: alternatives would boost cost - effectiveness of continuing disability reviews ( gao / hehs - 97-2 , oct. 16 , 1996 ) . in response , we addressed the following questions: what steps is ssa taking to conduct legally required ssi cdrs in fiscal years what resources has ssa committed to meeting this requirement and what additional resources , if any , are needed ; how does ssa select recipients for ssi cdrs ; what are the potential benefits of conducting cdrs on the ssi population ; what potential options exist for improving the cdr process ? in companion reports , we discussed ssa's general strategy for conducting cdrs , which are also required under the disability insurance ( di ) program.the di program provides disability benefits to individuals who have enough work experience to be insured under social security . to address these questions , we ( 1 ) interviewed federal and state officials ; ( 2 ) reviewed relevant laws , regulations , policies , procedures , and reports ; and ( 3 ) reviewed ssa data on cdr work plans , budgets , costs , savings , and previously conducted cdrs . pass program: ssa work incentives for disabled beneficiaries poorly managed ( gao / hehs - 96-51 , feb. 28 , 1996 ) . ssa rehabilitation programs ( gao / hehs - 95-253r , sept. 7 , 1995 ) . supplemental security income: disability program vulnerable to fraud when middlemen are used ( gao / hehs - 95-116 , aug. 31 , 1995 ) . social security disability: management action and program redesign needed to address long - standing problems ( gao / hehs - 95-233 , aug. 3 , 1995 ) . supplemental security income: growth and changes in recipient population call for reexamining program ( gao / hehs - 95-137 , july 7 , 1995 ) .