( app . ii contains more background information on the medicaid program. ) the $130 billion medicaid program is at a crossroads . between 1985 and 1993 , medicaid costs tripled and the number of beneficiaries increased by over 50 percent . current projections suggest that program costs will double over the next 5 to 7 years . to constrain rising health care costs , states are increasingly turning to mandatory enrollment of some or all medicaid beneficiaries in managed care delivery plans — arrangements that limit a beneficiary's choice of physicians and hospitals . in many cases , these managed care plans are prepaid a fixed amount per enrollee . this financing arrangement has demonstrated the ability to lower service utilization , which in turn can hold down costs . in order to implement mandatory managed care programs , states must obtain a waiver of certain medicaid requirements . the waiver authority that gives states the greatest flexibility is section 1115 of the social security act . section 1115 allows the executive branch to waive most federal medicaid requirements for demonstration projects likely to assist in promoting program objectives . since 1992 , 22 states have asked to use this demonstration authority to restructure their medicaid programs . the common thread present in what have been termed “comprehensive” 1115 demonstration waivers is ( 1 ) the switch from a fee - for - service to a managed care approach to delivering health benefits and ( 2 ) the use of anticipated savings plus other funding streams to expand coverage to groups previously ineligible for medicaid . eleven states with 1115 waivers approved since 1993 have undertaken an ambitious experiment to demonstrate that the medicaid program can actually save money while simultaneously expanding coverage . the administration has entered into 5-year budget commitments that allow each state to reinvest managed care savings and redirect other funds in order to expand coverage to currently uninsured individuals . compared to expenditure trends for the predemonstration program , states suggest that the net result of waivers will be lower costs — even though managed care savings are being reinvested . eleven more waivers are pending , and all but a few applicants are pursuing a similar managed care cost - containment / coverage expansion strategy . only illinois , oklahoma , and kentucky ( the state's 1995 demonstration application ) propose using 1115 waiver authority to reduce both state and federal medicaid expenditures without expanding coverage . the use of 1115 waivers to restructure state medicaid programs has been facilitated by a new federal flexibility in assessing the budget neutrality of such demonstrations — particularly , the administration's avowed openness to “new methodologies” to estimate what the continuation of a state's existing medicaid program would have cost . by redefining the terms of budget neutrality , the administration has made it easier for states to demonstrate that waivers will cost less than their existing medicaid programs . the administration asserts , nonetheless , that all approved 1115 waivers are budget neutral and that the demonstration authority is not being used to expand entitlement spending .