additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . wyoming is the only state to discontinue medicaid for all immigrants . immigrants no longer eligible for the full scope of medicaid benefits , however , continue to be eligible for emergency services under medicaid . about a third of the states provide state - funded temporary assistance to needy families , medical assistance , or both to new immigrants during their 5-year bar from federal programs . six of the 10 states where most immigrants reside provide assistance to those no longer eligible for tanf and medicaid . california , maryland , massachusetts , and washington provide both state - funded cash and medical assistance , while new jersey and virginia provide medical assistance . some of these state programs impose deeming requirements similar to the federal program rules and state residency requirements . in addition , some states restrict medical assistance to immigrant children , pregnant women , or to those in residential care before a specific date . maryland , for example , provides medical assistance to pregnant women and children , and virginia provides benefits to children . in the states we visited , we observed a range of these types of benefits available to immigrants . california , where more than 35 percent of the nation's immigrants live , provides both state - funded cash and medical assistance to new immigrants during their 5-year bar from federal benefits . washington provides medicaid benefits to pre - reform and new immigrants following the 5-year bar . new jersey provides state - funded medical assistance to new immigrants , although it has proposed changes to state legislation to limit the scope of medical assistance benefits to emergency services only . in washington , new immigrants may obtain state - funded cash or medical assistance after meeting a 12-month residency requirement and the state - imposed federal deeming requirements . officials of washington state noted that it included the residency requirement to address concerns about the state attracting immigrants from other states and becoming a welfare magnet state for immigrants . as of december 1997 , a total of 389 immigrants participated in the program at cost to the state of approximately $5,200 for that month . in addition to this state - funded medical assistance , some new immigrants may receive additional state or local medical assistance during their 5-year bar . 105-185 ) restores federal food stamp eligibility , effective november 1 , 1998 , to 250,000 — mostly children , the disabled , and the elderly — of the estimated 820,000 immigrants no longer eligible for food stamps in fiscal year 1999 , according to usda . about 70 percent of the 820,000 immigrants remain ineligible for food stamps . at the time of our review , 14 states representing almost 90 percent of immigrants nationwide receiving food stamps in 1996 were replacing food stamp benefits with state - funded benefits to a portion of immigrants no longer eligible . almost all states and the district of columbia are continuing tanf for both groups .