these are important issues . if staff work together to discover the reasons for different assessments of cases , they may be able to more clearly identify and communicate what is required in different types of situations . the board makes its decision . if benefits are still denied , the veteran can take his or her claim to the court . but this process can become increasingly complex . at any time before a claim is appealed to the court , the veteran can ask and will be given an opportunity for a hearing . if the hearing is before a varo hearing officer , the hearing officer may also consider the claim and grant benefits if evidence in the hearing warrants . if the claim has already been appealed , a board member would conduct the hearing and consider the evidence presented in arriving at a board decision . much of this process , such as when veterans may receive hearings and from whom , is set forth in legislation and regulations . the veteran may also introduce new evidence during the process , requiring va to then obtain that evidence and decide if it is relevant and , if so , consider it in the decision . under va regulations , unless the veteran shows good cause , all new evidence must be submitted within 90 days after the varo notifies the veteran that his or her appeal has been forwarded to the board . the board is usually liberal in its interpretation of good cause , according to a board official ; thus , veterans frequently submit new evidence after the 90-day period . va's current legal and organizational structure , the complex nature of the claims adjudication process , and the current fluid environment brought about by the veterans' judicial review act and the court make effective interaction among va organizations imperative . ( see fig . a first priority of this official should be monitoring the progress of the organizations in implementing the recommendations of the vba study of recently certified appeals and ensuring that vba and vha policies and practices are consistent with court and board decisions . these efforts should be ongoing to ensure such consistency , obtaining general counsel opinions where needed and to ensure that any resource or organizational difficulties are identified and resolved . in a meeting on august 15 , 1995 , va's chief of staff , the under secretary for benefits , the chairman of the board of veterans' appeals , and other key officials commented on a draft of this report . the va officials acknowledged that appeals processing is one of the most serious problems currently facing the agency . for example , in one case a varo denied death compensation to a veteran's wife based on va regulations that were in effect at the time . while the case was pending before the board , the court held that a portion of the regulation used in deciding the case was invalid . ensuring clear and consistent interpretation of va's adjudication responsibilities , such as duty - to - assist requirements , is one obvious area needing the involvement of all the organizations involved in adjudication .