that apply . district ? enter the last two 7.7 . whatwhat waswas thethe total bond issue ? issue ? how much money did this most recently passed bond issue provide for the items listed below ? enter zero if none . removal of underground storage tank ( usts ) removal of other environmental conditions access for students with disabilities 9 . during the last 10 years , how many bond issues have failed to pass ? bond issues failed to pass 10 . do you currently have a bond issue before the electorate ? circle one . section ii . school information this section asks about the first school shown on the instruction sheet enclosed with this survey . name of school: please enter the name of the first school shown on the instruction sheet . help ! while some studies cite building age as a major factor contributing to deteriorating conditions , older buildings often have a more sound infrastructure than newer buildings . buildings built in the early years of this century — or before — frequently were built for a life span of 50 to 100 years while more modern buildings , particularly those built after 1970 , were designed to have a life span of only 20 to 30 years . a study of english school facilities found that the schools built during the 1960s and 1970s were built quickly and cheaply and have caused continuing maintenance problems . as one survey respondent commented , “the buildings in this district are approximately 20 years old , but the exterior siding was inferior from the beginning...it has deteriorated and ruptured extensively....” a principal in chicago stated about her 1970s building , “our most pressing problem is that the school is crumbling down around us.... from the beginning , this building has had serious roof problems . water leaks throughout the building from the roof and from the walls . pools of water collect in the floors of the classrooms . one wall has buckled and is held in place with a steel stake . the windows leak and let cold air in....” according to some school officials , the misperception about the age factor has been reinforced because older buildings are sometimes not maintained but allowed to deteriorate until replaced . three schools we visited in chicago presented a good example of the difficulty of using age to define condition . all three were built between 1926 and 1930 and had the same design and basic structure . today , their condition could not be more different . one school had been allowed to deteriorate ( had received no renovation since the 1970s ) until it reached a point where local school officials classified it as among those schools in the worst physical condition . the second school had received some recent renovation because of community complaints about its condition and was classified as a typical school for the school district . the third school had been well maintained throughout the years , and now school officials classified it as a school in the best physical condition . ( see pictures contrasting the three schools in fig . two - thirds of america's schools report that they are in adequate ( or better ) overall condition .