administration . ( a ) selection criteria for state educational agencies. - - the secretary shall award grants to state educational agencies under this part on the basis of the quality of the applications submitted under section 10303 ( b ) , after taking into consideration such factors as ( 1 ) the contribution that the charter schools grant program will make to assisting educationally disadvantaged and other students to achieving state content standards and state student performance standards and , in general , a state's education improvement plan ; ( 2 ) the degree of flexibility afforded by the state educational agency to charter schools under the state's charter schools law ; ( 3 ) the ambitiousness of the objectives for the state charter school grant program ; ( 4 ) the quality of the strategy for assessing achievement of those objectives ; and ( 5 ) the likelihood that the charter school grant program will meet those objectives and improve educational results for students . ( b ) selection criteria for eligible applicants. how are charter schools held accountable for student performance ? what challenges do charter schools pose for federal education programs ? to address these questions , we reviewed charters or charter proposals , collecting information on the schools' instructional programs , accountability systems , and financial and administrative relationships with the school districts where they are located . we reviewed these documents for most of the 83 approved or proposed charter schools we identified as of may 1994 ; these schools were in california , colorado , massachusetts , and minnesota ( see app . i for a list of the 83 charter schools ) . we also conducted telephone interviews to collect information on individual charter schools ; their relationships with the school districts where they are located ; and school , district , and state experiences with how federal programs work with charter schools . we interviewed ( 1 ) the principals or other representatives of 50 charter schools , ( 2 ) district officials in 34 districts with charter schools , and ( 3 ) state officials in the 11 states with laws authorizing charter schools . we also analyzed the laws of the 11 states to determine similarities and differences in charter schools' legal status , exemption from state rules , approval process , funding , and accountability for student performance . we supplemented our legislative analysis with information from officials in each state on issues that were unclear in the legislation . these officials reviewed relevant portions of this report and provided oral comments . we obtained updates from these state officials , as of january 1 , 1995 , on ( 1 ) the number of charter schools in their states and ( 2 ) whether the charter schools were new or conversions of existing schools . we did our study from february 1994 through january 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . charter schools are a new and increasingly popular entrant in the debate on restructuring and improving u.s. public education . the model offered by charter schools differs substantially from the traditional model for governing and funding public schools .