some examples follow . the nhsc program requires that providers placed in hpsas serve 80 percent of the hpsa population . while designations for the medicaid or migrant populations require that these specific populations be treated , there is no mechanism to ensure that these same populations would be identified and treated by an nhsc provider in a geographic hpsa . the medicare incentive payment program pays all physicians in geographic hpsas a 10-percent bonus on medicare billings even if medicare patients are not those actually underserved in the hpsa , and even if low medicare reimbursement rates are not the cause of underservice . the rural health clinic program provides cost - based reimbursement for medicare and medicaid services provided in any rural hpsa or mua , even if the rural health clinic will not accept the entire hpsa population as patients . according to program managers at the health care financing administration , there is no requirement to distribute rural health clinic services throughout the underserved area or for rural health clinics to accept patients regardless of ability to pay for services . we did not directly audit these programs to determine the extent that program controls were adequate to prevent misdirection of resources for underserved populations in hpsas and muas . however , we did find evidence that such problems exist — especially in the case of the medicare incentive payment program . at present , there is no evidence that the medicare incentive payment program is targeted to improve access to care for medicare beneficiaries , even though over $98 million was paid to physicians in 1994 for this purpose . neither the hpsa system nor the program identifies the extent that medicare beneficiaries are underserved in geographic hpsas or that low reimbursement rates cause access problems for them . the medicare incentive payment program was established in 1987 subsequent to concerns expressed by the physician payment review commission that low medicare reimbursement rates for primary care services may cause access problems for medicare beneficiaries in rural hpsas . under the program , all physicians providing services to medicare beneficiaries in a rural or urban geographic hpsa are eligible for a 10-percent bonus on medicare billings . the premise on which this program was created may no longer be valid in that the basis for medicare reimbursement has changed since 1987 . in its 1995 report to the congress , the physician payment review commission found no evidence that provider shortages or low medicare reimbursement rates cause health care access problems for beneficiaries in rural areas . close to half of the $98 million spent under the program in 1994 was paid to about 82,000 rural physicians . while the commission found some evidence of a link between living in urban hpsas and access - to - care problems , beneficiaries cited the cost of services not covered by medicare and a lack of transportation as the primary causes of access difficulties . these problems are unlikely to be solved by providing a bonus on medicare billings . the remaining half of the $98 million spent under the program in 1994 was provided to about 96,000 physicians in urban areas .