florida pays for this care . current va policy emphasizes rehabilitation of psychiatric patients . thus , va's medical practice is shifting away from the custodial role . long - term psychiatry is no longer described as a level of va care . rehabilitative programs are offered as alternatives to long - term care . outpatient , residential , and community - based treatment programs are also presented as alternatives to inpatient psychiatric care . va's policy states that a significant number of patients who now reside in long - term care facilities may be reintegrated into the community when a comprehensive , flexible case management policy is implemented . case management is used to provide veterans with an ongoing connection to va so that medical , psychosocial , and vocational services can be planned and maintained for veterans whose symptoms affect their life management skills . the approach for case management involves a planned and systematic use of the full range of va and community services and requires a dual focus on meeting the veterans' needs and conserving agency and community resources . va's policy also states that patients should be encouraged to receive their treatment near their homes and within one medical center . although va focuses now on rehabilitative care , it recognizes that some patients may require prolonged hospital treatment because they do not respond to current medications and they behave in unpredictable and destructive ways . in addition to focusing on rehabilitative psychiatric care , more psychiatric services will be provided on an outpatient basis . these outpatient services will be provided through clinics , residential , and community - based care . for example , the chief of psychiatry at bay pines is planning to consolidate and reduce the current number of psychiatric beds from 149 to 120 to provide more outpatient psychiatric services . in another example , the psychiatric service at the va hospital in houston , texas , adopted ambulatory care as the main mode of treatment and integrated inpatient and ambulatory care to provide a continuum of care . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . our methodology is discussed in more detail in appendix i . we presented our preliminary observations to you and your staff on march 21 , 1995 . at your request , we provided a similar briefing for representative weldon and his staff on march 23 , 1995 . in addition , we provided similar briefings to representative jerry lewis and his staff ; and the congressional staffs of senators christopher s. bond , bob graham , connie mack , and alan k. simpson and representative bob stump . this report presents the final results of our work . va provides health care services nationwide through a direct delivery system of 172 hospitals , 365 outpatient clinics , and 128 nursing homes . in addition to operating its own nursing homes , va pays for care provided to veterans by community and state veterans' nursing homes .