stat . 244.045 ( 1997 ) ) state postemployment restrictions have gaps . south carolina's ethics provisions apply only to former state employees that accept employment from an organization regulated by the state agency where they formerly worked or if this employment involves a matter in which they participated directly and substantially . ( s.c. code ann . 8-13-755 ( 1997 ) ) hawaii's ethics provisions place some employment limitations on former employees and legislators but also expressly provide that those limitations do not prohibit a state agency from contracting with them to act on behalf of the state . ( haw . rev . stat . ann . 84-18 ( 1998 ) ) length of states' postemployment prohibitions varies . kansas' ethics provisions prohibit former state officers or employees from accepting employment with a person or business if they participated in the making of any contract with that person or business . the prohibition lasts for 2 years from the time the contract is completed or from the time the state employment ended , whichever is sooner . ( kan. stat . ann . 46-233 ( 1997 ) ) in contrast , kentucky's provisions prohibit for 6 months after termination of state service certain former officials from participating in or benefiting from any contract involving the agency where they were employed . the provisions also prohibit such individuals from accepting employment , compensation , or other economic benefits from any person or business that contracts with the state on a matter in which the former official was directly involved during the past 3 years of state service . ( ky. rev . stat . ann . 11a.040 ( 1998 ) ) according to a 1996 study completed by the council of state governments and the american society for public administration , 17 states lacked one or more of the ethics provisions aba and other organizations believe are necessary to promote open and fair competitive contracting , as summarized in table 1 . of these 17 states , 9 did not restrict postemployment activities of former state employees with organizations that compete for government contracts . for example , arkansas does not prohibit postemployment activities of former state employees that could have a bearing on social service contracting . eight states lacked provisions limiting the direct involvement of former public employees in competitive contracting . state enforcement approaches to help ensure compliance with ethics provisions differed widely among the four states we reviewed . in these states , enforcement involved a variety of officials and organizations , such as the department or agency that contracted for services , ethics commissions , legislative and state auditors , inspectors general , and attorneys general . in maryland , for example , the state placed representatives from the attorney general's office in major state agencies to provide technical assistance and help ensure that state agencies comply with applicable contracting policies . two of the four states lacked enforcement elements that officials in those states believe are necessary to help ensure compliance with applicable ethics policies . in massachusetts , the state inspector general believes that social services contracting has a high level of risk , often associated with unfair contractor advantages , conflicts of interest , and personal gain through public office .