ii. ) in 1992 , 27 states had average service periods within 10 days of the 74- day national average . by 1998 , 36 states had average service periods within 10 days of the 59-day average . several factors influence beneficiary choice about whether and when to use hospice care . growth was particularly rapid among beneficiaries with diagnoses other than cancer . at the same time , many beneficiaries had shorter stays . on average , the days of hospice service used per beneficiary declined by about one - fifth during the 7-year period and beneficiaries with diagnoses other than cancer experienced the sharpest reductions . our analysis of medicare claims data indicates substantial growth in hospice use . the number of beneficiaries electing hospice care increased 2 ½ times from 1992 to 1998 , from about 143,000 to nearly 360,000 persons annually . ( see fig . across most demographic groups , the use of hospice services has grown at a relatively consistent rate . thus , hospice users today are similar to users in 1992 ; the distribution of enrollees by race has not changed ( 89 percent are white ) , and the proportion of enrollees who are women has climbed only slightly ( from 50 to 54 percent ) . we excluded beneficiaries from our analysis if total payment for a beneficiary was less than $75 or was $1 million or more , if a beneficiary at the time of a first hospice claim was younger than 20 or older than 110 , or if a beneficiary's residence was not in one of the 50 states or the district of columbia . our analysis of beneficiary use includes information on age at the time of entry into hospice ( younger than 65 , 65 to 74 , 75 to 84 , 85 and older ) , gender , race and ethnicity ( white , black , hispanic , and other ) , state of residence , enrollment in managed care or fee - for - service medicare ( based on status in the month of death , from the hcfa denominator file ) , and primary diagnosis ( three - digit international classification of disease code ) . analysis of the beneficiary claims data showed that 98 percent of beneficiaries had only one hospice provider , and 97 percent had only one diagnosis code . therefore , we conducted all further analysis on the basis of the provider and diagnosis listed in the first hospice claim for each beneficiary . we calculated the period of enrollment by summing the number of days covered by each claim , even if they covered discontinuous periods of service , and excluded duplicate claims.because records of hospice use are not complete for beneficiaries who entered hospice during the later years of our study period , we adjusted the claimed days of hospice service for 1996 to 1998 to better account for beneficiaries with very long stays.our adjustment factor was calculated from 1992-95 data on the proportion of total beneficiary claim days accounted for within the first 2 calendar years of hospice use . to calculate the rate of hospice use , we identified the number of medicare decedents each calendar year who had used hospice before death .