iii. ) he was concerned that readers would generalize the findings about this small group of persian gulf veterans to all persian gulf veterans and that the readers would consider these veterans' perceptions of care as conclusive evidence about care received . as stated in the report , we agree that the responses of the 89 veterans cannot be generalized to any larger population and that the information on health status and health care received was based on veterans' memories and perceptions . dod officials , including the deputy assistant secretary of defense for clinical services , provided comments on the draft in an april 18 , 1995 , meeting . this could have substantial impact . for example , while only about 40,000 veterans had received the va special examination , and therefore were receiving information from va , va indicated that another 110,000 persian gulf veterans had received inpatient or outpatient care from va. va officials told us that they expected to have a complete registry and to mail required information to all on the registry by the end of may 1995 . va also instituted the toll - free telephone information service , required by the veterans' benefits improvement act , in february 1995 . officials reported that about 29,000 veterans had called the number in the first month of operation . they believed that this indicated the outreach mechanism was having a substantial impact . dod has also taken steps to publicize services available to persian gulf veterans . for example , in may 1994 dod sent a memorandum to persian gulf veterans notifying them that they were eligible for an examination and how to arrange for one . dod sent the memorandum by mail to retirees and those who had left the military . dod officials stated that they went to considerable lengths to find up - to - date mailing addresses for these people , including purchasing addresses from a private credit reporting firm . dod also sent the memorandum to the services for distribution through command channels to active duty and reserve members . however , during our review , dod officials determined that the services had sent the memorandum to active duty units but not to reserve units , instead relying on public communication channels to inform reservists . officials of the arcom told us that they had not received information about the ccep from reserve headquarters . dod officials indicated that it is often difficult for them to reach members of reserve units because the units are so dispersed nationally . additionally , in june 1994 dod initiated a toll - free number for persian gulf veterans . callers to this hotline receive information about the special examinations and other medical care available from va and dod and are referred to medical facilities to receive the va or dod examination , if they so desire . however , in april 1995 an arcom official told us he was unaware of either the dod or va hot line . in october 1994 the national defense authorization act for 1995 required that dod establish an outreach program for those in the military who served in the persian gulf .