not all have expertise in developmental disabilities . although hcfa recommends that at least one member of a state survey team be a qualified mental retardation professional ( qmrp ) , 17 states had no qmrps on their survey agency staffs as of march 1996 . justice's investigators are usually physicians , psychiatrists , therapists , and others with special expertise in working with the developmentally disabled . according to hcfa and justice officials , justice department investigators generally can better challenge the judgment of professionals in the institution regarding the care provided to individual residents than can state surveyors . hcfa officials acknowledged that the differences between medicaid surveys and justice investigations could explain some of the differences between their findings . they told us , however , that they have begun to implement several changes to the survey process to increase the likelihood that state surveys will identify all serious deficiencies . these include new instructions to surveyors for assessing the seriousness of deficiencies , increased training for surveyors and providers , and implementation of a new survey protocol intended to focus more attention on critical quality - of - care elements and client outcomes . the new survey protocol reduces the number of items that must be assessed each year and places greatest emphasis on client protections , active treatment , client behavior and facility practices , and health care services . the new protocol gives surveyors latitude , however , to expand the scope of a facility's survey if they find specific problems . hcfa's pilot test of the new protocol showed that although surveyors identified fewer deficiencies overall than with the standard protocol , they issued more citations for the most serious cop violations . hcfa is conducting training for state surveyors and providers on this new protocol and plans to monitor certain aspects of its implementation . even when state survey agencies identify deficiencies in large public icfs / mr , state enforcement efforts do not always ensure that facilities' corrections are sufficient to prevent the recurrence of the same serious deficiencies . although state survey agencies almost always certify that serious deficiencies have been corrected , they subsequently cite many institutions for the same violations . for example , between december 1990 and may 1995 , state survey agencies cited 33 large public institutions for violating the same cop on at least one subsequent survey within the next 3 years . moreover , 25 were cited for violating the same cop on one or more consecutive surveys . hcfa officials told us that the sanctions available to the states under medicaid have not always been effective in preventing recurring violations and are rarely used against large public icfs / mr . we analyzed national data from hcfa's online survey , certification and reporting system for state and federal icf / mr surveys conducted between december 1990 and may 1995 . information from surveys conducted before december 1990 was not available at the time of our review . we limited our analysis of hcfa and state data on deficiencies to information about institutions participating in medicaid as of august 1995 .