( see fig . the number of hmos in the risk program fluctuated somewhat in the program's first 5 years , but since 1992 the number of risk hmos has grown steadily . the health benefit services division handles enrollments or changes in plans and conducts educational activities for members . each year , the health benefit services division processes about 120,000 enrollment documents . calpers offers members a choice of 22 plans . during the open season , plans must accept enrollees regardless of health status , age , or previous medical condition . calpers encourages its members to join an hmo by allowing members to choose from among 16 hmos , including 9 medicare risk hmos . currently , about 76 percent of calpers members are enrolled in hmos . for people who are eligible for medicare , the advantage of enrolling in an hmo through calpers is that calpers will reimburse them for the medicare part b premium . if retirees were not enrolled in a calpers health plan at the time they retired , they are not eligible to enroll during their retirement . also , calpers offers hmo benefits , such as prescription drugs , that are better than the benefits people could obtain individually . to make comparisons easier for members , calpers requires hmos to offer similar coverage . in addition , plans cannot charge more than the standard premium , which is the same for anyone enrolling in the specific plan . the amount an employer contributes to a premium varies among the public agencies participating in calpers . calpers has one annual open season . during 1996 , the dates were changed from an open season beginning may 1 with an effective date of august 1 to an open season beginning september 1 with an effective date of january 1 , 1997 . calpers changed its season to coordinate its deductibles with its preferred provider organizations and with other state benefits such as the vision and dental care programs . the preferred provider organizations with which calpers contracts and the other state programs operate on a calendar year . calpers officials told us that they found the process of shifting the health benefits cycle manageable and not very costly but that the organization needed about 15 months to prepare for the change . retirees who want to change plans visit the calpers office in person or submit a written request . medicare beneficiaries must notify calpers in writing of a change in enrollment . calpers instructs medicare beneficiaries to mail their enrollment information directly to the hmo of their choice during open season . the plan sends the new enrollment information to hcfa . calpers officials characterized the peak load associated with open season as a time when the staff members are “basically busier.” to handle the peak load , the organization hires temporary workers and allows its permanent staff to work overtime hours . educating members is an important task for calpers , especially educating older people who fear signing over their medicare cards to an hmo . calpers sponsors retirement seminars for active employees who are within 5 years of retirement . it also offers 4-hour individual sessions for people who will retire soon .