( see app . i for more information on our scope and methodology. ) to do this , ssa sends computer tapes or cartridges containing the names of ssi recipients to each state . the states in turn append to the bottom of these tapes any earnings information pertaining to the ssi recipients residing in their states and then mail the tapes back to ssa . once ssa receives the tapes , it matches them against the agency's own records to determine if recipients have disclosed all of their earnings to the agency . in order to detect unreported financial accounts , information reported by clients is compared to irs form 1099s , which are filed annually by financial institutions and contain the amount of interest earned on financial accounts . because form 1099 data only contain interest accrued on financial accounts , this match can detect only interest - bearing accounts . each september , ssa conducts this match using data from the previous year , which covers most ssi recipients from that year . a primary cause of ssi overpayments has been that clients do not always disclose their earnings and financial accounts when they apply for benefits or once they are receiving such payments . for example , ssa's fiscal year 1996 payment accuracy study shows that out of a total of $1.6 billion in overpayments , approximately 40 percent ( nearly $647.6 million ) was the result of nondisclosed earnings and financial accounts . about $379.5 million of these overpayments occurred because ssi clients did not disclose their earnings and $268.1 million occurred because ssi clients did not disclose their financial accounts . many of these overpayments could have been prevented or more quickly detected if more timely and comprehensive information on the earnings and financial accounts of ssi clients had been available . ssa conducts a second annual payment accuracy study , which contains more detailed information on the amount of overpayments in the ssi program . however , neither study accurately estimates for the entire ssi population the amount of overpayments made because of nondisclosure at the time of application versus the amount made because of nondisclosure after clients began receiving benefits . we also interviewed government officials to determine to what extent the earnings information from the ocse databases would be more current and comprehensive than the data presently used by ssa to verify earnings information reported by ssi clients . we examined ( 1 ) the comparative value of these new data sources versus the data sources currently used by ssa , ( 2 ) how ssa currently verifies client - supplied information on earnings and financial accounts , ( 3 ) how the new data sources could be most effectively used for verification purposes , and ( 4 ) the issues involved in implementing the use of the new data sources . finally , we obtained nationwide aggregate data from ssa studies on the amount of overpayments that occurred in fiscal year 1996 . we used these data to determine the amount of overpayments attributable to the nondisclosure of earnings and financial accounts . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .