some of these were modest . for example , all programs using private insurers issued enrollees insurance membership cards that were similar to cards issued for the insurers' commercial programs . families generally reported being very satisfied in the five programs that assessed patient satisfaction . for example , 97 percent of respondents in a 1993-94 survey of florida's healthy kids families were either “very satisfied” or “satisfied” with the care provided for their children . more families with children in the healthy kids program were satisfied with their care than families of children in any of the four comparison groups — medicaid , private insurance , other insurance , or uninsured . a separate study of healthy kids families found that higher percentages of program families than of nonprogram families were “very satisfied” with the benefits available to their children , their doctor's availability , waiting times in the doctor's office , and the amount they had to pay at the time of an office visit . as another example , a 1989 survey of participants in minnesota's children's health plan , predecessor to minnesotacare , found that over 80 percent rated the program either a 9 or a 10 on a scale of 1 to 10 , with 10 being excellent . all the programs we visited sought to reduce unmet medical needs and to encourage the appropriate use of primary and preventive care services . several of the programs have begun to evaluate whether their programs are achieving these goals . although some programs are finding that access and appropriate use of medical services have increased , several have found that use of preventive services is still below desired levels . program staff have increased their efforts to educate parents about the importance of preventive care for children . ( see app . iii. ) if enacted , legislation to change the medicaid program to a block grant would give states greater flexibility to redesign their medicaid programs , but it would also limit federal funding . to accommodate these changes , states would need to make difficult choices when structuring their medicaid programs . while the programs we visited differed from medicaid , they exemplified the choices states and private - sector organizations have made when using their own resources to provide health coverage to uninsured children . most notably , the state - and privately funded programs we visited covered some children who would not otherwise have been covered ; complemented existing medicaid coverage ; kept per child costs to a minimum ; provided preventive and primary care services — the services children are most likely to need ; offered a wide network of providers ; required families to share part of the cost ; used hmos frequently to manage children's health care ; and used existing administrative systems of state , nonprofit , and private organizations . despite these state and private efforts , many children remained uninsured . in addition , eligible children sometimes had to wait to enroll . further , programs did not always cover services routinely available to children insured through private insurance or medicaid .