it validates veteran concerns . by having physicians clearly identified as responsible for the care and treatment of gulf war veterans , these veterans are more confident that va takes their complaints seriously . it enhances opportunities for veterans to receive follow - up care . after completing the registry examination , veterans have an immediate point of contact should they have questions about their condition or require follow - up care . it allows for increased awareness of va's referral centers . one of the primary care doctors we spoke with was not aware of the availability of va referral centers for veterans with undiagnosed conditions or who do not respond to treatment . if designated physicians were responsible for treatment of gulf war veterans , greater awareness and use of the referral centers would likely take place . it allows for a better treatment focus . if designated physicians see the majority of gulf war veterans , there is an increased likelihood of recognizing symptomatic and diagnostic patterns and developing an effective treatment program . this approach may also lead to greater understanding of the nature and origin of gulf war illnesses . periodic reevaluation and management of patient symptoms , diagnosis , and treatment is part of continuous and coordinated care . this is important for persian gulf veterans because of the need to ensure that their diagnosis is correct , assess their progress , check for new symptoms , and determine how they are responding to their treatment plan . although va officials contend that gulf war veterans are generally being treated appropriately for the symptoms they display , they also recognize the need to evaluate health outcomes and treatment efficacy . they added that these form letters generated considerable anger because they were often interpreted to mean that va physicians did not believe that veterans were suffering from any physical illness . gulf war veterans also indicated that they clearly preferred the use of specific physicians to treat their conditions . veterans noted that designated physicians tended to be genuinely concerned about their patients and more likely to take their health problems seriously . recognizing that those who initially communicated with us might be more dissatisfied than the typical gulf war veteran who receives care , we designed and administered a mail - out questionnaire that we sent to an adjusted random sample of 452 gulf war veterans . our sample was selected from 8,106 veterans who received va's registry examination nationwide during calendar years 1996 and 1997 . our survey population was limited to 1996 and 1997 registry participants because this group received the examination after va's most recent update to the protocol , which was implemented as of january 1 , 1996 . the questionnaire collected information on veterans' satisfaction with ( 1 ) the persian gulf registry health examination , ( 2 ) the treatment va provided , and ( 3 ) sources of health care other than va. sixty - three percent , or 283 , of the 452 veterans surveyed responded . analyses of the characteristics of nonrespondents showed them to be similar to those of respondents , thus increasing our confidence that our survey results are representative of the views of the sampled population .