( app . iii lists the organizations whose accreditation is deemed equivalent to hcfa certification ; it also lists other organizations that accredit institutional health care providers or units within providers. ) regardless of whether hcfa or state agency personnel perform the review , the process used to determine whether an institution meets certification requirements involves an on - site survey by a team of registered nurses and persons trained in other health - related disciplines . this survey may take several days depending on the type and size of provider . the survey includes a thorough review of the provider's policies , procedures , and systems . at the conclusion of the inspection , the team meets with appropriate provider officials and informs them of its findings . subsequently , the team prepares a formal written report and sends it to the provider . if the team finds that the provider does not comply with one or more conditions of participation , it will ask the provider to submit a corrective action plan , including a timetable . at the end of the time period specified in the plan's timetable , the surveying agency may perform a limited resurvey to ensure that all identified problems have been corrected , or it may require the provider to submit documentation that corrective action has occurred . if the provider does not comply with conditions by the end of the time period in the plan's timetable , or if the problem was severe enough to seriously endanger medicare beneficiaries , hcfa may revoke the provider's certification to receive medicare payment . in our 1991 review of the medicare hospital certification program , however , we found that hcfa rarely terminated hospitals from the medicare program even though they might have been out of compliance with medicare requirements months longer than anticipated or allowed by regulation . this situation occurred because federal and state officials preferred to work with substandard hospitals to bring them into compliance , political pressures were exerted to keep them open if possible , and quality problems less obvious than gross negligence were difficult to document . this apparent unwillingness to terminate noncompliant hospitals has cast some doubt on hcfa's willingness to act against any but the very worst hospitals . while terminating hospitals from medicare is usually undesirable except as a last resort , we reported that hcfa should terminate facilities that are persistently noncompliant with conditions of participation . to ensure that state agencies and private accrediting organizations are performing their surveys adequately , hcfa performs validation surveys . hcfa personnel conduct validation surveys on a small percentage of the facilities surveyed by state agencies ; in addition , hcfa contracts with state agencies to conduct validation surveys of the facilities surveyed by private accreditors . in 1993 , state agency personnel performed 181 validation surveys among the approximately 5,200 hospitals accredited by the joint commission . the 1993 hcfa annual report on validation surveys of hospitals accredited by the joint commission concluded that a decline over several years in the percentage of hospitals found by the validation surveys to have general health and safety deficiencies provided increased assurance that accredited hospitals met federal standards .