sells . “effectiveness of treatment for drug abuse: an overview of the darp research program.” advances in alcohol and substance abuse , vol . 2 ( 1992 ) , pp . drug courts: overview of growth , characteristics , and results ( gao / ggd - 97-106 , july 31 , 1997 ) . drug control: observations on elements of the federal drug control strategy ( gao / ggd - 97-42 , mar . substance abuse treatment: va programs serve psychologically and economically disadvantaged veterans ( gao / hehs - 97-6 , nov. 5 , 1996 ) . drug and alcohol abuse: billions spent annually for treatment and prevention activities ( gao / hehs - 97-12 , oct. 8 , 1996 ) . randomized trials are often used to study the efficacy of a treatment , asking the question , “can it work ? ” although such studies provide the most definitive information about whether particular treatments are effective , they are not widely used in drug treatment research . according to an analysis by the lewin group , among the reasons cited for the limited use of randomized trials are the difficulties in obtaining informed consent from drug abusers and the perceived ethical issue of randomly assigning people who are seeking drug treatment to a control group in which no treatment or a treatment regimen not of the client's choice is provided . simple and controlled observation designs typically employ a repeated - measures methodology , whereby the researchers collect information on drug use patterns and other criteria from clients before , during , and after treatment . generally , controlled observation studies examine multiple treatment groups , and simple observation studies follow a single treatment group without a nontreatment comparison group . observational studies provide information about the effectiveness of treatments when implemented in uncontrolled , or real - world , conditions . observational design has been used to assess treatment provided in all four of the major treatment settings: residential therapeutic communities and outpatient methadone maintenance , outpatient drug - free , and inpatient chemical dependency programs . quasiexperimental study designs generally have a comparison group , a key feature of strong research design , but an investigator does not randomly assign individuals to treatment and comparison groups . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . nor has any medication used in combination with one or more cognitive - behavioral therapies proven effective in enhancing cocaine abstinence . researchers are hopeful , however , that a pharmacological agent for treating cocaine addiction will be developed . without a pharmacological agent , researchers have relied on psychotherapeutic approaches to treat cocaine addiction .