territories has . ( see fig . as seen in figure 3 , four of the sponsors operate in over half of the states ; five of the sponsors operate in 16 or fewer states . labor's regulations allow scsep funds to be provided to eligible organizations through grants , contracts , or other agreements pursuant to the purposes of title v of the oaa . department officials have chosen to fund the program through noncompetitive grants . the regulations specify that grants are the “appropriate instrument when the department does not need to exercise considerable direction and control over the project.” labor provides annual grant applications only to national organizations that currently sponsor scsep . labor's action is consistent with the statute and with expressions of intent by the senate appropriations committee . labor officials rely on annual appropriations committee report language such as the following from a recent senate appropriations report that seems to indicate support for the current sponsors: “it is the intent of the committee that the current sponsors continue to build upon their past accomplishments.” in addition , the oaa , although it permits awards to other entities , creates a specific preference for awards to “national organizations and agencies of proven ability in providing employment services . .” labor's procedures require that noncompetitive grants over $25,000 be included in an annual procurement plan that is forwarded for approval by the responsible assistant secretary to the procurement review board ( prb ) . the prb , whose members include designees of the chief financial officer and the solicitor , as well as the director of the division of procurement and grant policy , is “to serve as a senior level clearinghouse to review proposed noncompetitive and major acquisitions.” the prb advises whether competition is appropriate for each acquisition and whether long - term relationships with the same organizations are consistent with labor policies . however , labor exempts title v awards and does not involve the prb in reviewing the program's annual grant renewal decisions . labor officials did not adequately explain the reason for this exemption . the hold harmless provision of the oaa's title v , in effect , severely limits labor's ability to allocate funds among states in a way that ensures equitable distribution , that is , in accordance with the state - by - state distribution of persons 55 years old and older , adjusted to give greater weight to economically disadvantaged areas and persons . the result is a pattern of too many scsep positions in some states and too few in other states relative to their eligible populations . in addition , within states , labor's administrative inaction has permitted a continuing pattern of overserved and underserved counties . in applying the oaa's hold harmless provision , labor officials establish a reserve amount from each year's scsep appropriation , delineated by state subtotals , to finance the 1978 level of national sponsor positions in each state .