( see app . i for more information on the legal authorities for ofccp. ) established in 1966 , ofccp has seen its role evolve over time . initially , ofccp served as a policy - making body ; using a small nationwide staff , it concentrated primarily on coordinating and monitoring enforcement , while the actual day - to - day enforcement responsibilities were scattered among other federal agencies . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . in addition , during the course of compliance reviews and complaint investigations , ofccp checks for compliance with certain aspects of the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) and the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( fmla ) . irca requires all employers to maintain a verification form pertaining to the citizenship and / or immigration status of new employees . ofccp examines these records and reports its findings to the immigration and naturalization service . fmla requires employers to permit employees to take unpaid leave for certain family and medical reasons . generally , any employee who takes this leave is entitled , upon return , to be restored to the same or an equivalent position without loss of benefits . a compliance review , which often takes between 3 and 6 months to complete , usually consists of two phases: a desk audit and a site visit . the desk audit is a systematic review of documents and materials that the contractor under review provides , explaining its efforts to ensure equal employment opportunities . as part of the desk audit , compliance officers compare the representation of women and individual minority groups in the contractor's workforce with that of the workforces of similar federal contractors in the area , and examine the contractor's affirmative action plan . next , ofccp usually conducts an on - site review at the contractor's establishment . during this phase , compliance officers investigate potential violations identified in the desk audit , verify the contractor's activities to implement its affirmative action program , and obtain information needed to work with the contractor to resolve any violations . activities include inspecting the contractor's facilities and reviewing its personnel files ( see fig . compliance reviews tend to uncover violations in the vast majority of cases . in two of these cases , the contractors did not honor their conciliation agreements by failing to recruit and hire women , and by filing false reports . enforcement resources not devoted to compliance reviews are used for complaint investigations and other support activities . any establishment that serves as a depository of government funds or is a financial institution that is an issuing and paying agent for u.s. savings bonds is required to file . also , all private sector employers with 100 or more employees are required to file regardless of whether they hold federal contracts .