develop . pers . breakdown of mqsa inspection fee costs contracts with states to conduct inspections fda personnel to conduct inspections equipment , development of calibration procedures , and instrument calibration design , programming , and maintenance of data systems necessary to schedule inspections and track results training and certification of inspectors ( fda and state ) . in addition to those named above , the following individuals made important contributions to this report: stan stenersen , evaluator ; susan lawes , technical advisor ; helene toiv , advisor ; julie rachiele , technical information specialist ; and jennifer vieten , intern . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . misreading mammograms can have considerable consequences . a mammogram that is incorrectly read as showing an abnormality could cause a woman to go through unnecessary and costly follow - up procedures , such as ultrasound or biopsies . a mammogram that is read as normal when an abnormality is actually present could result in missed diagnosis of early lesions and delayed treatment , which could cost a woman's life . mqsa contains a number of provisions designed to ensure the quality of the image and its interpretation . among other things , mqsa requires that fda establish quality standards for mammography equipment , personnel , all mammography facilities be accredited by an fda - approved accrediting body ( either a nonprofit organization or a state agency ) and obtain a certificate from fda in order to legally provide mammography services after october 1 , 1994 ; and all mammography facilities be evaluated annually by a certified medical physicist and be inspected annually by fda - approved inspectors . fda issued interim regulations in december 1993 that established requirements for accrediting bodies and quality standards and certification requirements for mammography facilities . since early 1994 , fda has been working with the national mammography quality assurance advisory committee to develop the final regulations . fda officials estimate that they will publish the proposed final regulations for public comment in october 1995 and issue the final regulations in october 1996 . as of october 1 , 1994 , fda had approved acr and the states of california , arkansas , and iowa as official accrediting bodies .