report no . washington , d.c.: va , deputy assistant secretary for program coordination and evaluation , may 1991 . friedman , matthew j. , lawrence c. kolb , arthur arnold , and others . third annual report of the chief medical director's special committee on post - traumatic stress disorder . washington , d.c.: va , feb. 1 , 1987 . should rcs maintain an organizational structure within vha that is separate from medical centers ? in 1987 , we reported on various aspects of va's readjustment counseling program and made recommendations for improvement in some program areas . our report included observations on the accuracy of rcs' database , the need for rcs to better monitor vet center activities by making regional office site visits as required , and the need to better evaluate the quality of vet center care . this report recognizes rcs' efforts in these areas and identifies the need for further improvements . in performing this review , we visited rcs' central office in washington , d.c. , four of rcs' seven regional offices , and five vet centers . at these locations we reviewed documentation , discussed program activities with officials , and at three of the vet centers we met with veterans to obtain their views on the program . we also obtained workload activity data for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 from 39 randomly selected vet centers that helped to describe clients and services provided . we also met with officials of several veteran service organizations to obtain their views on the program . we performed our work between june 1995 and april 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) under the veterans' health care amendments of 1979 ( p.l . 96-22 ) , the congress authorized a temporary program of readjustment counseling services for vietnam era veterans who served from august 5 , 1964 , to may 7 , 1975 , to assist them in the transition to postwar civilian life . at that time it was recognized that a veteran suffering from a “readjustment problem” might exhibit “a low - grade motivational or behavioral impairment” that interfered with interpersonal relationships , job or educational performance , or overall ability to cope with daily life . this condition , in combination with other symptoms , was later termed post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) . at that time va medical centers did not have special programs in place to treat these problems . veterans who did go to va medical centers for treatment were usually admitted to the general psychiatric service where these problems were not well understood . ptsd is caused by severely stressful or traumatic events such as military combat , seeing people die , or incarceration as a prisoner of war . ptsd symptoms include intense reliving of the event in memory or dreams , anxiety , sleep disturbance , depression , social isolation , and an incapacity for intimate relations with others . ptsd may not be curable and can be a chronic condition with symptoms that are stress - induced and effects that may increase with a person's age .