( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) vha operates one of the nation's largest health care systems , including 173 hospitals and over 400 outpatient clinics nationwide ; vha had about 45,700 hospital beds nationwide in fiscal year 1996 . vha hospitals also purchase health care from other public and private providers under certain conditions , such as during medical emergencies or when they do not provide the services themselves . during discussions with us in july 1997 , veterans also expressed a willingness to use different hospitals . for example , during interviews we conducted with 190 veterans who received care at either the lakeside or west side vha hospitals , 75 percent indicated that they would use another vha facility if the one they presently use was closed . of the remaining 25 percent , 17 percent of the veterans were not certain where they would obtain care , and 7 percent said they would use non - vha care . also , vha currently operates a shuttle service between the lakeside and west side hospitals that runs throughout the day . a more limited service is available between these two hospitals , hines , and an outpatient clinic in crown point , indiana . vha could modify this system to minimize veterans' inconvenience caused by the shifting of services if a hospital is closed . depending on which hospital is closed , vha could expand its service to ( 1 ) include north chicago ; ( 2 ) run between any outpatient clinics not already part of the shuttle service , including new clinics that may open in the future ; and ( 3 ) run more frequently to certain locations . vha has recognized that making modifications to existing transportation systems was integral in helping veterans adjust to service delivery changes at other locations . if vha consolidated services into three hospitals it could reduce expenditures over the next 10 years by about $200 million or more for ( 1 ) facility operating and maintenance costs and ( 2 ) renovation costs . vha will incur one - time costs to relocate inpatient and outpatient workload if a hospital is closed . additionally , vha may be able to generate revenues through the lease or sale of the fourth hospital . vha will likely need to use some of the savings from consolidating services to prepare existing or new space for the workload to be relocated , primarily to meet veterans' outpatient treatment needs . in this regard , vha has many relocation options , and the extent of relocation costs could vary greatly depending on the hospital to be closed and the mix of options vha determines to best meet veterans' needs . for example , vha's costs to prepare space to accommodate the smallest hospital's workload could be relatively low — perhaps as little as $5 million — if vha decides to use existing space to treat the closed hospital's workload . this may involve expanding the hours of operation at the remaining three hospitals' outpatient clinics or converting inpatient space into outpatient treatment areas . vha may also decide to rely , in part , on new cbocs to help meet veterans' needs .