additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . whd has achieved some initial success with this effort . for example , one los angeles manufacturer has established a compliance division to audit its contractors to ensure compliance with federal and state labor laws . other manufacturers have hired consultants to monitor their contractors' compliance with labor laws . these consultants conduct compliance training programs that all the manufacturers' contractors must attend ; these consultants also conduct compliance investigations of the contractors' workplaces and wage records . contractors who refuse to comply with labor laws , one expert said , are requested to do so by the consultant ; contractors' failure to comply results in the notification of the manufacturer and possible loss of the contracts . whd offices in dallas and san francisco have also had success with this strategy . to the extent that these voluntary efforts are successful , whd will be able to reallocate enforcement resources to other agency priorities . however , economic incentives continue to exist for manufacturers to maintain lax or no oversight of their contractors' compliance with labor standards . in this regard , manufacturers benefit when contractors offer lower bids for work , even though the lower bids are predicated on the contractors' violation of minimum wage and overtime provisions . aware of these incentives , whd officials told us that they recognize that , should these voluntary efforts fail , legislative action may be needed to better protect garment workers from exploitation . sweatshop working conditions remain a major problem in the u.s. garment industry , according to the experts contacted . they say working conditions , in many cases , have worsened over the last few years . in general , the description of today's sweatshops differs little from that at the turn of the century . labor has made some progress in coordinating labor law enforcement to combat the sweatshop growth in the garment industry . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . we conducted our work from may 1994 to october 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . flsa is the federal law regulating minimum wage and overtime , as well as child labor , in the united states . whd of the employment standards administration ( esa ) enforces this law through workplace inspections of employer payroll records .