( app . i describes our methodology. ) adding our extrapolated estimate for these five types of revenues to the $732 million estimate for the three types of revenues produced a total state and local tax revenue estimate of $1.1 billion for 1992 . the california study and the fiscal impacts study reflect differing views about the magnitude of revenues generated by illegal aliens in california . passel , jeffrey s. immigrants and taxes: a reappraisal of huddle's “the cost of immigrants.” washington , d.c.: the urban institute , jan. 1994 . romero , phillip j. , and others . shifting the costs of a failed federal policy: the net fiscal impact of illegal immigrants in california . sacramento , calif.: california governor's office of planning and research , and california department of finance , sept. 1994 . u.s. bureau of the census . government finances: 1990-91 . washington , d.c.: u.s. government printing office . u.s. bureau of the census . state government finances: 1992 . washington , d.c.: u.s. government printing office . we did not assess the validity of the growth trends . in addition , we did not independently verify california's administrative data for medicaid and incarceration because we had no reason to believe that the data on expenditures and number of recipients in these programs presented any special concerns about reliability . we did our work between april and september 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as of september 1994 , california estimated that it will spend $2.35 billion on elementary and secondary education , medicaid , and adult incarceration for illegal aliens in fiscal year 1994-95 . california officials believe that these three programs represent the state's highest costs for illegal aliens . this estimate is $80 million lower than california's january 1994 estimate primarily because the education estimate was reduced . in the september estimate , california reduced its projections of the numbers of illegal aliens who will receive education or medicaid services , or be incarcerated in state prisons . at the same time , however , this new estimate added in administrative costs not previously included and for education and adult incarceration , added capital costs . the net effect of these adjustments is shown in table 1 . the urban institute's fiscal impacts study estimated costs lower than california's estimates for all three programs ( see table 1 ) . this is in part because the fiscal impacts study estimated costs for earlier years — the education estimate was for the 1993-94 school year ; medicaid , for fiscal year 1992-93 ; and adult incarceration , for 1994 . other reasons for the lower estimates in the fiscal impacts study varied by program , as described in the following sections . the cost estimates in the california and fiscal impacts studies are questionable because of the limited direct data available on illegal aliens and certain assumptions made by the studies . for example , estimates of the cost of education — the single largest cost associated with illegal aliens — are based entirely on assumptions about the size and characteristics of the illegal alien population .