there are enormous data and reporting requirements in the . most states don't have the information systems available to collect data such as whether a client has been on welfare before . this requires data systems to communicate across counties and across states.” in addition to program design and implementation problems , states are concerned about being penalized for noncompliance with the regulations for program decisions they made before the final issuance of the regulations . in our survey , 14 states mentioned this specific concern . they told us that the potential difficulty with the lack of regulations is that hhs will provide its own interpretation of the law through the regulations , which may be inconsistent with the approaches states took . according to hhs officials , interim guidance distributed in a january 1997 policy announcement signaled to states that penalties will not be imposed for early program decisions if they were based on a reasonable interpretation of the law and that before a final rule is available , penalties will be imposed only for violations of the statute . further , the guidance specifies that statutory interpretations in the final rules will apply prospectively only . hhs' guidance to the states since august 1996 , the date the new welfare reform law was enacted , has been provided through a variety of means , including its january 1997 policy announcement , letters to state directors providing hhs' answers to frequently asked questions , conference calls to groups of states , conferences , and one - on - one calls between states and their respective hhs regional representatives . in considering hhs guidance , both written and oral , 33 of the 49 states responding to our survey reported that the guidance , for the most part , met their needs for information . for issues covered by hhs' written guidance , the states were particularly satisfied with guidance for process - related issues . for example , 37 of 44 states indicated that hhs' guidance mostly or completely met their needs for information about what must be described in a state tanf plan for hhs to consider the plan complete , as required by tanf . similarly , hhs guidance on how it calculated the amount of each state's block grant met the information needs of 37 of 41 states , and guidance on prorating the amount of states' tanf block grant based on when their plan was submitted and deemed complete met the information needs of 32 of 39 states . states were least satisfied with hhs' guidance on financial management controls ; only 13 of 30 states indicated that hhs' guidance on this subject mostly or completely met their information needs . state welfare directors and national organizations we contacted mentioned other issues of significance to the states that were not covered by hhs' written guidance . among these issues were the application of minimum wage laws to tanf participants , exempting domestic violence victims from time limits , and tanf requirements for a cap on administrative costs . from our survey , we determined that at least 25 states received no guidance from hhs on these issues . of those states that reported receiving oral guidance , most said the guidance met their needs for information .