we received responses from all of these centers . their responses were based on fiscal year 1994 data , the most current available at the time . we supplemented the information from the survey with discussions with va officials and community and state veterans nursing home administrators . also , we reviewed cost reports to identify the relative costs to va for each type of nursing facility , previous studies on nursing home costs and quality , and va policies and procedures on monitoring nursing home care and cost reporting . in addition , we visited 2 va , 10 community , and 5 state veterans nursing homes . our review team included a registered nurse ( rn ) who interviewed nursing home personnel and reviewed the care provided to 95 veterans in the facilities we visited drawing on medicare provider certification and survey procedures . the patients were randomly selected to be a representative sample from the va and state veterans nursing homes . we reviewed the total veteran population served under va contracts at each community home . we performed our work between july 1995 and november 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . veterans aged 65 or older are increasing both in number and in the percentage of the veteran population receiving va health care services . more significantly , the number of veterans aged 75 and older , the heaviest users of nursing home care , is increasing rapidly . va estimates that the number of veterans aged 75 and older will increase from about 2.6 million in 1995 to about 4.0 million in 2000 . all veterans with a medical need for nursing home care are eligible to receive such care in va nursing homes and community nursing homes under contract to va. va also pays a portion of the cost of care for veterans served in state veterans nursing homes . because most veterans receive care financed through other government programs ( medicare or medicaid ) , private insurance , or personal assets , however , these va programs provide only a portion of the nursing home care that veterans receive . va serves veterans essentially on a first - come , first - served basis up to the limits of va's budget authority for nursing home care . va is authorized to pay for care in community nursing homes for a period generally not longer than 6 months for nonservice - connected veterans and for an indefinite period for veterans with service - connected conditions . no maximum service period exists , and only higher income , nonservice - connected veterans must contribute to the cost of their care in va nursing homes . state veterans homes establish their own admissions policy , and , although they receive per diem payments from va , state homes generally rely on patient cost sharing to help cover expenses . va operates 129 va nursing homes ( in 45 states ) , contracts with 3,766 community nursing homes ( in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico ) , and pays a portion of the costs for veterans served in 80 state veterans homes ( in 38 states ) .