iv ) . while economic growth and state welfare reforms have been cited as key factors to explain nationwide caseload declines , there is no consensus about the extent to which each factor has contributed to these declines . among our case study states , oregon and wisconsin , which were early implementers of welfare reform , have seen the largest caseload declines from january 1996 to september 1997 — 42 percent and 52 percent , respectively . officials in these two states said that , along with favorable economic conditions , implementing their welfare reform programs — which included instituting “work first,” diversions , and full - family sanctions ; emphasizing full - time jobs and exiting welfare ; and expanding child care assistance — has contributed to their large caseload declines . national data are not yet available on the extent to which caseload declines have occurred as a result of increased employment and income for families , as opposed to other factors , such as full - family sanctions or fewer families applying for assistance . “work first” policies and more stringent work requirements may lead some families to obtain jobs and leave welfare more quickly than otherwise ; these policies might also discourage other families from applying for assistance . time limits and stronger sanctions may reduce the length of time some families receive assistance , by either motivating them to obtain jobs and leave welfare or leading to the involuntary termination of their cases . changes in eligibility rules and earnings limits can also affect the size of caseloads . for example , in september 1997 , wisconsin began implementing its wisconsin works program , under which clients judged to be job - ready are not eligible to receive cash assistance . the state's cash assistance caseload dropped by 55 percent from september 1997 to february 1998 . state policies on earnings limits can also affect the extent to which caseloads decrease when recipients obtain employment . in california , where a three - person family can earn up to $1,551 a month and still remain eligible for cash assistance , 23 percent of families that obtained employment left welfare in state fiscal year 1997 . in contrast , a three - person family that earned more than $616 a month in oregon would no longer be eligible for cash assistance , and 70 percent of families there that obtained employment left welfare during the same period . tanf caseloads can also decline because of administrative changes . for example , in 1997 , wisconsin removed about 5,000 child - only cases from its tanf program and transferred them to a kinship care program administered by local child welfare agencies under the supervision of the state department of health and family services . these were cases in which the custodial adults were not the legally responsible parents and cash assistance was paid only for the children . in contrast , oregon has retained the child - only cases in its tanf program , and they constituted 28 percent of the state's tanf caseload in 1997 .