we incorporated their comments where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of labor ; the director , office of management and budget ; relevant congressional committees ; and other interested parties . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7014 or sigurd nilsen at ( 202 ) 512-7003 . major contributors to this report include thomas medvetz , wayne sylvia , and marquita sylvia . the program is not residential nor does it provide vocational training . furthermore , some programs identified by state officials as offering basic education also provided vocational training . we used these four features for comparison purposes only . we did not intend to imply that all programs should contain these features , that the existence of such features would necessarily ensure program effectiveness , or that programs should be modeled after job corps . to identify state and locally established youth training programs similar to job corps , we systematically surveyed state officials familiar with human resource programs in each of the 50 states and the district of columbia as well as national organizations associated with youth employment and training programs . we asked them about any programs within their state that were similar to job corps — that is , that contained job corps' four descriptive characteristics . we also reviewed applicable reports and publications related to youth programs that we identified through an extensive literature search . in addition , we sought information on the possible existence of other similar programs through the internet computer information system . the california conservation corps was established in 1976 to assist youth in becoming more employable by providing educational opportunities and meaningful work aimed at protecting and enhancing california's natural and human resources . the program's motto “hard work , low pay , miserable conditions” provides prospective enrollees with a preview of corps life and reflects the nature of the program . for example , each year about 85 youths participate in the backcountry trails project and spend an entire 6-month period in remote areas of california's parks and forests doing trail work . during this time , participants live in spartan tent camps supplied by mule train and helicopter , hike as much as 15 miles each day while clearing trails , and earn minimum wages for their efforts . in 1994 , the california conservation corps had an annual budget of about $50 million and served about 1,700 youths at its 44 locations statewide , 13 of which were residential . participants average 7.4 months in the program , and almost two - thirds of participants live in the residential component . as shown in figure 1 , the program receives its operating funds from a variety of sources — the largest source being the state's general fund , which contributes about 56 percent of the program's operating budget . about a third of the operating budget comes from revenue generated by program activities , such as reimbursements for public service conservation work and installation of energy - efficient lighting in public buildings .