not applicable . this appendix augments the report's information on statutory , application , and allocation requirements for both title i and the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) programs . title i part a , the largest federal aid program for public elementary and secondary schools , provides funds to local educational agencies ( lea ) through the states to enable schools to improve the academic achievement of eligible children either by providing additional or more intensive instruction or by upgrading the entire instructional program of the school.the federal government awards grants to state educational agencies ( sea ) , which administer and distribute these funds to leas . the statute authorizes three types of grants: basic grants , concentration grants , and targeted grants . most leas nationwide receive basic grants ; fewer leas receive concentration grants , which go to leas with high numbers or percentages of children from low - income families . the department of education determines title i part a allocations for each county in the country through a statutory formula based primarily on ( 1 ) the number of children aged 5 through 17 from low - income families using updated census poverty counts , ( 2 ) state per pupil public expenditures , and ( 3 ) the amount appropriated in a given fiscal year . under the statute , 10 percent of title i lea appropriations are distributed as concentration grants and the remainder as basic grants . in 1994 , the congress amended title i through the improving america's schools act to provide for targeted assistance grants . these grants would allocate more funds to leas with either more poor children or a greater percentage of such children . if the congress appropriates funds for these grants in the future , eligible leas will receive the funds . although the 1994 law stipulates that future title i funds appropriated in excess of those for fiscal year 1995 are to be distributed as targeted assistance grants , appropriation provisions in fiscal years 1996 , 1997 , and 1998 have overridden this stipulation . thus , no targeted assistance grants have yet been distributed . the department of education allocated title i funds for school year 1997-98 to counties using updated poverty estimates provided by the bureau of the census . each county's allocation is determined by multiplying the number of children counted in the formula by 40 percent of the respective state's per pupil education expenditure and accordingly reducing down to the amount appropriated . leas with high numbers or percentages of low - income students receive additional funds as concentration grants . generally , awards to states cover july 1 to september 30 of the following year . these funds remain available at the state and local level for an additional fiscal year for obligation and expenditure . an sea may reserve up to 1 percent or $400,000 ( whichever is greater ) from the state's title i part a and certain other title i allocations for administration .