this is not accurate . nothing in our proposed refinement to the medicare payment method would tie hmo payments to hmo penetration rates . our recommendation is to include an estimated ffs cost for hmo enrollees in the formula used to calculate the county rate . by making the estimate of a county's average medicare costs more accurate , this revision would reduce payments most in counties where cost disparities between the ffs and hmo beneficiaries are greatest . our recommended approach would leave the county payment rate unchanged despite high managed care enrollment — if hmo and ffs beneficiaries in a county have the same average cost . hhs also expressed concern that , with the adoption of our revision , counties with relatively low aapcc rates but high medicare managed care penetration rates could be “very adversely affected.” our approach is targeted and would not reduce medicare rates in counties with no cost disparities between the ffs and hmo beneficiaries . under our approach , a county with a low aapcc rate but no cost disparities would see no change in its county payment rate — even if the hmo penetration rate in that county was high . in contrast , an across - the - board payment rate cut — which , as hhs notes , is part of the administration's fiscal year 1998 budget proposal — would affect high aapcc and low aapcc counties equally , regardless of how costly a county's beneficiaries might be . our proposed revision would reduce but not eliminate excess hmo payments . consequently , substantial excess payments would probably remain to cushion hmos from any resulting reduction in the county rate . ( see p . to illustrate what hhs believes is the potential for our modified payment method to produce inequitable results , hhs constructed an example involving two hypothetical counties . hhs contends that the example shows a paradoxical result: under our modified method , hhs asserts , hmos in county a would receive higher capitation payments than hmos in county b even though hmo enrollees in county a are healthier than those in county b . as explained below , this conclusion is incorrect . our recommendation would yield hmo payment rates in line with medicare law , because they would be set on the basis of the estimated average ffs cost of all beneficiaries in a county . hhs did not acknowledge that under the current method both counties' hmos receive the same rate even though county a hmos serve healthier beneficiaries than county b hmos . our method would reduce excess payments to hmos in both counties , although hmos would still receive payments exceeding their enrollees' expected per capita costs . moreover , our method would increase payments to hmos in counties experiencing adverse selection — that is , in instances where a county's hmos have enrollees whose expected costs exceed those of ffs users . hhs' example also runs counter to the experience of the counties we examined . our data show that counties with low hmo penetration rates tend to have low excess payments relative to counties with high penetration rates .