of students ) . award ( millions ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . we will continue to pursue these issues . our work raises questions about labor's use of national training contractors to provide a substantial portion of its vocational training . a primary justification for using national contractors is that they are better able to place students in jobs through their nationwide placement network . the overall implication of this is unknown ; are students moving to other , and perhaps better , jobs , or are they becoming unemployed ? the use of national contractors may have been prudent in the past , but times have changed . we also have serious concerns about the validity of reported job placements . these statistics may be overstated by 9 percentage points at the six centers where we conducted our site work . however , according to labor data , nearly half of all job placements were found by the student , family , or friends . the shifting composition of the labor market , particularly the decline in the construction trades ; the high proportion of vocational training funds allocated to national contractor training ; and labor's lack of information to support its justification for these national contracts , raises questions about whether this is the most cost - effective approach to vocational training . to ensure that job corps vocational training programs are provided in the most efficient and effective manner , we recommend that labor revisit whether the continued use of national training contractors is cost effective . in comments on a draft of this report , labor expressed concerns about certain aspects of our report . in response to our recommendation on the use of national contractors , labor agreed to review the practice of contracting with national training providers on a sole source basis . the following summarizes its concerns and provides our response . ( labor's comments are printed in app . v. ) labor pointed out a number of items in our report that it believes should be modified or clarified , and we have done so where appropriate . specifically , we have modified our characterization of program growth over the years , included information on a new study of job corps' net impact , revised the percentage of vocational completers nationwide , and revised our presentation of job corps student job retention . in addition , we have made a number of other technical changes to our report to respond to labor's comments . labor expressed concern that we did not recognize other program outcomes , such as general equivalency diploma ( ged ) attainment , and based our conclusions only on vocational completion and job placement . ged attainment and gains in reading and math skills are quantifiable program outcomes experienced by many job corps students . in our view , these outcomes are a means to an end — that is , providing students with the basic educational skills needed in the world of work — and not an end in and of themselves . these other measures are an adjunct to the principal measures of vocational completion and job placement .