what happened ? ” readers skipping the answer to this question would not know key information about the value of their estimate in today's economy . because the pebes addresses complex programs and issues , explaining these points in simple , straightforward language is challenging . although ssa made changes to improve the explanation of work credits , for example , many people still do not understand what these credits are , the relevance of the credits to their benefits , and how the credits are accumulated . the public also frequently asks questions about the pebes' explanation of family benefits . family benefits are difficult to calculate and explain because their amounts are dependent on a number of factors , such as the age of the spouse and the spouse's eligibility for benefits on his or her own work record . informing the public about family benefits , however , is especially important: a 1995 survey revealed that as much as 40 percent of the public is unaware of these benefits . a team of representatives from a cross section of ssa offices governs ssa's decisions on the pebes' development , testing , and implementation . the team has revised and expanded the statement in response to feedback on individual problems . the design expert we consulted observed that the current statement “appears to have been the result of too many authors , without a designated person to review the entire piece from the eyes of the readers . it seems to have developed over time , piecemeal . ..” although ssa officials have obtained the public's feedback , they have missed some key opportunities along the way to improve the statement . while ssa conducted tests to ensure that the pebes could be read at a seventh grade level , it has not conducted formal comprehension tests.for example , ssa could have administered either oral or written tests to a sample of readers to determine whether they actually understood ssa's explanations of certain complex issues . these tests would have provided ssa with quantifiable , objective information to use in revising the statement . ssa has also failed to take advantage of information from its workers who answer the public's questions about the pebes every day . ssa currently has front - line workers record the reason people call , but the information collected does not provide sufficient detail for ssa to understand the problems people are having with the pebes . although the public and benefit experts agree that the current statement contains too much information , a standard benefit statement model does not exist within the public or private sector , and there is no clear consensus on how best to present benefit information . the canadian government chose to use a two - part document when it began sending out benefit statements in 1985 . the canada pension plan's one - page statement provides specific individual information , including the earnings record and benefit estimates . a separate brochure details the program explanations . the first time the plan mails the statement , it sends both the one - page individual information and the detailed brochure ; subsequent mailings contain only the single page with the individual information .