( see app . i for more details on the reversal and remand rates of the court and the board and on the accuracy rates reported by vba. ) vba considers a disability claim to have been accurately processed if basic eligibility has been determined correctly , the case file contains all required medical and nonmedical documentary evidence , the ro's decision on service - connection and the rating given to each impairment are correct , the payment amount is correct , and the ro properly notified the veteran of the outcome of his or her claim . under the accuracy measurement system that was in operation from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 1997 , vba headquarters annually reviewed approximately 100 cases randomly selected from the cases completed by each of 57 ros . vba plans to use the balanced scorecard to give ro managers incentives to work as teams in their sdns with a focus on meeting balanced scorecard performance measures , including accuracy . the extent to which this strategy will improve accountability and accuracy cannot yet be determined . in our discussions with ro staff , many stated that vba had not provided adequate training for claims adjudicators . they stated , for example , that there was confusion in the ros on how to process cases because of apparent conflicts between decisions of the court of veterans appeals and va's regulations and guidance . they also stated that too much of their training was determined locally , resulting in inconsistent training among the ros . vba acknowledged shortcomings in training and stated that it had not fared well in preparing its workforce , with a resultant decline in technical accuracy . vba acknowledged the need for an effective , centralized , and comprehensive training program that provides the background necessary for its decisionmakers to render decisions according to the statutes and regulations mandated for claims adjudication . such training is important not only for current employees but also for the many new employees whom vba will have to hire to replace retiring employees . these cases are made up of three separate samples: ( 1 ) rating - related work products ; ( 2 ) authorization work products that require significant development , review , and administrative decision or award action but may not involve any rating - related action ; and ( 3 ) principal guardianship files , referred to as fiduciary cases . ( see table ii.1 for sdn and ro sample sizes. ) for rating - related work products and authorization work products that typically do not require rating - related action , the sampling methodology will allow vba to produce accuracy rates with a reasonable level of statistical precision for the nation and each sdn . however , the sample of fiduciary cases is too small to provide accuracy rates with the same level of statistical precision . similarly , for cases that are self - reviewed by ros , the sampling methodology will allow each ro to produce accuracy rates with a reasonable level of statistical precision for rating - related work products and authorization work products typically not requiring ratings .