additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . regarding the third point , our analysis considered all of the factors commerce reported as evidence that a potential shortage of it workers may be emerging in the report's chapter entitled “is there an adequate supply of it workers ? ” while the report contained other information indicating there was a tightening labor market for it workers , that information was presented elsewhere in the report and only as anecdotal information reflecting the experiences of individual companies , not the industry as a whole . finally , we believe the report's title and the statements about the magnitude of the it worker supply and demand imbalance contained in the report's introduction could reasonably be interpreted as reflecting a conclusion that there is an it worker shortage . we believe it is useful to now have commerce's clarification that it does not believe its report demonstrated that a shortage of it workers exists . as this correspondence states , the commerce report appears to appropriately establish that the demand for it workers is expected to grow , but it did not adequately describe the likely supply of it workers . for that reason , we agreed with the department's conclusion that more needs to be known about the demand and supply of it workers . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this correspondence until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen of the committee on commerce and the committee on science . we will also make copies available to other interested parties upon request . if you have any questions about this correspondence , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7014 . major contributors to this correspondence include sigurd r. nilsen , assistant director ; betty s. clark , evaluator - in - charge ; and gene g. kuehneman , jr. , senior economist . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . the projected job growth for all occupations between 1994 and 2005 is 14 percent . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . since the report was issued , commerce has issued an update with revised bls projections showing an even stronger growth . between 1996 and 2006 , there will be over 1.3 million projected job openings as a result of growth and net replacements ; about 1.1 million of these job openings will be due to growth alone .