( see fig . va's right to collect from medigap insurers was upheld in earlier court decisions . however , some insurers still contend that they are not liable for the amounts sought by va until they receive an adjudicated claim indicating what portion of va's bill is covered by medicare . the insurers claim that calculating the amount owed to va is unduly burdensome because va does not give them a medicare remittance advice or explanation of benefits explaining medicare - approved charges . the effect of this change on va recoveries is unclear . for veterans in the mandatory care category who are not subject to va's copayments , recoveries are likely to decrease for outpatient bills involving routine office visits . information obtained at the time of enrollment and subsequent reenrollment could include the policy number and , upon request , a copy of the policy . by including other information , such as income and detailed information on adjudicated service - connected disabilities , mccr staff could more readily identify billable insurance and prepare and process bills . the effectiveness of such a process would , however , continue to be dependent on ( 1 ) the willingness of veterans to give va complete and accurate information on their insurance coverage , employers , and incomes and ( 2 ) the thoroughness of va efforts to obtain and verify the information provided . va data show that much of the information va currently gathers is inaccurate — veterans fail to reveal their insurance coverage or underestimate their incomes in applying for va health care . for example , the va initiatives described indicate that va is not currently obtaining complete and accurate information on insurance coverage . similarly , only about 3 percent of veterans with no service - connected disabilities are identified through va's admission process as having incomes that place them in the discretionary care category . about 15 percent of veterans identified during the admission process as having incomes that place them in the mandatory care category , however , are subsequently identified through matches with income tax data as having incomes that might place them in the discretionary care category . currently , va's only recourse when it determines that veterans knowingly provided false information in order to avoid copayments is to retroactively seek recovery of those copayments . a va official told us that va medical centers frequently waive such copayments . va does not , however , maintain data on the extent to which such copayments are actually billed retroactively and recovered . the mccr program is attempting to negotiate with hmos and other managed care plans to enable va facilities to become participating providers . hmos , however , have little incentive to accept va as a participating provider because , to the extent their enrollees obtain care from nonparticipating providers , hmos' costs are reduced and profits increased . the mccr business plan proposes that va consider a legislative proposal that would require hmos to recognize va as a preferred provider . va currently has a contract with only one hmo — dakota care — in south dakota .