these data are available upon request . afip can provide vamcs with the number of malpractice cases at the facility , the status of a case , the amount of payment , the results of peer review , a determination about whether the patient injury was related to a component of care , and the types of risk management issues that should be addressed . according to an official in afip , at least one vamc , the identity of which he could not recall , and a regional office requested this information in fiscal year 1994 . we will make copies available to others upon request . if you have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7120 . major contributors to this report were james a. carlan , assistant director ; and patricia a. jones , evaluator - in - charge . u.s. army litigation division provided only 5-year aggregate information for these categories . failure to diagnose ( that is , concluding that patient has no disease or condition worthy of further follow - up or observation ) wrong diagnosis or misdiagnosis ( that is , original diagnosis is incorrect ) improper performance of test unnecessary diagnostic test delay in diagnosis failure to obtain consent / lack of informed consent failure to perform surgery improper positioning retained foreign body wrong body part improper performance of surgery unnecessary surgery delay in surgery improper management of surgical patient failure to obtain consent / lack of informed consent failure to order appropriate medication wrong medication ordered wrong dosage ordered of correct medication failure to instruct on medication improper management of medication regimen failure to obtain consent / lack of informed consent medication error failure to medicate wrong medication administered wrong dosage administered wrong patient wrong route improper technique failure to manage pregnancy improper choice of delivery method improperly performed vaginal delivery improperly performed c - section failure to obtain consent / lack of informed consent improperly managed labor failure to identify / treat fetal distress delay in treatment of fetal distress ( that is , identified but treated in untimely manner ) retained foreign body / vaginal / uterine abandonment wrongful life / birth ( continued ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .