other offices . the safety and health technology center in bruceton , pennsylvania , provides engineering and scientific capability to assist msha , states , and the mining industry in identifying and solving technological mine safety and health problems . msha's approval and certification center in triadelphia , west virginia , approves , certifies , and accepts machinery , instruments , materials , and explosives for underground surface mines . both centers report to msha headquarters . because most of the nation's coal mines are located in the appalachian area , 8 of the 10 district offices for coal enforcement were located in pennsylvania , virginia , west virginia , and kentucky in fiscal year 1995 . the district offices for coal mines west of the mississippi and in the north central part of the nation were in colorado and indiana . none . the primary mission of the office of postsecondary education ( ope ) is to administer postsecondary education and student financial assistance programs . programs of student financial assistance include pell grants , supplemental educational opportunity grants , grants to states for state student incentives , direct loans to students in institutions of higher education , work - study , and the guaranteed student loan program . ope programs also provide assistance for increasing access to postsecondary education programs , improving and expanding american educational studies and services , improving instruction in crucial academic subjects , and supporting international education . ope maintains 10 field offices to perform activities associated with ( 1 ) training , technical assistance , and oversight of student aid programs , ( 2 ) loan servicing and debt collection , and ( 3 ) overseeing specific higher education projects ( see fig . field staff conduct program reviews of institutions to determine compliance with title iv requirements , provide training and technical assistance for financial aid and business officers at institutions , and monitor operations at guaranty agencies . staff also collect defaulted loans and other debts , contract with servicers , monitor collection contracts , and help in the preparation of legal actions . regional staff also serve as focal points and as experts assisting with field readings for ope's higher education programs . staff may also be called on to work on school - to - work initiatives . according to education , because field office staff gain in - depth knowledge of the institutions in their regions , effectiveness is increased . regional training facilities provide hands - on use of computer programs needed toward student aid and determine student eligibility . they are also a place for institutions , lenders , and guaranty agencies to call upon for technical assistance and specific help on an individual basis . in addition , several oversight activities are supported by information gathered from on - site reviews . table ii.8 provides key information about the 10 regional offices that constitute ope's field office structure . in fiscal year 1995 , ope's field operations service and division of project services had staff in all 10 federal region cities , and debt collection service had staff in three region cities — atlanta , chicago , and san francisco .