that is , such employers have a choice . according to insurers , insurance brokers , and employers that we interviewed , employers with more than 50 workers generally can get an insurer to write a policy covering their workforce . however , insurers and brokers we interviewed pointed out that the price of such coverage for employers that have close to 50 employees might differ substantially — from employer to employer and from insurer to insurer . our data sources for employee access to health insurance included the agency for health care policy and research and nchs' medical expenditure panel survey ( meps ) household component , which provides current information on health insurance offers and coverage from a sample of about 25,000 persons , and the bureau of labor statistics' ( bls ) 1994 , 1995 , and 1997 surveys of small , medium , and large employers . variation by state is wider than by industry . at the state level , the estimated offer rate among medium and large employers ranged from a low of about 72 percent in wyoming and texas to almost 100 percent in 14 states . the higher offer rates were concentrated in the northeast , including the six new england states , new jersey , and pennsylvania . because these estimates are based on survey data , the estimate derived from the sample may be higher or lower than the true percentage of all employers in the state that offer health insurance . because of the small number of establishments surveyed in certain states , the degree of imprecision for these estimates , as measured by their confidence intervals , can be quite large . details on the estimated offer rates by firm size in each state and associated confidence intervals for each firm size grouping are in appendix ii . survey data on offer rates presented above estimate the extent of realized access to insurance , but employers that do not offer health coverage often have potential access . survey data , studies , and interviews with market participants indicate that variations in health insurance offer rates by firm size , industry , and state reflect decisions that medium and large employers make about offering health coverage , not difficulties they face in obtaining access to health insurance . as discussed below , multiple factors , including the characteristics of a firm and its workforce and the cost of health insurance , influence employers' health insurance decisions . although nehis data do not measure the degree of labor turnover , various studies have cited it as predictor of the likelihood that a firm will offer health insurance . some research literature indicates that firms with high labor turnover rates are less likely to offer health insurance . quantitative analyses of the link between labor turnover and firms' decisions to offer health insurance are rare , but several health insurance industry experts we interviewed indicated that this relationship exists . because labor turnover varies by industry , this relationship can be illustrated by examining industry data .