( see app . i for a detailed description of our benefit calculations. ) we did our work from july to november 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . each of the 50 states and the district of columbia has a workers' compensation program . for example , in a state that equates total loss of earning capacity with 600 weeks of benefits , a worker with a 20-percent loss of earning capacity would receive a percentage of his or her projected earning capacity for 120 weeks ( 20 percent x 600 ) . states can also use some combination of the three basic methods . for example , texas pays workers benefits for permanent disabilities on the basis of their functional impairment for a limited number of weeks . however , workers can also receive additional benefits for loss of wages after their impairment benefits are exhausted . only workers whose functional impairment is rated at least at 15 percent or higher are eligible for these supplemental benefits . wisconsin also pays impairment benefits on the basis of loss of functional capacity for permanent disabilities for a limited number of weeks . however , if the worker does not return to work by the end of this period at the preinjury earnings level , additional benefits are based on loss of wage - earning capacity . the amount of compensation veterans are awarded for their service - connected conditions is based on a percentage evaluation , commonly called the disability rating , which va's schedule for rating disabilities assigns to a veteran's specific condition . the veteran receives the specific benefit amount the law sets for that disability rating level . unlike workers' compensation , va does not base compensation on each individual veteran's salary or wage loss , nor does it base compensation on how each veteran's earning capacity is actually affected by his or her service - connected condition . veterans with the same condition at the same level of severity usually receive the same basic cash benefit . the rating schedule contains medical criteria and disability ratings . the medical criteria consist of a list of diagnoses , organized by body system , and a number of levels of medical severity specified for each diagnosis . we selected these impairments because the criteria for each were clear and similar on both schedules . within the federal government , when comparisons are drawn between military and civilian salaries , the salary for a military rank of o - 4 , a major or lieutenant commander , has been traditionally considered comparable to the salary of a federal employee at grade 12 , step 1 , on the general schedule ( gs ) pay scale . therefore , as agreed with the subcommittee staff , we based our estimates of the benefits a major or lieutenant commander would receive under feca at a gs - 12 , step 1 , salary level . to provide a broader perspective of compensation amounts , we used the gs - 7 , step 1 , salary level to estimate the compensation someone with a military rank of o - 1 , second lieutenant , would receive under feca .