additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . about 40 beds have been converted to office and other space . moreover , further integration of air force and va patient care services could provide va access to additional beds . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . dod plans to close the mather hospital by 2001 . the planned closure provides va the opportunity to acquire a fully functional hospital and outpatient clinic at a fraction of the cost of new construction at travis . in addition , the facility is closer to the larger sacramento - area veteran population and would alleviate the crowding at the existing sacramento outpatient clinic . because mather is a small hospital , however , operating costs per patient treated may be high . va has developed two primary options for potential use of the mather hospital building: convert the building into an outpatient clinic and 91-bed hospital and convert the building into an outpatient clinic and use the second floor as an ambulatory surgery center . va's existing sacramento outpatient clinic is overcrowded , and plans have been developed to build a larger facility . building a replacement outpatient clinic in sacramento that would provide 87,000 outpatient visits per year is estimated to cost about $32 million ( excluding the cost of land ) . va officials believe that using the existing mather clinic may be a cost - effective alternative to new construction . nchcs studied the mather hospital to determine how to renovate the facility for use as a 91-bed va hospital , outpatient clinic , and outpatient surgery center . renovation would be required primarily to improve patient privacy , improve accessibility for the handicapped , and make safety and seismic improvements . va officials said that the inpatient wards at the mather hospital could be reconfigured into a 91-bed hospital that meets the handicapped - access needs of the veteran population . va officials , working with an architectural design firm , estimate that the total cost of converting the mather hospital into a fully functional hospital and outpatient clinic would be about $28 million . in addition , there would be start - up costs of about $11 million and increased annual operating costs of about $14 million . in addition to the hospital building , va has developed plans for using several of the adjacent buildings . such contracts , however , involve certain risks because of the unknown demand for care . in other words , if va overestimates demand , then its costs of providing care through contracting would increase . the third method of providing care though contracting would be to purchase care “on the margin,” paying for each hospital episode separately , as va does now for emergency services .