iv ) . specifically , he agreed with our recommendation that improvements in monitoring vera's impact are needed and said that va is already monitoring the vera special care classification categories to avert potential problems . although officials in the veterans health administration's office of the chief financial officer have begun to review changes in the numbers of special care patients served , as of august 21 , 1997 , these data were not complete and were unavailable for our review . furthermore , this effort does not include data to monitor changes in medical practice for veterans receiving special care services . the networks in turn allocate these resources to their facilities . vera provides more comparable levels of resources to each network for each high - priority veteran served than the process it replaced , which allocated resources primarily on the basis of facilities' historical budgets.vera provides more comparable levels of resources by classifying patients on the basis of the cost of their health care into two workload groups — basic care and special care . basic care patients generally receive routine services that are less expensive than those received by special care patients . special care patients often have complex or chronic conditions , such as spinal cord injuries , advanced acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) , chronic mental illness , or end - stage renal disease or require care in settings such as nursing homes ( see app . iii for complete list of special care patient classifications ) . the vera special care category also includes some adjustment for age to account for expected changes in the age distribution of veterans in a network . vera determines a national capitation rate for each workload group . ( see fig . moreover , va does not monitor other changes in service delivery that are critical to assessing networks' responses to vera's incentives . 1 for fiscal year 1997 capitation rates. ) va could consider , for example , adjusting for veterans' private health insurance coverage or access to non - va health providers . usage rates for high - priority veterans vary widely among visns . they range from 25 percent in visn 4 ( pittsburgh ) to 45 percent in visn 18 ( phoenix ) of the eligible beneficiaries on the basis of data from fiscal years 1994 to 1996 . ( see fig . whether veterans have private insurance or access to non - va health providers are important variables in predicting use of va services in networks , visn officials said . our previous work also showed that health insurance status affects usage of va health care services: we found that uninsured veterans were eight times more likely to use va services than insured veterans . state - level insurance data also suggest that veterans' usage rates vary with insurance coverage . states included in visns such as visn 4 ( pittsburgh ) and visn 11 ( ann arbor ) , which have lower rates of veteran use of va health care services , have proportionally fewer uninsured veterans .