florida is the exception . in 1996 , florida served more than 3,100 individuals with tbi , and the state estimates that 1,829 residents sustain a tbi each year . we asked program representatives and experts to describe individuals who have the greatest difficulty in accessing services from these and other programs and the consequences of being unable to access services . these experts most frequently identified three groups: individuals who are cognitively impaired but lack physical impairments , individuals without personal advocates , and individuals with problematic behaviors . they reported that many of these people ultimately end up homeless or in nursing homes , institutions for mental illness , prisons , and other institutions . individuals who are cognitively impaired but lack physical disabilities are less likely than those with more visible impairments to obtain services . experts repeatedly told us that adults with tbi who walk , talk , and look “normal” are refused services , even though they cannot maintain themselves in the community without help . cognitively impaired people frequently lack executive skills — such as managing time , money , and other aspects of daily living — and have difficulty functioning independently . this difficulty will most likely last throughout their lifetime . these individuals frequently do not qualify for medicaid waiver services under programs for the physically disabled because they have little to no difficulty in bathing , dressing , eating , or other activities of daily living used to assess disability . the services needed by these adults with tbi — which may include someone to remind them to pay the bills or provide assistance in figuring out their bank balance — are relatively low - cost but crucial to their ability to live in the community . the lack of executive skills also complicates the ability of adults with tbi to negotiate the various service delivery systems . people without someone to act as their personal advocate have difficulty obtaining services from multiple programs . we repeatedly heard that an adult with tbi without an effective and knowledgeable advocate would probably not receive services . people without social support systems or whose social support systems fail also fall into this category . adults with tbi often return to their parents' home following hospital discharge . even those married at injury may be cared for by their parents , since many married adults with tbi divorce post - injury . tbi advocates report that parents who have been the primary caregiver frequently are unable to continue to provide care due to exhaustion , aging , or death . as a result , individuals cared for by their parents for years suddenly appear , trying to obtain services to remain in the community . people with problematic behaviors — such as aggression , destructiveness , or participation in illegal activities — generally do not have the skills required to return to the community and usually require expensive treatment in residential environments with a great deal of structure . without treatment , these individuals are the most likely to become homeless , be committed to a mental institution , or be sentenced to prison .