( see fig . as shown in figure 1 , all 14 nonmanufacturing industry groups and specific industries osha selected in 1996 and 1997 had lwdii rates and injury and illness incidence rates that exceeded the national averages for all industries . what data did osha collect from establishments in the selected industries ? how did osha intend to use the data it collected , and how has it actually used the data ? what specific assurance , if any , did osha give about confidentiality and privacy rights associated with the data collected ? what is osha's current policy on access to the data it collected from these establishments ? to do our work , we reviewed provisions of the occupational safety and health act of 1970 and documents on osha's data collection initiative . we conducted interviews with osha , bls , and other labor officials and business and worker representatives about this initiative . we determined whether osha pledged confidentiality of the employer occupational injury and illness data that it collected . in addition , we reviewed the freedom of information act ( foia ) and discussed with labor department officials how labor , including osha , responds to foia requests for these data . we conducted our study from september 1997 to april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the occupational safety and health act of 1970 covers more than 100 million working men and women and about 6.5 million employers.excluded from coverage are the self - employed ; state and local government employees in some states ; and some transportation workers , miners , and others covered by other federal laws . osha regulations require most employers covered by the act to keep records at each establishment , including a log and summary of occupational injuries and illnesses ( osha form 200 or an equivalent form ) and a supplementary record of occupational injuries and illnesses ( osha form 101 or an equivalent form ) . on the log , employers must briefly describe all occupational injuries and illnesses that occur at the establishment and summarize that information yearly . employers must make the log accessible to authorized federal and state officials and to employees upon request and post an annual summary of occupational injuries and illnesses for the previous calendar year at each establishment . the supplementary record is to provide information about each injury and illness on the log , such as the affected employee's name and the circumstances of the injury or illness . authorized government officials must have access to these records also . the records employers must keep provide useful information for ( 1 ) employers and employees , raising their awareness of injuries and illnesses and helping them in their efforts to address establishment hazards ; ( 2 ) osha staff for carrying out enforcement and outreach programs ; and ( 3 ) statistical purposes , by measuring the magnitude of injury and illness problems nationwide . the information also helps osha develop safety and health standards and conduct research on the causes and prevention of such injuries and illnesses . in addition , bls collects injury and illness data from employers for its annual survey of occupational injuries and illnesses .