md . oreg . vt. to learn about each state's tpp strategy , we interviewed state officials within the lead agencies responsible for tpp efforts , along with officials from other state agencies that had a supporting role in the strategy , as shown in table i.2 . to describe state strategies and programs and the effect welfare reform may have had on these efforts , we obtained and analyzed program documents and data in each of the case study states and obtained descriptions of applicable laws . we also interviewed local program officials from county governments , local health departments , and community organizations responsible for implementing tpp programs . in the states where title x family planning program funding does not go directly to the state , we interviewed officials in the nonprofit corporations who administer the program . in the states where major private tpp programs were operating independent of the state strategy , we interviewed relevant officials to determine their involvement with the states . to determine how states evaluate their strategies and programs , we reviewed and analyzed completed evaluations and discussed with officials plans to conduct additional evaluations . we also reviewed the literature on the current status of evaluating tpp programs and conducted interviews with program evaluators . to determine how much states spend on teen pregnancy prevention , we asked each state to provide financial information for their fiscal year 1997 programs . we asked the states to provide us the dollar amount and sources of federal and state funding for programs to prevent teen pregnancy . some states were able to identify the amount of money from various federal sources , but some states were unable to break out tpp spending from the various block grants used to fund the effort . federal requirements do not mandate that funding for tpp efforts be separated from more broad categories , such as the maternal and child health block grant , and block grants offer states discretion in the use of funds . we did not verify the funding information the states provided . to obtain information on the federal role in supporting state efforts to reduce teen pregnancy , we met with hhs officials , who identified all agencies within hhs that administer tpp programs along with other federal agencies that fund tpp efforts . through hhs , we asked each hhs agency and the other federal agencies to provide us information on the programs they administer that can impact teen pregnancy . we also asked them to provide information on the programs' total funding and the amount of the funding directly for teen pregnancy . many of the programs could not isolate funding for teen pregnancy prevention because it was not an explicit focus of their programs . we did not verify the funding data provided . we performed our work between april 1997 and november 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the cooperative state research , education , and extension service links education resources and department of agriculture programs and works with land grant universities and other educational institutions . a systemwide initiative on children , youth , and families at risk has highlighted programs and research related to teen pregnancy prevention .