manipulating the panel of providers . health plans can avoid high - cost recipients by dropping providers that attract high - cost patients . for example , a former health plan official told us that the health plan she worked for identified a specific provider who was responsible in large part for the plan's attracting a significant number of enrollees with aids — a condition that frequently requires extensive and expensive treatment , especially in its later stages . this plan dropped the provider from its panel in favor of an aids treatment clinic and saw its aids caseload decrease . the decision to drop the provider may have been for other reasons , in that by adding the clinic and dropping the individual provider , the health plan may have improved its capacity to treat people with aids and the quality of care they would receive . the outcome demonstrates , however , recipients' attachment to specific providers and health plans' ability to ( 1 ) identify specific providers as magnets for high - cost recipients and ( 2 ) reduce the cost to treat these recipients by dropping or replacing certain providers . limiting access to information about specialty providers . health plans can also make it difficult for prospective enrollees to find out which specialty providers are available through the plan . in one state we studied , the state and health plans initially resisted distributing a handbook produced by an advocacy group designed to help disabled medicaid recipients select a health plan that could best meet his or her particular needs . the booklet contained a worksheet for individuals to detail their specialty care requirements . the state and health plans were concerned about the possibility of adverse selection and felt that , without this information , the high - cost cases would be more evenly distributed among the various health plans . using marketing efforts to discourage enrollment . some states have allowed plans to conduct direct marketing as a way of enrolling beneficiaries in managed care . however , through direct marketing , health plans can also attempt to deliberately influence the distribution of high - cost enrollees . for example , they may seek information on a person's health status or discourage — or not aggressively market to — those likely to have more expensive needs . consequently , several of the states in our review prohibited or severely limited the amount and content of marketing by health plans . remaining silent about new treatment approaches . the wide gap between the relatively healthy and the sick within a rate cell also discourages the dissemination of information about health plans that have found innovative and successful ways to treat enrollees with difficult conditions . one health plan official told us that when the plan develops innovative and successful ways to treat the chronically ill , it does not advertise this fact because the resulting increase in enrollment of chronically ill individuals could be financially devastating . this health plan had success in managing asthma , and as word of its success spread , the number of asthmatics enrolling in the plan increased dramatically .