additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the remaining three plans stated that they did not have such expedited review policies . the final plan is excluded from our analysis of this element ; an official from this plan stated that the plan does not require preauthorization of any procedures and that an expedited review process is unnecessary because all decisions regarding coverage are made after the care is received . nine plans reported that they included doctors or nurses on their appeal committees . we did not , however , analyze individual appeal cases and so were unable to determine whether doctors and nurses with appropriate expertise made appeal decisions in cases of denials resulting from medical necessity decisions . five plans , out of 10 reporting , required that persons reviewing appeals not be the same individuals involved in the case earlier . all 10 plans in our study reported that they provide written information to members describing the complaint and appeal process . we reviewed the materials provided to members — including member handbooks , member contracts , newsletters , and other forms of communication — and judged them to be clear and understandable . nine plans accepted oral complaints from members , while one plan required members to put complaints in writing . only two plans , however , accepted oral appeals from members ; the remaining eight required members to file appeals in writing . one plan that accepted oral appeals , however , noted in its policy that oral appeals must be filed in person . complaint and appeal procedures are regulated by a patchwork of federal and state laws . no federal standards , however , prescribe how complaint and appeal systems are to be structured and administered . for example , the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , a federal law governing most employer - sponsored health plans , requires that all health plans provide a mechanism to permit participants and beneficiaries to appeal a plan's denial of a claim . regulations promulgated pursuant to erisa generally require that plans approve or deny appeals within 60 days . some states may have statutes or regulations governing indemnity plan complaint and appeal procedures ; however , under erisa the states are prevented from regulating self - funded health plans , which enroll approximately 87 percent of indemnity plan members . we conducted our review between march and june 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .