qualmed , inc. 1 . californiacare health plans ( blue cross of california ) 2 . foundation health federal services , inc. 3 . in preparing the business proposal , offerors must provide support for both their administrative and health care prices and justify their health care prices by addressing seven cost factors over which the offerors have some control: ( 1 ) hmo option penetration rates ( enrollment ) , ( 2 ) utilization management , ( 3 ) provider discounts , ( 4 ) coordination of benefits / third - party liability , ( 5 ) resource sharing savings , ( 6 ) resource sharing expenditures , and ( 7 ) enrollment fee revenues . offerors must also provide trend data for costs that the offeror is considered likely to have little or no control over such as price inflation . in evaluating proposals , since these factors are considered uncontrollable , the government substitutes its own estimates for the offerors' so that all offerors are treated equally . offerors must also pledge an equity amount to absorb losses if health care costs exceed the amount proposed . in evaluating proposals , dod determines whether offerors have the financial resources to meet this pledge , and the equity amount is also applied as part of the methodology in evaluating prices . before the proposals' due date , offerors are free to submit questions on clarification of requirements or further program information . offerors can continue to submit questions up until the close of discussions before best and final offers are due . upon receipt of the offerors' proposals , a source selection evaluation board ( sseb ) evaluates the technical proposals according to detailed evaluation criteria . the board size depends on the number of offerors and , in recent procurements , has numbered about 80 people . dod incurs substantial costs as well . the evaluation process , in particular , requires tremendous time , effort , and costs . a dod official estimated that 54,000 hours were spent on evaluating a recent procurement . in addition to evaluation duties , many staff must continue to perform their regular duties . many commonly spend weekends performing evaluation duties involving a considerable amount of overtime expense . further , many of the evaluators travel from all over the country and are on travel status for 5 to 6 weeks . dod recognizes that in the next round of the seven regional procurements , the number of offerors may further narrow and consist only of those who won awards in the first round . while dod has chosen to award large contracts on a regional basis , it may be advisable in the next round to consider such alternatives as awarding smaller contracts covering smaller geographic areas , awarding to more than one offeror in a region , or simplifying the contracts by removing the claims processing function and awarding it separately . dod's rfp requirements are extremely specific and prescriptive because , the department has stated , it desires a uniform program nationwide in which beneficiaries and providers are subject to the same requirements and processes regardless of residence .