ii. ) vha also identified several additional actions it has taken to improve the management of pharmaceuticals over the last 6 years . we are actively pursuing these opportunities , including most of those initiatives cited in the report . however , it is important to qualify your estimate of billions in savings . it is impossible to project savings for some of the cited initiatives . to do so establishes peg points for reducing va resources without any real justification . we agree that estimating precise savings from all of the initiatives included in this report is impossible . that is why we conservatively estimated that va could save billions through management improvements over a 7-year period . to the extent possible , we have cited estimates developed by va program officials and the va ig . we do not agree , however , that va should not establish “peg points” for reducing va's budget request on the basis of planned savings and then monitor management initiatives to determine whether the savings were realized . effectively determining future resource needs is impossible without tracking savings . in its fiscal year 1997 budget request , va seeks an increase over the fiscal year 1996 appropriation to offset inflation . the actual increase , however , is really much higher because no offsetting decrease exists in the request to compensate for any management savings likely to occur during the year , such as efficiency improvements expected to occur through full implementation of visns . basically , the pbm will address ( 1 ) contracting for pharmaceuticals to ensure the most efficient and effective contract processes ; ( 2 ) the most efficient and effective distribution systems for pharmaceuticals ( eg , consolidated mail outpatient pharmacies ) ; and , ( 3 ) the appropriate utilization of pharmaceuticals through the issuance of evidence - based disease management protocols , treatment protocols and drug use protocols . vha is also testing commercial software to compare pharmaceutical utilization against these established protocols and to measure outcomes achieved from drug therapy . in short , the goal of the pbm is to reduce overall health care costs through appropriate use of pharmaceuticals , not reduce the cost of individual pharmaceuticals . the final report has been revised to indicate that vha has taken other actions to improve management of pharmaceuticals . page 17 . vha had strategically planned to consolidate mail prescription processing through automated technology well before 1992 . in fact , through research and development at the va medical center nashville , tn beginning in 1990 , vha essentially developed the automated prescription dispensing technology that is on the commercial market today . gao's 1992 report was not the determining factor prompting va's decision to implement consolidated mail outpatient pharmacies or the timing of their implementation . timing of the implementation was actually influenced by the development of suitable technology associated with efficient human resources management . due to the fact that none of the existing mail prescription facilities is operating at full capacity , it is too early for either va or gao to estimate annual cost avoidance . experience to date suggests that substantial savings will accrue .