this report is based on that testimony . you also requested additional information on ssa's status as an independent agency , which appears in appendix i . to do our work , we drew from completed and ongoing gao work on social security issues . ssa's efforts to maintain an effective cadre of leaders are complicated by the impending retirement of many of its executives and managers and by the absence of a commissioner and deputy commissioner with the stability of fixed terms . this leadership must be in place for ssa to progress on the four fronts we have highlighted . first , ssa must step up to its role as the nation's expert on social security issues ; it is uniquely positioned to inform the public policy debate on the future financing and structure of social security . second , ssa must redesign the disability claims process and place greater emphasis on return to work in its disability programs . to increase the redesign project's likelihood of success , ssa needs to ensure that those initiatives most likely to save significant costs and time are implemented . because of the scope and duration of ssa's redesign , it should report on an annual basis the extent to which it is meeting its processing time reduction goals . it must also sustain its efforts to build and maintain stakeholder support . in addition , ssa must develop a comprehensive detailed plan that integrates its redesign initiatives and systems development activities . the commissioner also needs to act immediately to place greater emphasis on return to work by changing both the design and the administration of the disability programs . third , ssa must better protect taxpayer dollars . ssa is studying and plans to work with employee groups on this issue but has not developed specific plans for reducing the number of teleservice centers . reports of fraud and abuse trigger public perceptions that ssa is not making cost - effective and efficient use of taxpayer dollars . finally , ssa must manage technology investments and its workforce , and — when needed — make difficult decisions about handling increasing workloads with reduced resources . it must also continue to focus on and closely manage its year 2000 conversion to help ensure that ssa will move into the 21st century with systems that function correctly . as the 21st century approaches , ssa faces dramatic challenges: funding future retirement benefits , rethinking disability processes and programs , combating fraud and abuse , and restructuring how work is performed and services delivered . how ssa performs in these areas can have a powerful effect on its success in fulfilling its mission and on the public's confidence in this agency and the federal government . to help ssa meet these challenges , the congress took steps through the independence legislation to build public confidence in and strengthen the agency . ssa's success in meeting these challenges is critical . the agency is all important , accounting for one - fourth of federal spending and touching the lives of almost all americans .