no knowledge . ( continued ) the district of columbia , hawaii , and puerto rico are not included because they each have one lea . see app . data were collected by state but were not available at the time of our survey . leas provided this information to the state ; however , the data were not aggregated at the state level . ( continued ) the district of columbia , hawaii , and puerto rico are not included because they each have one lea . see app . ( 3 ) how do seas ensure local programs' compliance with the act ? and ( 4 ) what specific uses are made of safe and drug - free schools funding at the state and local levels ? to determine what is required under the act , we reviewed relevant documents , such as the act and its legislative history , relevant sections of the code of federal regulations , and other related legislation . to assess what actions education is taking , we followed up on allegations of impropriety in three states ( michigan , virginia and west virginia ) , reviewing documentation and interviewing state and local officials involved in the original incident and in the investigation and resolution ( see app . i for a description of each of these site visits ) . we also reviewed documents at education's headquarters in washington , d.c. , and interviewed department officials . in addition , we reviewed department of education state files for 16 states: connecticut , delaware , illinois , indiana , iowa , massachusetts , michigan , missouri , nebraska , nevada , new york , rhode island , tennessee , texas , west virginia , and wyoming . these state files included documentation , such as a copy of the state's plan , the reviewers' comments , materials from the state responding to education's request for supplemental information , and grant award documents . states were selected using a stratified , random sample . to select states for site visits , we used two main techniques to help identify allegations . first , we followed up on leads provided by correspondence to a member of the congress . for example , a set of seven letters given to us alleged improper use of funds . we reviewed these letters and called all seven authors to clarify their complaints . on the basis of the letters and phone calls , we eliminated six of these allegations from our investigation because they concerned curriculum issues . because the safe and drug - free schools act makes curriculum a state and local issue — the secretary of education is specifically prohibited from prescribing or proscribing specific materials or approaches — curriculum could not be used as a basis for inappropriate use of federal funds . we did visit the site of the seventh allegation — west virginia . we also chose the west virginia program because it had been audited by the inspector general ( ig ) of the department of education and was the subject of other department of education reviews , providing us with much information that could be reviewed in a relatively short time .