( see app . i for more information on our scope and methodology. ) ssi is a program based on need . the maximum monthly ssi benefit in 1996 was $470 . clients receive less than the maximum or become ineligible for the program altogether if their earned and unearned income and resources exceed certain thresholds . monthly changes in the amount of non - ssi income that clients receive increase or decrease the amount of ssi benefits to which they are entitled . if clients do not report these income fluctuations promptly to ssa , an overpayment or underpayment will accrue . ssi clients are required to self - report any income that they receive to claims representatives when applying for ssi and are also required to self - report any changes in their monthly income by the 10th day of the following month . ssa policy requires that claims representatives verify this reported income , but does not require that claims representatives check for unreported income unless they suspect that clients are not reporting all their income during initial or subsequent eligibility determinations . ssa uses both financial eligibility reviews , known as redeterminations , and computer matching to identify and prevent overpayments . during redeterminations , clients report their income on mailed questionnaires or during face - to - face or telephone interviews . the method used to contact the client and the frequency of such contacts depend on the likelihood that a client's financial situation will change . computer matches detect some types of income that clients have not reported . they consist of comparing the ssi payment records against client information contained in the payment files of other government agencies . in order to detect unreported income , the earnings and unemployment insurance ( ui ) benefits reported by ssi clients are compared or matched , for example , against earnings and ui information that employers report to state agencies . however , no computer matches are done that could identify unreported or underreported income from the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) and workers' compensation ( wc ) programs . in 1994 , ssa began establishing on - line connections between its field offices and state agencies that had automated databases that could easily be linked to ssa's computer system . ssa did this so that information on earnings and afdc and ui benefits contained in these databases could be automatically obtained as soon as claims representatives requested it . claims representatives use such information for a variety of purposes , including verifying the amount of income that clients report when applying for ssi and during redeterminations of their continuing financial eligibility . on - line access began in a limited number of ssa field offices in nashville , tennessee , in july 1994 . this access takes only a minute or two to retrieve the pertinent data . as of mid - 1996 , on - line access to state wage , ui , and afdc data was also fully implemented in ssa field offices in north carolina , south carolina , and kentucky , and partially implemented in ssa field offices in 2 other states .