iii ) . the department generally agreed with our basic conclusions and provided us a number of technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of education , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7014 or joseph j. eglin , jr. , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7009 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . two bills — h.r . 2416 and s. 2065 — introduced in the 104th congress would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public . although a hearing was held in the house , no further action was taken before the session's end . had the bills been enacted , they would have applied to colleges with police or security departments and required the colleges , in addition to reporting annual crime statistics , to maintain open - to - the - public , easily understood daily logs that chronologically recorded all crimes against persons or property reported to college campus or security departments . the bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in tennessee since 1994 . department implementation of the crime awareness and campus security act's reporting requirements has included issuing regulations ; disseminating policy guidance to colleges ; providing technical assistance to colleges and outreach to campus law enforcement organizations ; and , to a limited extent , checking whether colleges have prepared crime statistics reports and what procedures they have used for disseminating the reports . however , because of resource constraints , the department has only recently expanded its monitoring efforts by initiating program reviews that specifically address compliance with the act's reporting requirements . moreover , the department was late in issuing a required report to the congress . following enactment of the law in 1990 , the department issued various policy guidance documents on campus security to help colleges meet the law's requirements , as summarized in table 1 . most of the guidance was issued as department letters . final implementing regulations took effect in july 1994 . the department supplemented its policy guidance with technical assistance provided upon request by its customer support branch . to help colleges achieve compliance , the department emphasizes providing such assistance , rather than imposing sanctions . under department policy , the secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations or fails to take corrective action when required to do so . available sanctions include fines or limitation , suspension , or termination of participation in federal financial aid programs . department officials told us that although the department and independent auditors had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law's enactment , as of january 1997 , the department had not imposed sanctions against any college found in noncompliance with campus security requirements . although the department began issuing guidance to colleges on complying with the law in 1991 , guidance for monitoring program compliance came much more slowly . the department did not issue its first program review guidance specifically addressing campus security until september 1996 .