other minor dependents of u.s. citizens . examples are persons who would be space - available , tuition - paying , and federally connected but lack entitlement to a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate or a contract providing for education benefits . ( 4a ) minor dependents of foreign national citizens for whom the secretary of defense determines that enrollment is in the national interest . includes all foreign national dependents attending ankara , bahrain , and bonn schools unless excluded by the department of state . ( 4b ) all u.s. citizens not included in other categories , for example , u.s. retired military personnel . ( 4c ) dependents of local or third - country nationals when no significant u.s. interest is involved . dodds provided the following explanations . bahrain: the bahrain school was established by dod in the late 1970s . includes u.s. government employees who are covered by an economy act agreement between the department of state and dod , or any component of such an agency and dod . examples: dependents of u.s. citizen employees of all u.s. government agencies other than dod , such as the state department , agency for international development , department of agriculture , federal aviation administration , customs service , general services administration , and the smithsonian institution . this also includes u.s. citizen employees of certain international organizations , such as the north atlantic treaty organization and the united nations . ( 2a ) minor dependents of dod nonappropriated funds institutions employees who are u.s. citizens ( or persons lawfully accorded permanent residence in the united states ) , are full - time employees , are not overseas pursuant to a transportation agreement , but are receiving a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate . ( 2b ) minor dependents of u.s. citizens who are employees of organizations overseas that serve significant defense - related interests and / or that have executed contracts or other agreements with the u.s. government that authorize dependent education in dodds on a tuition - paying basis . for example: employees of permanent party american red cross , united service organizations , boy and girl scouts , post exchange concessionaire contractors , and stars and stripes . also , university education personnel , u.s. government contractor personnel , and technical representatives , when the contract authorizes dependent education in dodds on a tuition - paying basis . ( 2c ) dependents of host nation or third - country national military or civilian personnel assigned or attached to the u.s. military services overseas at international or major dod commands , when recommended by the major overseas commander . for example: third - country national military and civilian personnel service with u.s. armed forces overseas , north atlantic treaty organization , united nations , canadian , or other allied forces . minor dependents of dod military sponsors ( army , navy , marines , air force , and coast guard ) who are stationed in an overseas area to which their dependents are not authorized transportation at u.s. government expense , but to which the sponsors have elected to transport their dependents at their own expense .