the extent of these delays can be significant . for example , cder took 4 months ( 80 work days ) to issue a warning letter to one chinese manufacturer inspected in september 1994 . in the inspection report , received by cder 2 months after the inspection , the investigator noted 20 significant deviations from u.s. gmps and wrote that the manufacturer was incapable of producing the injectable pharmaceutical product for which it was seeking approval . the investigator wrote that “virtually all of the processing equipment for the first phases of processing is filthy , in extreme state of disrepair , and was removed during this inspection.” despite the severity of the inspection findings , it was not until march 1995 that cder sent a warning letter to the manufacturer . as shown in table 3 , it took more than 15 work days to issue 23 of the 30 warning letters sent to foreign pharmaceutical manufacturers . after receiving the inspection reports from investigators , it took cder between 21 and 148 work days to issue the 23 late warning letters , with an average of 57 work days . according to a cder official , cder experienced staffing shortages during the period we examined that delayed the review of incoming foreign inspection reports . more recently , fda reported that its analysis of fiscal year 1997 data showed a substantial improvement in the time cder spent in processing warning letters . fda reported that 30 percent or 3 , of the 10 warning letters issued to foreign pharmaceutical manufacturers during fiscal year 1997 were sent within 15 work days . on average , fda issued the 10 warning letters in about 24 work days . however , compared with the number of warning letters issued during fiscal year 1996 , fda issued two - thirds fewer warning letters during fiscal year 1997 . our analysis of inspections conducted in china and india between january 1 , 1994 , and may 15 , 1996 , showed that cder did not issue any of the six warning letters within the agency's 15-work - day standard . the number of work days from cder's receipt of inspection reports to the issuance of these warning letters ranged from 24 to 86 days , with an average of 40 days . in one case , a february 1994 inspection of a plant in india making an antibacterial agent identified serious problems , including failure to ensure that the proper manufacturing process was followed and inadequate testing of impurities in the product and water used by the plant . the investigator also found that two deficiencies identified during a 1985 fda inspection had not been fully corrected to meet u.s. quality standards.given the significance of the deficiencies found during the 1994 inspection , the investigator and his district office recommended that cder ( 1 ) not approve the new drug application , ( 2 ) advise fda district offices to deny entry into the united states of any pharmaceutical products from this manufacturer , and ( 3 ) pursue additional enforcement actions against pharmaceutical products from the manufacturer that were already distributed in the united states .