iv . because u.s. school districts differ a great deal in size and scope , their involvement with the federal government can also vary . districts that offer a wide variety of educational choices — such as magnet schools , vocational programs , and programs for students with limited english proficiency — may receive federal assistance from a large number of sources and be subject to additional program requirements . other ( often smaller ) districts may be involved with the federal government through a smaller number of more broadly targeted programs and requirements , such as those that provide funding for teacher training . although there has been widespread agreement on the need to improve the educational system , school districts are central to some education reform efforts and more peripheral to others . certain education reform movements , like charter schools , have minimized the role of the school district . in contrast , in other reform efforts the district plays a central role in improving curriculum , instructional methods , student assessment , and professional development . many proponents of all varieties of education reform — regardless of their view of school districts — regard flexibility as a key element in efforts to improve teaching and learning . however , little information is currently available about what types of flexibility are thought to be needed and how federal flexibility initiatives have been used . u.s. school districts vary greatly in size , from rural districts with only one school to citywide systems encompassing hundreds of schools and hundreds of thousands of students . in enrollment , school districts range from some with only a few students to new york city with over 1 million . as shown in figure 1.1 , while only a few districts had enrollments of over 100,000 students in school year 1995-96 , a much larger number of districts reported serving fewer than 150 students . these small districts , although numerous , accounted for less than one - half of 1 percent of total student enrollment . some districts ( usually smaller ones ) served only younger children or only secondary students . although about 74 percent of school districts provided instruction from the beginning of school through 12th grade , 22 percent of school districts provide instruction only through grade 8 , and the remaining 4 percent have a low grade of 7 or higher and a high grade of 12 . districts with more than 100,000 students accounted for about 12 percent of student enrollment but made up less than 1 percent of all school districts . similarly , while more school districts were located in rural areas , urban districts served a greater proportion of students . differences in the composition of the student population are sometimes reflected in the specialized programs found in many districts and schools . in 1993-94 ( the most recent school year for which data are available ) , 43 percent of public schools provided english as a second language ( esl ) programs , and 18 percent of public schools provided bilingual programs , for students with limited english proficiency . many districts offer vocational - technical programs , which provide skill training in specialized areas as well as academic instruction .