( see fig . in total , 242 of 3,141 counties had more than 5 percent enrollment in the medicare risk hmo program — a level that for this study we classify as “higher enrollment.” in contrast , however , 2,663 of the counties — about 85 percent — had either no beneficiaries or fewer than 1 percent enrolled in risk hmos . the higher enrollment / lower payment pattern also appeared in counties located in msas in seven other states in different parts of the country . counties in both new mexico and colorado exhibited the pattern described previously for oregon . hmo presence was generally strong and higher levels of risk hmo enrollment were coupled with lower payment rates in several of the more urban counties in msas with a few adjoining counties also having higher enrollments in risk hmos . elsewhere in the two states , enrollment rates were considerably lower . in new mexico , the counties with higher enrollments in medicare risk hmos were in and around the albuquerque and santa fe msas and had lower aapcc rates . ( see fig . about 48 percent of new mexico's medicare beneficiaries lived in the six counties in and around the two msas , but about 98 percent of the risk hmo enrollees in the state lived there . risk hmo enrollment was particularly high in the albuquerque msa — about 34 percent of the medicare beneficiaries in the msa's three counties were enrolled . in colorado , about two - thirds of the medicare beneficiaries and about 99 percent of the medicare risk hmo enrollees lived in and around four msas — boulder - longmont , colorado springs , denver , and pueblo . ( see fig . risk enrollment was highest in the denver msa — about 30 percent of the medicare beneficiaries were enrolled in december 1995 . table ii.1 shows risk hmo enrollment figures for counties in and around selected new mexico and colorado msas . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or michael f. gutowski , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7128 . other major contributors to this report include howard cott , aleta hancock , joseph petko , wayne turowski , and joan vogel . health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) enter into risk contracts with the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) to provide medicare - covered services to beneficiaries who enroll . risk plans assume all the financial risk associated with providing medicare - covered services to enrolled beneficiaries in return for a monthly per capita premium — the adjusted average per capita cost ( aapcc ) payment — from hcfa for each medicare beneficiary enrolled . the amount of these aapcc - based payments varies by county . hcfa pays some hmos on a cost - reimbursement basis , with these hmos assuming no risk that fees will be insufficient to cover costs ; our work focused only on managed care plans that had entered into risk contracts with hcfa . we first obtained data from the office of managed care at hcfa headquarters .