vi ) . in an overall comment , hhs stated that several ongoing medicare initiatives involving the four regional carriers are already addressing the problems highlighted in this report . specifically mentioned were the use of information from processed claims to identify for prepayment review suspicious suppliers and high - dollar , high - volume claims ; prepayment screens to detect egregious utilization of a supply item ; and comprehensive medical reviews of suppliers whose billing patterns indicate possible overutilization . as we have stated in this report , a number of hcfa initiatives show promise . all of these claims had been processed without any review . the results of the fiscal intermediary's subsequent review are as follows: eighty - nine percent of the claims for which documentation was received and reviewed ( 42 of 47 ) should have been totally or partially denied . almost 61 percent of the dollars billed for medical supplies ( $193,147 of $316,824 ) should have been denied for various reasons , including , among others , items not medically necessary , items not covered by medicare or covered as part of routine or administrative costs , no documentation of supplies used , no doctor's orders , and no itemized list of supplies . ( see app . ii for detailed information. ) forty - five percent of the claims for which documentation was not returned ( 38 of 85 ) , totaling $487,412 , was subsequently denied . one claim was determined to be potentially fraudulent because the beneficiary's condition required none of the $2,404 in medical supplies billed . a further review , by the fiscal intermediary's fraud and abuse unit , of the same provider's claims for this beneficiary for the previous 5 months resulted in the identification of an additional $20,393 in potentially fraudulent medical supply charges . fiscal intermediaries obtain similar or better results when they conduct their own prepayment reviews of medical supply claims . for example , a fiscal intermediary used a computerized payment control to identify all medical supply claims ( code 270 ) in excess of $500 submitted between october and december 1993 . after reviewing documentation supporting the claims , the fiscal intermediary denied 69 percent of the dollars billed ( $59,542 of $86,046 ) . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra 1993 ) partially addressed the problem of providers not submitting documentation that would allow fiscal intermediaries to adequately assess medical supply claims . obra 1993 provided essentially for certain supplies , including surgical dressings , to be paid on the basis of the fee schedule that regional carriers use for the part b program . as a result , providers must submit to fiscal intermediaries claims that itemize the specific supplies and quantities being billed . because the provision does not apply to all medical supplies , many other types of medical supplies are still billed using broad codes that do not adequately describe the type and amount of such supplies . the provision does not at all apply to surgical dressings supplied by a home health agency .