co . this decision did not delineate fully between state actions that are preempted and those that are not but indicated that courts may approve state actions that do not conflict with erisa's underlying objectives or impact too greatly on employee benefit plans . in the wake of the court's ruling in travelers , states are likely to perceive that they have more options and greater flexibility than previously recognized . in particular , the decision permits new york and other states to adopt hospital rate setting systems and may permit states to tax providers . the case suggests that state laws affecting employee health plans will have to be judged individually on the facts and circumstances in each case . the nature and magnitude of the impact on employee benefit plans of each state law at issue will determine the outcome . in cases in which the state law does not conflict with erisa's objectives , it should survive legal challenge . the travelers case leaves substantial questions unresolved about erisa preemption that may need to be resolved through further litigation . although erisa and court decisions have produced a sharp distinction in the regulatory status of self - funded and insured health plans , most employer plans can be categorized as ranging from full insurance to complete self - funding . clearly distinguishing between self - funded and fully insured plans is growing more difficult as the health market changes . among factors contributing to the confusion are more extensive use of stop - loss coverage and innovative risk - sharing arrangements between employers and managed care organizations . the level of stop - loss coverage that a self - funded employer purchases is one factor that influences where an employer's plan fits within this range: a plan with a low stop - loss threshold self - funds a smaller share of its risk than a plan with a high stop - loss threshold . particularly among smaller employers , some health plans have stop - loss coverage beginning at a relatively low level of health claims . in addition , many employers that offer self - funded health plans also provide insured coverage to some employees . for instance , many employers that provide a self - funded plan also offer their employees a choice of one or more health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) that may not be self - funded . some employers , however , are beginning to adopt alternative financing arrangements with managed care plans that place some financial risk with the employer as well as the plan and its providers . some employers may also provide coverage for specific conditions , such as cancer or mental health care , through a separate plan that may be either insured or self - funded . in many cases , employees will not know whether their employer - based health plan is self - funded or purchased through an insurer , especially since commercial insurers often provide administrative services for self - funded health plans . data on the number and characteristics of self - funded erisa plans are scant largely because efforts to collect this information on the federal level have been limited .