this did not occur . even with these factors included in the analysis , the effect of regular visits with a cardiologist did not change . neither race nor heart attack severity was associated with taking any of the three types of drugs , and patient age was associated only with taking cholesterol - lowering medication . further , among the younger patients — those more likely to have regular cardiology appointments — the usage rate of cholesterol - lowering drugs was much higher among those with regular cardiology appointments — 60 percent , compared to 38 percent for those without a regular cardiologist . on the whole , our conclusion that patients under the regular care of a cardiologist are more likely to take recommended medications parallels the findings of other studies of physician specialty differences in the united states . our results also reinforce the findings of the small number of other studies specifically concerned with hmo members . the pattern we found for older heart attack patients in medicare hmos is the same as that reported by other researchers for younger hmo members with asthma . one characteristic of medical care in the united states is that the patients of specialist and generalist physicians sometimes receive different treatments for the same medical condition . studies have documented this phenomenon in both fee - for - service and hmo settings . however , it is both a special problem and a unique opportunity for hmos and their members . it is a special problem because hmos can restrict access to specialists , perhaps leading some enrollees to feel that they have been denied necessary care . it is a unique opportunity because these differences are not immutable and because hmos , unlike fee - for - service insurers , can actively manage care . thus , hmos can educate the physicians they employ about treatment guidelines , review clinical records to ensure that patients are taking appropriate medications , or take other organizational actions to improve the quality of care provided by all types of physicians that are not possible in fee - for - service settings . we provided a draft of this report to hcfa and a panel of experts for their review . based on their comments , we expanded the number of drugs we examined and explicitly addressed the possible confounding effects of patient characteristics . we also incorporated technical changes where appropriate . several other issues that the reviewers raised are addressed here . first , some reviewers were concerned that our survey sample had the potential to introduce selection biases . in general , enrollees in medicare hmos who develop chronic conditions are more likely to revert to standard fee - for - service medicare . our sample , however , was limited to heart attack survivors enrolled in medicare hmos who remained enrolled for the roughly 2-year period from their heart attack until we interviewed them . if many patients were excluded from our sample because they had left hmos between their heart attack and our survey , then our respondents could represent hmo enrollees who were disproportionately healthy and satisfied with medical care provided by hmos .