however , no further action has been taken . as previously discussed , we and the department of labor's inspector general identified several shortcomings that should be addressed in the implementation of the nafta - taa program . however , while labor addressed some of these shortcomings , other concerns , such as lack of a system to monitor performance , were not addressed . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we found that the timeliness of the certification process has improved . during the first 9 months of the program , labor completed 94 percent of its determinations within 40 days from the date the petition was filed . under taa , labor had 60 days from the date the petition was filed to certify workers . in the initial months of the program , labor officials told us they were able to complete the investigations under the shortened time frames because many of the certifications had been shifts in production , which are not difficult to determine compared with certifications involving determinations of adverse impact from foreign imports . in addition , labor officials told us that the states' role has , in effect , provided labor with additional field staff to collect the required data . whether labor will continue to meet the shortened time frames may depend on the number of petition filings . during the first 9 months of the program , only 251 petitions were filed ( see fig . by comparison , over 1,100 taa petitions were filed during the same time frame . before the ratification of nafta , labor officials predicted that nafta dislocations would be limited during the first 18 months of the program . officials cited a number of reasons , including their belief that labor - market changes would develop gradually . in the state we visited with few nafta - taa filings , state officials cited a number of reasons for the low number of nafta - taa petitions , including improved local economies and that some industry shifts had already occurred . however , some union officials voiced concerns that the lack of program awareness and outreach in some areas might limit the number of petitions filed .