each carrier developed its own policy . medical directors for each of the carriers decided whether to reimburse for transportation costs separately . in 15 states , carriers had a policy to reimburse separately for transportation costs associated with ultrasound services . beginning january 1 , 1996 , carriers could allow transportation payments for only the following services: ( 1 ) x - ray and standard ekg services furnished by an approved portable x - ray supplier and ( 2 ) standard ekg services furnished by an ipl under special conditions . for all other types of diagnostic tests payable under the physician fee schedule , travel expenses were considered “bundled” into the procedure payment . for example , carriers could no longer make separate transportation payments associated with ultrasound services . after further review , hcfa again revised its policy . hcfa concluded that the statute authorized carriers to make separate transportation payments only for portable x - ray services . therefore , hcfa published a final regulation providing that effective january 1 , 1997 , carriers would no longer make separate transportation payments associated with ekg services . the enactment of the balanced budget act in august 1997 caused additional changes in medicare's transportation payment policy . first , bba temporarily restored separate payments for transporting ekg equipment but not ultrasound equipment during 1998 . the law requires the secretary of health and human services to make a recommendation by july 1 , 1998 , to the committees on commerce and ways and means of the house of representatives and the committee on finance of the senate on whether there should be a separate medicare transportation fee for portable ekgs starting in 1999 . second , bba phases in a prospective payment system for skilled nursing care that will pay an all - inclusive per diem rate for covered services . beneficiaries needing skilled care after being discharged from the hospital are covered under part a for 100 days of care during a benefit period . part a coverage includes room and board , skilled nursing and rehabilitative services , and other services and supplies . because of these uncertainties , we developed a range estimate of potential savings and costs associated with the revised payment policy . in 1995 , if the prospective payment system for skilled nursing care and the policy of not making transportation payments had been in effect , medicare outlays would have been lower by as much as $11 million on ekgs and $400,600 on ultrasound services . however , these savings would have materialized only to the extent that homebound beneficiaries and nursing home residents did not travel outside in medicare - paid ambulances to receive these tests . we cannot predict the likelihood that savings will be realized because they depend upon the future actions of portable equipment providers and nursing home operators . providers of portable equipment may continue to provide ekg and ultrasound services even if they no longer receive the separate transportation payments . many mobile providers have established private business relationships with the nursing homes they serve and may be eager to maintain those relationships . in addition , many also provide other services to nursing homes , such as x - ray services .