ii. ) comments from financial aid directors and students we interviewed helped us interpret the statistical results . one opinion arising in the directors' panels , for example , was that some low - income students are reluctant to borrow , especially during their first year or two in college . this observation is consistent with our statistical findings about grants being more effective than loans in increasing the likelihood that first - year , low - income students will stay in school . do grants and loans have equivalent effects on helping students stay in college ? does the timing of grant aid influence the length of time students stay in college ? to answer these questions , we analyzed two student - level databases to examine the statistical relationship between grants , loans , and staying in college . one database comprised a national sample of high school seniors who began full - time study at 4-year colleges ; we traced these students through college . the other database consisted of a group of relatively low - income freshmen from a large public 4-year university that frontloaded some of its institutional grant dollars to improve these students' dropout rates . to complement our statistical analysis and provide additional perspectives on our findings and observations , we talked to financial aid directors and students from 12 colleges and universities . we judgmentally selected four schools from each of three areas — washington , d.c. ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and seattle , washington — for our study . we convened a discussion panel with financial aid directors from the schools in each area and asked them for their observations on trends in federal student financial aid , factors affecting students' staying in school , and the potential benefit of frontloading grants . we also interviewed 51 students from these 12 colleges and universities , asking them about their financial aid packages , the effects working has on their studies , and their thoughts about debt accumulation . although the financial aid director and student responses illustrated ways financial aid affects students , neither group's responses were intended to be representative of the respective population as a whole . ( for further details on our scope and methodology , see app . most federal student financial aid programs are authorized under the higher education act of 1965 . federal student financial assistance exceeded $30 billion in academic year 1993-94 , and most assistance came from two programs — the pell grant and federal family education loan ( ffel ) programs . the pell grant program , which primarily targets low - income students , accounted for about $5.7 billion , while the ffel program comprised over $21 billion of the total federal aid . maximum annual awards to students in each program are capped: in 1993-94 , the maximum pell grant was $2,300 , and the maximum subsidized stafford loan — the largest of the ffel loan programs — ranged from $2,625 for freshmen to $5,500 for seniors . the department of education administers the pell grant program in accordance with eligibility criteria and authorized maximum award amounts set by the congress . in addition , the congress effectively limits actual maximum pell award amounts each year through the appropriations process .