ssa is in the process of revising these estimates . to handle increasing workloads and improve public service , ssa has begun to redesign inefficient work processes and develop supporting modernized information systems . ssa is in the process of a multiyear , multibillion dollar systems modernization effort expected to support new ways of doing business and improve productivity . ssa's automation investment fund of $1.1 billion supports its 5-year plan , from fiscal years 1994 to 1998 , of moving from reliance on computer terminals linked to mainframe computers in its baltimore headquarters to a nationwide network of personal computers . the new network is expected to improve productivity and customer service in field offices and teleservice centers and allow for further technology enhancements . although this new computer network environment may yield productivity improvements , it poses significant challenges for ssa . the usefulness of new computer systems will depend on the software developed for them . software development has been identified by many experts as one of the most risky and costly aspects of systems development . to mitigate the risk of failing to deliver high - quality software on time and within budget , ssa must have a disciplined and consistent process for developing software . ssa has already experienced problems , however , in developing its first major software application for use in its new network . these problems include ( 1 ) using programmers with insufficient experience , ( 2 ) using software development tools that have not performed effectively , and ( 3 ) developing initial schedules that were too optimistic . we have reported that these problems have collectively contributed to a delay of over 2 years in implementing this new software . finally , ssa must manage technology investments and its workforce and make difficult decisions about handling increasing workloads with reduced resources . it must also continue to focus on and closely manage its year 2000 conversion to help ensure that ssa will move into the 21st century with systems that function correctly . moreover , as ssa prepares to meet greater demands and changes in its employee and client base , it may have to make difficult workforce decisions to better respond to customer needs . for example , ssa may need to close offices and move its workers to different locations to better meet growing demand . in an environment of shrinking budgets and increased expectations for government agency performance , ensuring that agency decisions are based on comprehensive planning and sound analyses will be even more essential . ssa's success in meeting these challenges is critical . the agency is all important , touching the lives of almost all americans . how it meets its challenges as it moves into the next century can make a significant difference in the well - being of america's vulnerable populations — the aged , disabled , and poor — and in how the public feels about its government . in commenting on a draft of this report , ssa discussed the accomplishments of commissioner chater during her tenure and stated that many challenges remain . the agency also made technical comments on our report , which we incorporated where appropriate . see appendix ii for a copy of the agency's comment letter .