ii ) . of the services we asked about , parent literacy , social services , job training , and mental health were the most frequently provided ( see table ii.4 in app . ii ) . programs were least likely to provide dental and medical services to siblings and other family members , with 64 percent reporting they never provided dental services and 56 percent reporting they never provided medical services . some head start program officials we interviewed , however , told us that they contracted with a private preschool or child care centers to provide education services . these cases are rare , however ; only 3 percent of respondents to our survey reported that head start funded , but someone else delivered , education services . how are services delivered in a center setting , the most common option ? the center may be housed in a church basement , at a parent's work site , in a public school building , at a college or university , or some other location . a head start teacher as well as a second adult instruct the children using a curriculum relevant to and reflective of the needs of the population served . head start regulations emphasize that large and small group activities take place throughout the day . children should be encouraged to solve problems , initiate activities , explore , experiment , question , and gain mastery through learning by doing . in addition to educational services , children receive other services . meals and snacks are provided as appropriate . within a certain number of days of entering the program , children receive a thorough health screening and medical and dental examination . this screening may take place on or off site . program staff ensure that treatment and follow - up services are arranged for all health problems detected . in addition , head start staff are expected to visit the children's homes to assess their and their families' need for services . for example , these visits may identify the families' need for services such as emergency assistance or crisis intervention . staff may also provide families with information about community services and how to use them . during these visits , staff are expected to develop activities for family members to use at home that will reinforce and support the child's total head start experience . head start is administered by hhs' administration for children and families ( acf ) , which includes the head start bureau — one of several under acf . grantees , which deliver head start services at the local level , numbered about 1,440 in fiscal year 1996 . grantees may contract with organizations — called delegate agencies — in the community to run all or part of their local head start programs . grantees and delegate agencies include public and private school systems , community action agencies and other private nonprofit organizations , local government agencies ( primarily cities and counties ) , and indian tribes . in fiscal year 1996 , head start received $3.6 billion in funding and served about 752,000 children . this figure reflects children served through all of head start's programs .