this concludes my testimony . i would be happy to answer any questions . for our report on government stock investing , we used simulations to illustrate how changing the investment policy can affect the future outcome for the social security trust fund . how much higher is uncertain . indeed , investing in the stock market would not ensure a higher return than might be possible investing in bonds . the stock market could drop and stay depressed for a prolonged period of time . with government stock ownership , the risk and potential returns would be shared collectively by workers and beneficiaries . as shown in our simulations , any gain would extend the trust fund's solvency and thus reduce the size of benefit cuts or tax increases that would otherwise be required . on the other hand , any shortfall might require further benefit cuts or tax increases . the distribution of any gains or losses across workers and beneficiaries would ultimately depend on the structure of the social security program and any changes to it . for any system of individual accounts , the risk of stock investing would be borne by those individuals who chose to invest in the stock market . reform proposals that use government managed accounts would constrain investment choices to reduce the risks that individuals could take and , thereby , could also moderate their returns . in contrast , under proposals that place few restrictions on investment choices , investors could take much greater risks and potentially earn greater returns . in either case , individuals would benefit directly from any higher returns , and their retirement income would vary depending on their investment decisions and the timing of their investments . some individuals could do very well under such an approach , but others could experience a significant drop in their expected retirement income . those who are reluctant to invest in the stock market , such as appears to be the case with lower income individuals , may not benefit from the potentially higher returns of stock investing . focusing on the risks associated with stock investing in isolation ignores a significant impact that individual accounts proposals would have on other risks individuals would face . individual accounts proposals would fundamentally alter the role of social security as a social insurance program and focus instead on providing a vehicle for retirement savings . under a social insurance model , the government tries to help insure adequate income by largely taking responsibility for a wide variety of risks that individuals face . they face some risks individually , such as how long they will be able to work , how long they will live , whether they will be survived by spouses or dependents , and how much their lifetime earnings will be . they also face some risks collectively , such as the performance of the economy and inflation . social insurance tends to minimize such risks to individuals . in the process , social security redistributes income in a variety of ways — for example from high to low earners — and lowers the rate of return some workers earn on their retirement contributions .