additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . each varo is responsible for fully developing the claims . varos obtain medical records from the military services ; arrange for a va medical examination ; and obtain evidence from other sources , such as private health care providers or knowledgeable lay persons , if the veteran identifies such sources . once the claim is developed , the claims file is transferred to one of the four area processing offices that va has designated for processing undiagnosed illness claims . as mentioned earlier , over 700,000 men and women served in the persian gulf war . va reported that as of february 1996 , it has processed 7,845 undiagnosed illness claims and has identified an additional 6,655 claims that are being evaluated for undiagnosed illnesses . of the processed claims , va had denied compensation for undiagnosed illness to 7,424 veterans — a denial rate of 95 percent . in february 1995 , va issued a regulation ( 38 c.f.r . 3.317 ) that specifies the evidence required before compensation can be paid for an undiagnosed illness claim . under the regulation , veterans must provide objective indications of a chronic disability . objective indications include both signs — evidence perceptible to the examining physician — and other nonmedical indications that are capable of independent verification . in the final rule , va explained that nonmedical indicators of a disabling illness include but are not limited to such circumstances or events as ( 1 ) time lost from work ; ( 2 ) evidence that a veteran has sought medical treatment for his or her symptoms ; and ( 3 ) evidence affirming changes in the veteran's appearance , physical abilities , or mental or emotional attitude . the evidence requirements contained in the regulation are consistent with the joint explanatory statement that accompanied the veterans' benefits improvements act of 1994 . while va does not often grant compensation for undiagnosed conditions , these veterans often receive compensation for diagnosable injuries or illnesses . of the cases that we reviewed where the claimed undiagnosed illness ( es ) had been denied , about 60 percent of the veterans had been granted compensation for at least one service - connected diagnosable condition , such as hypertension , hearing loss , or knee disorders . about one - half of these veterans were granted a disability payment ; the remainder , with minor impairments , are eligible for free care for their conditions through the va medical system . the lack of evidence to support undiagnosed illness claims may in part be the result of poor va procedures to elicit such information , as the following examples indicate . in late 1995 , va's central office conducted a review of 203 completed undiagnosed illness claims . va found that additional specialty examinations should have been ordered in 23 cases ( about 11 percent ) . at the time of our work , va stated that the required examinations would be scheduled and the veterans' cases would be reconsidered based on the additional evidence .