eval . for mobility + gait — eval . for adl's , speech eval . swallowing — from 2 / 11 / 98 and these services are no longer needed on a daily basis . the case file indicated that while was making progress in his therapy programs , his condition had stabilized and further daily skilled services were no longer indicated . the physical therapy notes indicate that he reached his maximum potential in therapy . he had progressed to minimum assistance for bed mobility , moderate assistance with transfers , and was ambulating to 100 feet with a walker . the speech therapist noted that his speech was much improved by 2 / 18 / 98 and that his private caregiver had been instructed on safe swallowing procedures and will continue with feeding responsibilities . representatives from several advocacy groups told us that in cases brought to their attention , the denial notices were often general and did not clearly explain why the beneficiary would not receive or continue to receive a specific service . in august 1997 , mrc established a hotline for hmo appeals and analyzed all calls it received during the first 6-month period ( 179 ) . mrc concluded that the explanations found in most plans' denial notices were unhelpful because of their generality — for example , the services were “not medically necessary. hcfa regulations state that whenever plans discontinue services , they must issue timely denial notices to beneficiaries . hcfa , however , does not specify how much advance notice is required and we found that many plans do not issue denial notices in what many would reasonably consider “timely.” although beneficiaries may appeal denied services upon receiving notice , those who receive little advance notice may not be able to continue to receive services because of their potential financial liability . if the beneficiary appeals and loses , he or she is responsible for the cost associated with services received after the date specified in the denial notice . the potential financial burden can be substantial , especially if the denial involves snf services . in three of the four plans we visited , the general practice was to issue denial notices the day before services were discontinued . we reviewed a number of snf discharge notices at three hmos and often found that the notices were mailed ( usually by certified or express mail ) to the beneficiary's home instead of being delivered to the facility where the beneficiary resided . in some cases , it appeared that the beneficiary or his or her representative received the notice a few days after the beneficiary had been discharged . ten of the 25 chdr cases we reviewed also involved a beneficiary or his or her representative receiving a discharge notice after the beneficiary was discharged from the snf . the fourth plan we visited issued snf discharge notices 3 days prior to the discharge date . this lead time helped ensure that the beneficiary received the notice before the discharge . it also allowed more time for the beneficiary to file an expedited appeal and receive a decision from the plan .