viii. ) the current va manual states that when a proposed sharing agreement involves the contractor's use of federally owned property , such as medical space or medical equipment ( which is the case with the lithotripter at albuquerque ) , va should obtain a fair market value in accordance with comparable commercial practices . adjustments should have been made to the charges then but were not . to illustrate the effect of this overstated workload on the center's recovery of contract lithotripsy costs , we examined the center's charge of $1,469 for a basic lithotripsy procedure . the center's basic charge may be divided into two cost categories — $755 for the lithotripter and technician and $714 for facilities support , including anesthesiology services . these categories are consistent with those used by other albuquerque lithotripsy providers and they facilitate our comparative analysis with these providers . each category contains variable costs ( staffing , supplies , or administration ) as well as fixed costs ( equipment depreciation and maintenance or building management ) . to estimate the amount of unrecovered costs , we compared the center's 1993 charges for these cost categories using the center's workload estimate of 882 and its actual workload of 155 procedures . by ignoring the accumulated depreciation , the center would recover more than the cost of the asset over its useful life . for example , if 500 procedures are performed for each of the next 7 years , the center would have a total recognized depreciation of $120,360 more than the $1,248,225 purchase price . our recalculation of the amount to be depreciated is based on a 5-year useful life rather than a 9-year life . we used this shorter period in order to remain more consistent with the center's previous methodology for determining costs and because we regard 5 years as a more appropriate period for recovering costs on equipment that can quickly become technologically obsolete even though it is still operable . to fully recover its costs for a basic lithotripsy procedure in 1993 , the albuquerque center would have needed to charge about $3,360 rather than the $1,469 it actually charged . the representative said his company had guaranteed service and repair for 10 years from the date of purchase — 5 years beyond the useful life assigned for depreciation purposes . to fully recover the albuquerque center's fixed costs spread over the 155 procedures provided , the center would have needed to charge about $3,360 rather than the $1,469 it actually charged . these charges are summarized in table 4 . in february 1994 , the center revised its lithotripsy charge for unm patients . this revision included an adjustment in the expected number of procedures as well as changes to key assumptions and cost data . because these adjustments had an offsetting effect , there was essentially no change in the rate — $1,451 for 1994 , compared with $1,469 for 1993 . this approach would have yielded a depreciation charge of $322 per procedure over the center's estimated workload of 500 procedures . since 2 years of the period have gone by , 3 years remain over which to depreciate the equipment .