( app . iii contains a list of the services , by category. ) the stakeholders advisory group provided input and advice to the icc regarding work group activities and proposed integration recommendations . the sag consisted of 17 members , including representatives of elected officials , affiliated medical schools , community groups , labor unions , and veterans service organizations ( see app . given that hospitals are service providers and are labor intensive , most recurring savings generated came from eliminating personnel positions . of the estimated $4.9 million , about $3.7 million of the savings are attributed to eliminating 74 unstaffed positions and 6 staffed positions . other savings resulted from decisions such as standardizing drug formularies and reducing the need for contracting by performing activities in - house . the vachcs integration generated one - time savings of about $2.25 million . for example , the network director approved replacement of only one angiography suite for vachcs , resulting in a one - time cost avoidance of $1.25 million . in addition , vachcs officials said that by replacing only one of two cameras in the nuclear medicine service , vachcs avoided spending $500,000 . furthermore , it refrained from spending another $500,000 by sharing one computer system and thus eliminating the need to upgrade a second system . vachcs officials reported that the integration will likely lead to additional savings but that the annual savings were not measurable at this time . for example , the lakeside and west side hospitals will be jointly purchasing supplies and equipment . vachcs officials believe that this joint purchasing will result in lower costs , but they were unable to estimate the amount of the savings . overall , the officials who reported nonmeasurable savings also indicated that the amounts would be insignificant compared with the measurable savings . we provided copies of a draft of this report for review and comment to va , the university of illinois college of medicine , and northwestern university medical school , and we received comments from each of them . these comments are summarized in the following sections . the comments in their entirety are in appendixes vi , vii , and viii , respectively . the vha under secretary for health reviewed the report and acknowledged that it will be of interest to the great lakes network in its future planning as well as to other networks contemplating integrations of their facilities . in this regard , he noted that the report will be provided for consideration in the planned contractor study of health care delivery in the great lakes network . forty - six recommendations maintain the status quo or will not be implemented ; therefore , no changes occurred within the services as a result of those recommendations . thirty - eight recommendations have been deferred to the vachcs director or the deans' committee for further consideration . the remaining 116 integration recommendations are in various stages of implementation , with 90 percent either having been or in the process of being implemented , as table 1 shows . most integration decisions will reengineer services , while the least number of decisions will consolidate services , as table 2 shows .