ii . other technical comments provided by labor were incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable alexis m. herman , secretary of labor ; the honorable leonard r. page , general counsel of the national labor relations board ; the honorable c. richard barnes , director of the federal mediation and conciliation service ; relevant congressional committees ; and others who are interested . copies will be made available to others on request . if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in app . iii . we were asked to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which employers experiencing labor unrest are more likely to be inspected than employers not experiencing labor unrest , and ( 2 ) whether the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) has policies for performing inspections during labor unrest and whether these policies are being followed . to determine whether employers experiencing labor unrest are more likely to be inspected than employers not experiencing labor unrest , we ( 1 ) identified the universe of establishments that experienced labor unrest and determined how many of these were inspected by osha and ( 2 ) determined how many of the establishments that did not experience labor unrest were inspected by osha . to identify policies for conducting inspections during labor unrest , we obtained osha policies and interviewed federal osha officials . we also obtained inspection policies from each of the 25 states and territories that conduct their own safety and health programs . we also interviewed officials from the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) ; the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) ; the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) ; representatives of the national association of manufacturers , the labor policy association , the afl - cio , and a california longshoremen union ; and david weil , an associate professor of economics from boston university known for his research on occupational safety and health . in addition , we visited four california employers that had experienced various forms of labor unrest and had been inspected by osha during a period of labor unrest to obtain information about the inspections . labor unrest is a vague term with many connotations and no precise definition . to perform our analysis , we first identified the various documented forms of unrest . accordingly , we obtained information from the only two sources that systematically collect and maintain information on events that may be related to labor unrest — nlrb and fmcs . using these sources , we were able to identify establishments that experienced ( 1 ) charges of unfair labor practices , ( 2 ) union campaigns to organize employees , ( 3 ) efforts to decertify ( remove ) a union , or ( 4 ) work stoppages ( strikes ) . for purposes of this report , we define labor unrest as the occurrence of one or more of these four conditions .