vi ) . we revised our report on the basis of these comments and suggestions as they related to federal education programs when applicable . such recapturing can also be contentious . in addition , reducing local funding and holding state funding steady would also increase equalization by increasing the state share of total funding . although this action would effectively increase equalization effort , it would also reduce total education funding in the state — which might have harmful effects . states must also decide whether to control local tax behavior . although a state might reduce funding gaps without such constraints , those reductions would not be certain . ( see ch . constraining local tax behavior may be controversial , however , because it means the state will partially control local choices on spending for education services and , in some cases , raise taxes . for example , mandating that all districts maintain their local effort would be the state's less costly option for reducing or eliminating funding gaps . ( see ch . this choice , however , would keep poor districts with high tax efforts from using any new state funding to obtain even modest tax relief . by mandating an equal tax effort instead , states may be able to give tax relief to poor districts with high tax efforts , but this choice may raise taxes in many other , often wealthier , school districts . it also would be more costly for the state to implement . options to maintain or to equalize local tax efforts would limit the funding districts could raise for education services as well . the tax constraint option that allows the greatest degree of local choice involves the state setting a minimum tax effort . this option would be difficult to implement , however , because the statewide minimum effort must be at least equal to the tax effort of the state's wealthiest districts ; a lower tax effort by poor compared with wealthy districts would exacerbate funding gaps . the state would have to regularly monitor district tax efforts statewide and , if necessary , raise the minimum effort to lessen the funding gaps . for the federal government , the difficulty is determining whether federal programs encouraging equalization should continue to focus only on reduced funding gaps between poor and wealthy districts or whether these programs should also consider the extent to which state policies are responsible for reducing those gaps . two federal programs with equalization components operate to effectively reward a state for reducing funding gaps even if the state has not made much effort to equalize funding . some states with low funding gaps have accomplished this outcome in part through extraordinary taxpayer effort in the poorest school districts . to encourage states to increase their equalization effort and reduce funding gaps among districts , federal policymakers could use both a performance indicator of state equalization effort and an indicator of funding gaps to reward states for their performance . to encourage states to increase their equalization effort , regardless of its impact on funding gaps , federal policymakers could replace the performance indicator of a state's funding gap with one that measures only state efforts to equalize funding .