these determinations are final . there is no review or comment period provided to interested parties before they go into effect . access to wage determinations is provided both in printed reports available from the u.s . superintendent of documents and on an electronic bulletin board . modifications to general wage determinations are published in the federal register . an interested party may seek review and reconsideration of labor's final wage determinations . the national office and the regional offices accept protests and inquiries relating to wage determinations at any time after a wage determination has been issued . the national office refers all the complaints it receives to the relevant regional offices for resolution . most inquiries are received informally by telephone , although some are written complaints . regional office staff said that a majority of those with concerns appear to have their problems resolved after examining the information ( collected on a form wd - 22a ) for the survey at issue , because they do not pursue the matter further . if an examination of the forms does not satisfy them , they are required to provide information to support their claim that a wage determination needs to be revised . the national office modifies published wage determinations in cases where regional offices , based on evidence provided , recommend that it do so ; for example , when it has been shown that a wage determination was the result of an error by the regional office . however , some of those who seek to have wage rates revised are told that a new survey will be necessary to resolve the particular issue that they are concerned about . for example , if the wage rates of one segment of the construction industry are not adequately reflected in survey results due to a low rate of participation in the survey by that segment of the industry , a new survey would be necessary to resolve this issue . those who are not satisfied with the decision of the regional office may write to the national office to request a ruling by labor's whd administrator . if the revision of a wage rate has been sought and denied by a ruling of labor's whd administrator , an interested party has 30 days to appeal to the administrative review board for review of the wage determination . the board consists of three members appointed by the secretary of labor . the solicitor of labor represents whd in cases involving wage determinations before the administrative review board . labor supplements the f.w . dodge data with additional information provided to the national office by federal agencies regarding their planned construction projects . the rspr also includes the date of the most recent survey for each county and whether the existing wage determinations for each county are union , nonunion , or a combination of both . using this information , the regional offices , in consultation with the national office , designate the counties and type of construction to be included in the upcoming regional surveys .