, sec . 1552 ( a ) ) , we asked head start regional office officials why certain carryover balances were reprogrammed or offset as long as 3 or more years after an unspent balance occurred . regional office officials gave the following administrative and grantee - specific reasons: regional office staff may not process grantee files in a timely manner due to grantee or staff errors , delays in data entry , staff turnover , large workloads , and differences in staff competence . final forms documenting carryover balances are not due from grantees until 90 days after the budget year's end . we did not include data collected from this site in our overall estimates but used the data as a case study of a very large grantee . by eliminating the very large grantees , we reduced our population further by 4 grantees to 1,197 , thereby reducing our sample from 108 to 107 grantees . our findings , therefore , are representative of grantees in the 10 head start regions that are at least 3 years old with at least some but less than $60 million in fiscal year 1994 new funding . we provided the list of sample grantees to each selected regional office , which collected records for our review . we examined key documents from the files and summarized the information using a data collection instrument . data elements we collected included the number of service years for a selected grantee ; total federal funds authorized for specific funding periods ; the unspent balance of federal funds for specific funding periods and its intended usage ; and the amount of carryover funds added to or offsetting grantee awards in grantee budget years 1993 , 1994 , and 1995 by type and source year . to link source year with carryover funds , we gathered information from the financial assistance award form , which identifies the grantee service year in which the unspent funds occurred . once data collection was complete , we compiled and merged the data . data elements were verified and traced to documents maintained in the grantee files for 91 percent of the cases . depending on the size of grantees' awards , their reported unspent balances in those years ranged from as little as $2 to about $2 million . to calculate the age of carryover funds , we subtracted the source year from the grantee's current service year . the head start grantee funding process presented unique data collection challenges . we made no attempt to capture the fiscal year funding . rather , we used each grantee's budget year ending date to guide our compilation of financial data . because our analysis is based on data from a sample of grantees , each reported estimate has an associated sampling error . the size of the sampling error reflects the estimate's precision ; the smaller the error , the more precise the estimate . the magnitude of the sampling error depends largely on the size of the obtained sample and the amount of data variability . our sampling errors for the estimates were calculated at the 95-percent confidence level .