( see fig . in some mountain and plains states , individual insurance is relied on much more as a source of coverage . for example , we estimate that about one of every seven people under 65 in north dakota has individual health insurance as his or her only source of health coverage . north dakota is the only state where our estimates of the number of participants in the individual health insurance market exceed the estimated uninsured population . iowa , montana , nebraska , and south dakota also have estimated participation rates in the individual insurance market that are at least twice the national rate . appendix ii presents rates of individual health insurance enrollment by state . overall , individual insurance enrollment tends to be slightly lower in metropolitan areas than in nonmetropolitan areas . ( see table 2.1. ) in particular , individual health insurance is common among people living on farms . nearly 30 percent of people indicating that their residence was a farm had individual health insurance in 1993 , according to our analysis of the national health interview survey . the pattern of higher enrollment in rural areas is not uniform throughout the country . the southern region , for instance , has a relatively large nonurban population , but the proportions of the populations that had individual health insurance were lower than the national average in 12 of its 17 states . florida is an exception ; the large number of retirees under age 65 there may help explain the fact that a relatively large proportion of florida's nonelderly population has individual insurance ( 6.4 percent ) . in hawaii , the only state with mandated employer - sponsored health insurance , only 1.8 percent of the nonelderly population had individual health insurance as the sole source of coverage in 1994 . in several other states — alaska , arizona , delaware , kentucky , nevada , new mexico , virginia , west virginia , and wisconsin — less than 3 percent of the population relied on individual insurance as the only source of coverage . the individual insurance market is an important source of health coverage for people in their fifties and early sixties , particularly early retirees and people who have been widowed . the relative importance of the individual insurance market to people of different ages is illustrated in table 2.2 . those in the 60 to 64 age group are more than two - and - a - half times as likely to be covered by individual insurance than those in their twenties ( 9.6 percent versus 3.4 percent ) . the median age of people with individual insurance is 35 , compared with 32 for people with employment - based coverage and 28 for uninsured people . the individual insurance market is becoming increasingly important for early retirees because fewer employers are providing health coverage for them . in 1994 , nearly 10 percent of retirees aged 64 or younger had individual health insurance as the sole source of health coverage . a disproportionate share of people who had been widowed ( 9.2 percent ) also had individual insurance as the only source of health coverage .