ii. ) in 1996 , almost 9 out of every 10 uninsured medicaid - eligible children were u.s. - born , but many — over one - third — lived in immigrant families . in addition to the 11 percent who were immigrants , another one - quarter had at least one foreign - born parent . ( see fig . in addition , states can be assessed a financial penalty by the federal government if their error rates are too high . in an effort to balance these needs , most states have developed shorter forms for children who are applying exclusively for medicaid , primarily by dropping the asset requirements . however , some states that have expanded eligibility through waivers of normal program rules have been allowed to limit eligibility if a family already has insurance . for example , in arkansas , which received a waiver for its expansion , a child is not eligible for arkids 1st unless he or she has been uninsured for a period of 12 months or the child lost insurance coverage during that period through no fault of the family . in massachusetts ( which also has a waiver for expansion ) and georgia , officials are cognizant of the potential dangers of crowd out . massachusetts , as part of masshealth , will subsidize the cost of insurance available to the family . some states have developed a number of strategies to make the enrollment process easier for working families . several states , as part of their outreach effort , have outstationed eligibility workers in sites that families frequent as an alternative to enrolling at the welfare office . in addition , states have simplified and shortened their enrollment applications , allowed applications by mail , dropped asset requirements , and reduced documentation requirements . to help ensure continued coverage of children in families whose income fluctuates , states can provide continuous eligibility . of the states we contacted , only arkansas has adopted continuous eligibility for a year for children . some states have adopted enrollment methods that do not require individuals to visit a welfare office , in part to minimize medicaid's association with welfare and welfare families . if families are only seeking medicaid enrollment for children , massachusetts and arkansas allow families to ask questions and request an application by telephone . according to some state officials , advocates , and experts , immigrant families may also hesitate to enroll in medicaid because they are concerned that it will negatively affect their immigration status . immigrants who are legal residents may be afraid that if they receive benefits that they will be labeled a “public charge” and will have difficulties with the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) when applying for naturalization , visa renewal , or reentry into the united states . although advocates question whether aliens receiving benefits may be considered public charges , in some instances actions have been taken against such individuals seeking visa renewals . several advocates also told us about cases where individuals were prevented from reentering the united states unless they agreed to reimburse medicaid for services paid for by the program on their behalf — particularly in border states such as california .