iii. ) in his response to this report , va's under secretary for health stated that there is not necessarily an identifiable practitioner associated with every malpractice claim because ( 1 ) malpractice claims involving va are filed against the united states of america and typically do not name practitioners , ( 2 ) payments made are on behalf of care provided at a va facility , and ( 3 ) the act or omission for which payment was made is not necessarily practitioner - related . the under secretary concluded that ( 1 ) the va peer review process is necessary to determine if there is an identifiable licensed health care provider for whom it can be said that payment was made and ( 2 ) only if there is an identifiable practitioner can it be said that the payment was on his or her behalf . we agree that malpractice claims are filed against the united states of america and not against individual practitioners . initial privileging is done at the time of employment and every 2 years thereafter . however , a physician's privileges can be examined at any time if the situation requires it ; for example , when there is a question of physician competency or professional conduct . from october 28 , 1991 , through september 30 , 1994 , nine medical centers reported 11 adverse actions to the data bank . however , our analysis shows that the adverse reporting rate for va medical centers is lower than the adverse reporting rate of community hospitals . for example , in california , va has 4,008 beds and reported 2 adverse actions for an average reporting rate of 0.50 reports per 1,000 beds . conversely , community hospitals in california have 105,270 beds and reported 390 adverse actions for an average reporting rate of 3.7 reports per 1,000 beds . some of these cases are later selected for peer review . but , according to physicians involved in peer review , the peer reviews do not identify any issues that are not identified and discussed in the morbidity and mortality conferences . physicians also told us that peer review committee findings have more credibility than the findings of a single peer reviewer because the subjectivity inherent in determining quality of care is reduced . other benefits of the committee approach include identifying the underlying problem that led to an adverse outcome and greater physician acceptance of peer review . physicians told us that by focusing on the identification of system issues , they are better able to identify the underlying cause of an adverse outcome and prevent it from occurring again . physicians who are members of peer review committees also told us that the anonymity associated with peer review committees allows them to be open and honest in their evaluations . officials from one va medical center that switched from using a single reviewer to a peer review committee stated that the number of cases rated level 2 or 3 rose when they began using a peer review committee . specifically , during the first 5 months of 1994 , the committee assigned more level 3 designations to cases than did individual reviewers in all of 1993 .