( see app . i for the questionnaire we sent to all va pharmacies and their responses. ) to compare va's provision of otc products with that of other health providers and insurers , we contacted the department of defense , the health care financing administration , the federal employees health benefits program , and the group health cooperative of puget sound . at va's pharmacy in baltimore , we observed dispensing and copayment collection practices ; reviewed a wide range of records and documents ; and discussed va's provision of otc products with 20 physicians , pharmacists , and administrators . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . we identified many hospital - related situations in which va provided otc products . for example , veterans received phosphate enemas , magnesium citrate , and prep kits for barium enemas in preparation for colonoscopies and other diagnostic tests . following hospital stays , veterans received ostomy supplies after some surgeries , wound - care supplies , aspirin for heart surgery or angioplasties , and decongestants after sinus surgery . we also identified situations in which va physicians determined that a veteran would be likely to be hospitalized if otc products were not used . these included diabetic veterans using insulin to control their blood sugar , veterans suffering renal failure using sodium bicarbonate tablets to balance their electrolytes , and veterans who have suffered heart attacks or strokes using aspirin to prevent secondary occurrences . we identified , however , some non - hospital - related situations in which va provided otc products . these included antacids for heartburn , preparations for dry skin , acetaminophen for arthritis pain , and cough medications for common colds . given that va pharmacies filled prescriptions for such products over 2 million times last year , va facilities have an opportunity to reduce costs significantly . va pharmacies could more efficiently dispense otc products by reducing the number of times staff handle these items or by restricting mail service . va facilities could also reduce costs by collecting medication copayments at the time of dispensing . va pharmacies could significantly reduce their otc product dispensing costs of $48 million by providing more economical quantities of medications and supplies . dispensing larger quantities would reduce the number of times that va pharmacists fill prescriptions for otc products , saving about $3 for each time a product would have otherwise been dispensed . as previously discussed , va physicians generally prescribe otc products to treat acute or chronic conditions or to prevent future illness . in 1992 , defense eliminated all otc products except insulin from its formularies to control costs . subsequently , however , defense reinstated a few otc products in its formularies because physicians had begun substituting more expensive prescription medications .