ii. ) as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and federal agencies . copies also will be available to others on request . a discussion of some of these initiatives follows . ( see app . i for a detailed list of initiatives. ) the legislation that established ssa as an independent agency , the social security independence and program improvements act of 1994 , contained provisions for expanding ssa's authority to prevent , detect , and terminate fraudulent claims for ssi benefits . some of the law's provisions did the following: changed the federal crime of ssi fraud from a misdemeanor to a felony ; gave ssa the authority to impose civil penalties against any person or organization determined to have knowingly caused a false statement to be made in connection with an ssi claim ; and gave ssa the authority to request immigrant medical data and other information from ins and the centers for disease control for use in eligibility determinations . the provisions of the law that relate to ssi reflect legislative recommendations that were made by the subcommittee on oversight and the subcommittee on human resources , house committee on ways and means , in may 1994 . the subcommittees also made several administrative recommendations to ssa . ssa established a task force in april 1993 to combat middleman fraud . in large part as a result of the work of the task force , ssa has initiated various efforts to detect and prevent middleman fraud . because many of these initiatives are in the planning stages or the early stages of implementation , however , it is too soon to evaluate their effectiveness . one effort under way , as mentioned earlier , is the development of a nationwide database to help ssa and dds offices monitor middlemen . the database is expected to be useful in identifying reliable interpreters and in identifying and tracking middlemen whose activities are questionable . because all ssa and dds offices are expected to have access to the database , an office that encounters a new interpreter will be able to determine from the database if other offices have had experience with the same person . a second task force initiative , which resulted largely from february 1994 hearings on middleman fraud , implements one of the provisions in the legislation that established ssa as an independent agency . as of march 1994 , ssa requires that all non - ssa interpreters fill out a form on which they provide their name , address , and relationship to the applicant and sign a statement that they are providing an accurate translation . these forms are being maintained in each claimant's file , providing a potentially valuable body of information . ssa officials said that these files may eventually be incorporated into the database . another task force effort has resulted in ssa plans to review possibly fraudulent cases involving middlemen for which benefits are already being paid .