additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the program provides protection under two parts . part a , the hospital insurance program , covers inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility , home health , and hospice services . part b , the supplementary medical insurance program , primarily covers physician services but also covers home health care for beneficiaries not covered under part a . although most of the 38 million medicare beneficiaries receive their health care from fee - for - service providers , the nearly 5 million beneficiaries enrolled in hmos participating in medicare's risk - contract program receive home health care through their hmos . to qualify for home health care , a medicare beneficiary must be homebound , that is confined to his or her residence ; require intermittent skilled nursing , physical therapy , or speech therapy ; and be under the care of a physician . in addition , the services must be furnished under a plan of care that is prescribed and reviewed at least every 62 days by a physician . if these conditions are met , medicare will pay for skilled nursing ; physical , occupational , and speech therapies ; medical social services ; home health aide visits ; and durable medical equipment and medical supplies . as long as the care is reasonable and necessary and meets the above criteria , there are no limits on the number of home health visits or length of coverage . the home health benefit is one of the fastest growing components of medicare fee - for - service spending . from 1989 to 1996 , part a fee - for - service expenditures for home health increased more than 600 percent — from $2.4 billion to $17.7 billion . the number of beneficiaries receiving home health care more than doubled , from 1.7 million in 1989 to about 3.9 million in 1996 . while the congress liberalized the medicare home health benefit in 1980 , the dramatic growth in these services is primarily the result of changes to hcfa's home health guidelines made in 1989 . hcfa was ordered by a federal court to make these changes in response to a court decision that invalidated hcfa's interpretation of the coverage requirements . the 1980 statutory amendments removed the requirements that home health visits under part a be preceded by a hospital stay of at least 3 days and be for a condition related to the hospitalization . the amendments also abolished the 100-home - health - visit limitation under parts a and b . the new guidelines issued in 1989 allowed home health agencies to increase the frequency of visits by clarifying the definition of “part - time” or “intermittent” care , making it easier to qualify for skilled care , and increasing the standard of review before payment for services could be denied . these changes made the home health benefit available to more beneficiaries , for less acute conditions , and for longer periods of time .