( app . i contains a summary of hipaa access , portability , and renewability standards by market segment. ) three federal agencies — labor , hhs , and the treasury — are required to jointly develop and issue implementing regulations for hipaa . each agency has somewhat different responsibilities for ensuring compliance . accordingly , naic has asked that hhs interpret the statute to explicitly require the acceptance of late enrollees . market withdrawal as exception to guaranteed renewability . regulators believe that the hipaa provision that allows issuers who cease offering coverage throughout the individual and group markets to not renew the coverage of an individual or a group creates uncertainties that may affect their ability to regulate insurance . the statute , signed into law on august 21 , 1996 , required that implementing regulations be issued within fewer than 8 months , on april 1 , 1997 . implicitly recognizing this challenge , the congress provided for the issuance of regulations on an interim final basis . this time - saving measure helped the agencies to issue a large volume of complex regulations within the statutory deadline , while also providing the opportunity to add more details or further clarify the regulations based on comments later received from industry and states . therefore , some regulatory details necessarily had to be deferred until a later date . furthermore , agency officials point out that in developing the regulations , they sought to balance states' need for clear and explicit regulations with the flexibility to meet hipaa goals in a manner best suited to each state . for example , under group - to - individual guaranteed access requirements , states were given several options for achieving compliance . regulators believe the interim regulations leave three key questions unanswered . first , must an issuer who withdraws from the market also not renew existing coverage , or does it have the discretion to maintain existing coverage but not write new coverage ? second , must the issuer also cease to issue all other types of health policies , such as limited - benefit or specified - disease policies ? and finally , must the issuer terminate all coverage at once , or can it terminate each policy on its respective anniversary date ? nondiscrimination provisions in group plans . hipaa regulations prohibit group plan issuers from excluding an individual of the group from coverage or charging a higher premium because of an individual's health status or medical history . in the preamble to the nondiscrimination regulations , federal agencies sought input on this requirement from regulators and issuers and indicated that further guidance would be forthcoming . until further guidance is issued , regulators have several questions concerning how this requirement is applied , such as to what extent the statute permits an issuer to limit benefits on the basis of the source of a person's injury and whether issuers may vary benefits for different groups of employees . federal agency officials point to several factors that contributed to the perceived lack of clarity or sufficient detail in some hipaa regulations . first , the agencies were required to issue a number of complex regulations within a relatively short period of time .