( app . ii contains a summary of hipaa access , portability , and renewability standards by market segment. ) hipaa was signed into law on august 21 , 1996 , and by the end of june 1998 , all substantive provisions were effective for almost all plans . hipaa regulations were issued on an interim final basis , and federal agencies issued most of the implementing regulations on april 8 , 1997 . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . this provision is referred to as group - to - individual portability . states may comply with this provision using either the federal rules — which require individual market carriers to guarantee access to certain insurance policies to eligible individuals — or an “alternative mechanism.” under an alternative mechanism , states may , within broad federal parameters , design other approaches to provide eligible individuals with a choice of coverage . twelve states are operating under the federal rules , and 38 are using an alternative mechanism . of the latter , 22 are using a high - risk pool to provide coverage to these eligible individuals . a high - risk pool is a state entity that offers comprehensive health insurance to individuals with preexisting health conditions who are otherwise unable to obtain coverage in the individual market or who may be able to obtain coverage only at a cost - prohibitive rate . as the table demonstrates , carriers in these states almost always charge an individual in poor health who is eligible for coverage under hipaa a higher - than - standard monthly premium , which is similar to what unhealthy people without hipaa portability rights experience if accepted for individual coverage in states without premium rate restrictions . before hipaa , however , many unhealthy people in these states could have been rejected outright for any type of individual private health insurance or could have faced an exclusion for their preexisting condition . in the 22 states using a high - risk pool as an alternative mechanism,individuals in poor health who are hipaa - eligible also pay a higher premium , although the amount of the increase is generally less than in the states using federal rules , because the risk - pool coverage is subsidized . all 22 states using their high - risk pool as an alternative mechanism impose a premium cap for coverage in the pool of 200 percent of the standard rate or less , and about half cap premiums at 150 percent of the standard rate or less . the actual cost of covering these individuals is subsidized , most commonly by assessments on carriers . in several of these states , this assessment is offset against state premium or income taxes .