lvi ) . to put the state's school finance system in perspective , table vii.2 presents demographic data for school year 1991-92 for five groups of districts of increasing district income . average total funding per weighted pupilstate share of total funding ( percent ) targeting score ( state funds ) local funding raised for every $1,000 of district income . table vii.3 presents data on how state and local funding was distributed among the five groups of alabama districts . the wealthiest group is group 4 . group 1 group 2 group 3 group 4 ( continued ) group 1 group 2 group 3 group 4 nevada was divided into only four groups because of the distribution of the student population . the wealthiest group is group 4 . in our study , the goal of fiscal neutrality is achieved in a state when total ( state and local ) funding per weighted pupil does not depend on differences in districts' income per weighted pupil . we measured the extent of this dependency using the income elasticity of total funding per weighted pupil and defined this elasticity as a state's fiscal neutrality score . a positive fiscal neutrality score would indicate that per pupil funding rises with income ; a fiscal neutrality score of 0 would indicate that fiscal neutrality has been achieved ( that is , no relationship exists between per pupil funding and per pupil income ) ; and a negative score would indicate higher funding in low - income districts . the first section of this appendix presents the method we used to estimate each state's fiscal neutrality score and the results of our analysis . the second section shows how the variation in fiscal neutrality scores among states is explained by differences in state equalization policies ( state share and state targeting ) and by differences in the relative local tax effort of wealthy and poor districts . we used a linear regression model to estimate the elasticity of total funding in a district relative to district income . both the dependent and independent variables were adjusted for differences in geographic cost and student need within the state and expressed as a percent of their respective state averages . by expressing each variable as a percent of its state average value , both the dependent and independent variables can be interpreted as index numbers . a value below 1.00 signifies that a district was below the state average for that variable ; a value above 1.00 signifies that a district was above the state average . with these adjustments the regression model took the following form: because both variables are measured relative to their respective state averages , the regression coefficient ( b ) represents the percent difference , from the state average , in total funding relative to a percent difference , from the state average , in district income . this is precisely the elasticity we wanted to estimate and use as our fiscal neutrality score . a positive coefficient implies that total funding per weighted pupil is higher in wealthy districts , and a negative coefficient , the opposite .