ii. ) also , although a higher proportion of african american children receive medicaid coverage than children in other racial / ethnic groups , medicaid coverage expanded more for white , non - hispanic children , and hispanic children than for african american children . in 1989 , a child in the south was less likely to receive medicaid than a child in any other region , even though the south had the highest percentage of poor , uninsured children ( 47 percent ) . with the medicaid expansion , enrollment increased most in the south , so by 1993 the percentage of poor , uninsured children in the south had declined . adults had a different experience . ( see fig . between 1989 to 1993 , the proportion of adults who were uninsured rose 16 percent . in contrast , the proportion of children who were uninsured was similar in 1989 — 13.3 percent — and 1993 — 13.5 percent . comparing the experience of adults and children suggests that expanding medicaid for children did not displace privately purchased individual insurance . the proportions of children and adults with privately purchased insurance were similar in 1989 and changed little in 1993 . an increased proportion of adults did not purchase individual policies as more adults became uninsured . if medicaid had displaced privately purchased insurance for children , the proportion of children with privately purchased insurance would have decreased , but it did not . the question of whether parents who could have employment - based insurance for their families chose to drop or refuse coverage to get medicaid coverage for their children is more complicated . the longitudinal data that would be needed to directly answer this question are not available . two researchers attempted to overcome this limitation by developing an economic model using cps data from 1987 through 1992 . they estimated that expanding medicaid coverage for pregnant women and children did partially displace employment - based coverage , being responsible for about 17 percent of the decline in private insurance coverage between 1987 and 1992 . the rest of the decline in coverage was due to macroeconomic factors , changes in the demographic mix of population , or changes in employers' offering or generosity in covering health insurance for workers and their families . for children , their analysis leads to an estimate that 37 to 47 percent of children's increase in medicaid coverage was linked to a reduction in employment - based insurance coverage . although the medicaid expansion offset the decrease in employment - based insurance , an increasing number of children either have no health insurance or depend on publicly funded health insurance . we counted employment - based insurance , which is the most common type for children to have , as the primary insurance . if a child had both employment - based insurance and medicaid , that child was counted as having employment - based insurance . since most medicaid children with multiple coverage had medicaid and employment - based coverage , our count of medicaid children better represents children who depended entirely on medicaid for any insurance coverage . did not have any health insurance during the entire year .