iii. ) presently , the social security card , u.s. birth certificate , and u.s. passport remain the primary documents used by citizens to prove their eligibility to work . noncitizens are currently limited to using either the social security card , if they possess one , or one of eight documents they may receive from ins that authorizes their employment . however , doj proposes to eliminate birth certificates from among the list of approved work eligibility documents . however , ssa opposes charging for any cards because participation in the program is generally mandatory and it fears charges for cards could lead individuals not to report important changes , such as name changes due to marriage . this would in turn cause recordkeeping problems for the agency and potentially inaccurate records for number holders . yet ssa acknowledges in its report that the fee could be waived under some circumstances , such as in the case of a name change due to marriage , to encourage individuals to report such changes and enable ssa to keep its records current . this may also be true for hardship reasons for individuals who cannot afford to pay for the replacement card . in addition , ssa also fails to recognize in its report that the costs of collecting the user fee would be offset to some extent by the fees paid . consequently , the cost to ssa of collecting a user fee should be much less than the $1.3 billion ssa estimated . ssa's estimate of the cost for handling user fees was based on a unit cost of $4.60 per card , which it derived from its estimates of the amount of time necessary for handling three alternative forms of payment from all 277 million number holders . ssa reported that it based its estimates on its experience in receiving remittances in its field offices , primarily recipients' repayments of overpaid benefits . however , it does not track workload and cost data for handling these payments , and ssa officials told us that the agency has no measurement system for determining , and has not conducted studies of , how long it takes field offices and processing centers to handle these payments . consequently , we cannot determine whether ssa's unit cost is reasonable or not . to handle the collection of user fees , ssa said it would redesign the current process used by its field offices for handling remittances to accommodate the substantially higher volume of payments for the new card . ssa stated that it would liberalize existing procedures that only allow individuals to make cash or check payments at field offices by providing them with the option of being billed and mailing payments to ssa processing centers or paying by credit card at field offices . ssa's per card cost is the average unit cost for field offices and processing centers to handle payments based on ssa's assumptions about the rate applicants would select among three payment methods — pay cash or charge at an ssa facility or be billed and pay by mail .