i for details. ) several aspects of our analysis should be noted . six of the seven states with very high ability to raise revenue overall also had very high ability to raise revenue for education ( 115 percent or more of the u.s. average ) : connecticut , delaware , hawaii , massachusetts , new jersey , and new york . eight states had very low ability to raise revenue for education ( less than 85 percent of the u.s. average ) : arizona , arkansas , idaho , mississippi , montana , new mexico , utah , and west virginia . ( see app . how do states differ in their capacity to provide resources for education and their relative tax effort ? to answer these questions , we examined national and state trends in education spending and revenues using data from the department of education's national center for education statistics ( nces ) and other sources . in addition , we developed measures of states' ability and willingness to raise revenues for education and examined trends using data from the department of the treasury . first , all trend analyses comparing finance data for several years are in constant dollars . in addition , when reporting state trend data , we provided information on the 50 states ; we did not include the district of columbia . second , data in this report represent varying time spans because we used the most recent actual and estimated nces data . however , where possible , trend data in the report start in the 1960s to show long - term trends since esea's passage , which marked the beginning of a major federal role in education . third , although we present some answers to the third research question you asked us to address , a separate report will discuss how individual states approach education funding , including the legal , budgetary , and legislative barriers they face . we conducted our work between october 1994 and september 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . america's elementary and secondary schools are funded primarily by state and local revenue sources . state revenues derive primarily from general sales , personal income , and corporate taxes . localities raise revenues primarily through property taxes and , to a lesser extent , local sales and income taxes . federal aid to education has historically been provided to supplement state and local funds for students with the greatest needs . state school finance programs are meant to meet the educational needs of children , while considering budget priorities in each state . finance programs vary in complexity as well as in the amount spent per pupil . some of this variation in per pupil expenditures is accounted for by differences in the cost of educational services , the property wealth of the state , the amount the state is willing to spend for education , or the funding formula used by the state . in some states , this variation has led to lawsuits challenging funding formulas . from 1979-80 to 1992-93 , total real expenditures for public elementary and secondary education increased by 40 percent to $254.4 billion .