iv ) . in general , she concurred with our recommendations . concerning our recommendation that the oig establish consistent standards — performance goals or benchmarks — for the timely processing of state referrals , the hhs inspector general said she had recently reiterated to regional managers that they should apply criteria in the office of investigation's special agent's handbook to permissive exclusion cases . the handbook criteria require that exclusion documents be forwarded immediately to the appropriate field office supervisor for evaluation and , as a general rule , within 60 working days of receipt , a decision should be rendered on whether or not the oig will process the case for a permissive exclusion action . interim actions are needed . the oig has taken several important actions to address some of the problems we identified . tracking of incoming exclusion referrals should strengthen accountability for referrals received from the states and help ensure that none are overlooked . training that has been provided to current staff should help reduce inconsistencies among field offices and improve the quality of processing , and plans to hire additional staff should improve the timeliness of exclusion processing . outreach to states under project weed has resulted in identifying previously unknown exclusion cases . the oig plans for further outreach to states under this project may result in identifying additional cases and may improve the extent to which states refer cases to the oig . the oig believes — and we concur — that these actions should help correct many of the problems we identified . however , we believe that refinements to these actions would encourage states to refer more unacceptable providers to the oig and help the oig to process these referrals promptly . for example , the oig can further strengthen its exclusion referral process by clarifying reporting requirements and systematically monitoring key state agencies' compliance . it could also follow through on its plans to contact state agencies to ensure that states provide the documentation the oig needs to consider an exclusion action . in addition , the oig could establish consistent standards — performance goals or benchmarks — to facilitate the timely processing of state referrals . finally , oig exclusion data need to be distributed to appropriate state officials in a format that aids timely comparison with state provider files . we recommend that the hhs inspector general improve oversight of key state agencies that refer cases to the oig , such as the state medicaid agency and mfcu , to ensure that states understand and comply with the statutory reporting requirements for state - removed providers ; clarify to states that settlements and provider withdrawals to avoid formal sanctions should be reported to the oig , in accordance with its regulations ( 42 c.f.r . 1001.601 ) ; provide ongoing , clear , and consistent guidance to the states on the documentation needed for timely processing ; establish consistent standards — performance goals or benchmarks — for the timely processing of state referrals ; and in collaboration with hcfa , transmit oig exclusion data either electronically or by diskette , including social security numbers , to state medicaid agency officials responsible for enrolling and removing providers .