ii ) . in 1999 , there was over a fourfold difference in average visits per user between the lowest - utilization state ( oregon ) and the highest ( louisiana ) ( see fig . 5 ) , and over a threefold difference among states in the number of home health users per 1,000 ffs medicare beneficiaries ( see app . we noted in our april 2000 report that the adjusters to the basic payment rate to reflect patients' needs are more sensitive to differences in the amount of therapy services provided than to differences in patients' clinical indicators.we remain concerned that the financial benefit of providing more therapy services to receive higher payments may interfere with the goal of the pps to provide payments that support efficiently delivered care that meets patients' needs . agencies can enhance their revenues by serving more longer - term users and extending the length of time they serve patients in order to be paid for additional episodes . for some patients , the scheduling of visits could determine whether an agency is paid for one episode or two . in addition , the design of the pps allows agencies to receive a full episode payment for a small number of visits . while the episode payment is based on an average of 27 visits , agencies can receive an episode payment if they provide as few as 5 visits.as 16 percent of episodes in 1998 consisted of one to four visits , adding only a few visits would allow the agency to receive the full episode payment . the budgetary implications of growth in the number of episodes are considerable . hcfa has projected 5.3 million full episodes for 2001 , almost 13 percent fewer than in 1998 . because the industry has historically responded to changes in payment policy in ways that enhanced agency revenues , this projection may not adequately anticipate potential service growth in response to the pps' strong incentives . if the number of episodes in 2001 exceeds hcfa's projection by as little as 5 percent , program expenditures could be roughly half a billion dollars more than projected . hcfa has included three mechanisms under the pps to counter the incentives to stint on services and generate additional episodes . first , hcfa will curtail gross overpayments for very low - service episodes by paying on a per - visit basis ( through the low - utilization payment adjustment ) when fewer than five services are provided in a 60-day period . second , adjustments to the payment for an episode can be made if a significant change in patient condition occurs . the episode payment can be raised on a prorated basis if a patient's condition deteriorates or if therapy service provision increases after the beginning of an episode ; the payment can be decreased on a prorated basis if the home health agency reports significant improvement in a patient's condition during the course of care that changed the required services .