navigation . upgrades to the space - based global positioning system and compliance with global air traffic management rules to become effective over the next several years will require significant future expenditures , which are yet to be determined . according to dod , its very large fleet of aircraft will need to be properly equipped with new navigation equipment to comply with new procedures of the federal aviation administration and the international civil aviation organization . counterproliferation . dod said that it will increase planned spending on counterproliferation by approximately $1 billion over the 1999 fydp , particularly for protective measures against chemical weapons . force protection and combating terrorism . according to the qdr , dod is increasing its research and development funding in this area . the funding will support state - of - the - art programs , including systems to detect , assess , and disable large vehicle bombs ; standoff explosive detection capabilities ; capabilities to maintain surveillance of and tag and track harmful materials that can be used in terrorist attacks ; and improvements to robotic vehicles used in counterterrorism operations . information operations . according to dod , technical measures to protect military information systems , in both hardware and software , are being greatly expanded . the following are descriptions of the programs in the fydp , by appropriation , that are mentioned in this report . this program includes staff authorizations , peculiar and support equipment , necessary facilities , and the associated costs specifically identified and measurable to the conduct of recruit training and the basic introductory and indoctrination provided to enlisted entrants in units devoted to such training at army training centers , recruit training commands , marine corps recruit depots , the air force military training center , and other dod facilities . this program includes staff authorizations , peculiar and support equipment , necessary facilities , and the associated costs specifically identified and measurable to the conduct of specialized skill training in both dod and civilian institutions , including initial skill , skill progression , and functional training to provide tactical , technical , administrative , and management skills . specifically includes , but is not limited to , officer basic courses , advanced individual training at army training centers , training in aircraft maintenance and airfield operations , formal noncommissioned officer and drill sergeant schools , survival training , navy apprenticeship training , and temporary duty specifically identified for this training . this program includes staff authorizations , peculiar and support equipment , necessary facilities , and the associated costs specifically identified and measurable to the conduct of enlisted recruit training and initial skill training in a single unit in a single , uninterrupted formal course . includes , for example , army one - station unit training and navy apprenticeship training , when conducted as a single , uninterrupted course with recruit training .