they have done so for several reasons . first , they believe that as infantry , their units likely will be the ones tasked to respond to peace operations . second , they believe that regular training for some peace operations tasks and conditions reduces the preparation time needed prior to deployment and allows their units to focus on more mission - specific requirements . third , the commanders believe that they will encounter some of the peace operations tasks and conditions , such as the media , refugees , and civilian communities , on future complex battlefields . following are descriptions of the training approaches of u.s. army , europe , units , the 25th infantry division ( l ) , and i mef . some commanders in the army and the marine corps prefer to place exclusive emphasis on combat - oriented training . they believe that this training is the best preparation for peace operations , particularly given the potential that violent scenarios may erupt that will require more combat - oriented skills . they also believe that peace operations - specific training can be provided to forces after they have been notified of their participation in such an operation . following are descriptions of the training approaches of the 10th mountain division ( l ) and ii mef . when units are identified well in advance for an operation , special training has been provided . units involved in long - standing peacekeeping operations , such as in macedonia and in the sinai , have received extensive predeployment training . these units are notified from 4 months to 1 year before their deployment and obtain about 3 months' training depending on the type of unit and its function in the operation . since july 1993 , the u.s. army , europe , has regularly supplied between about 300 and 500 army personnel , on a 6-month rotation , to support operation able sentry in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia . this u.n. operation requires deployed units to monitor the border areas of macedonia , with albania , serbia , and montenegro and report any development that could undermine confidence and stability in macedonia or threaten its territory . of the five deployments since june 1993 , four involved mechanized infantry units and one involved an infantry unit . a mechanized infantry unit typically devotes a majority of its time training with the bradley fighting vehicle . since operation able sentry requires basic infantry skills , the mechanized infantry units train significantly differently for this operation than they would for a combat operation involving their bradley fighting vehicles . units deploying to the sinai as part of a 6-month rotation to the mfo typically are light infantry units based in the united states . their primary mission in the sinai is to observe and report all military activities in the area of operations to all parties to the treaty of peace between egypt and israel .