we disagree . we believe that treating program officials' comments more openly and formally provides oios the opportunity to demonstrate that it is fair and evenhanded and that its conclusions and recommendations are appropriate . to do less leads to speculation and , perhaps , unwarranted criticism that program officials' comments were not adequately considered and addressed in the final report . both state and oios provided technical comments that have been incorporated in the report as appropriate . to determine whether oios is in position to be operationally independent , we reviewed its mandate and procedures and related u.n. documents and met with the usg for internal oversight services and other oios officials to determine how oios has implemented these provisions . we also interviewed several u.s. officials who helped draft the resolution creating oios and the usg for administration and management , who was involved in helping establish oios and providing it with administrative services . to compare oios operations with those of u.s. inspectors general , we reviewed the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended . this raises two questions: if only 18 of 140 audit and investigation reports met the mandate's criteria for being provided to the secretary general , are oios' resources directed at those areas that would provide insight into the operations of the united nations ? on the other hand , if more oios reports actually provide the insight into u.n. operations intended in the mandate , why were they not provided to the secretary general and the general assembly ? we were not permitted to review the reports that had not been provided to the secretary general . consequently , we could not address these questions . in contrast , we note that all u.s. inspector general reports are provided to the head of the respective inspector general's department or agency and many are also provided to the u.s. congress . the usg for internal oversight services acknowledged that few audit and investigation reports had been forwarded to the secretary general and the general assembly . he told us that if he is satisfied with the program officials' response to the report and is confident that appropriate actions are being taken , he does not send the report to the secretary general . he also noted that sending all oios reports would place an additional paperwork burden on the general assembly and that producing enough reports for each member state would be expensive . the usg for internal oversight services said that beginning with the oios annual report due to be published in october 1997 , he will list all oios reports and if a member state is interested in a particular one , oios will brief its representatives.he also said that previous annual reports have referred to the conclusions and findings in many of oios' reports and he has been willing to brief member states on the topics addressed . oios and the department of administration and management have made efforts to communicate the scope of oios' operational independence to u.n. staff . we also met with representatives of the u.n. board of auditors , the u.s. mission to the united nations , and the u.s. state department bureau of international organization affairs .