however , this is not a requirement . the brilliant antiarmor submunition's development is significantly behind its original and revised schedules . the submunition received approval to enter its engineering and manufacturing development phase on may 15 , 1991 . the plan at that time was for the defense acquisition board to hold its low - rate production decision review in november 1994 . however , a review of the program office production lead time and delivery requirements shows that the submunition's initial production contract can be awarded in august 1998 and still allow sufficient time for the submunition to be integrated into the missile . delaying the decision would allow the army additional time to complete its development test program . the program office currently plans to award a limited production contract for 395 brilliant antiarmor submunitions in january 1998 . however , 90 of these submunitions are funded with research and development funds and are considered developmental units . these units are required for the december 1999 atacms block ii operational test . the remaining 305 units are low - rate initial production submunitions , which are required to be delivered to the contractor , starting in april 2000 , to be integrated into the first low - rate initial production block ii missiles . according to program officials , the lead time to produce the submunition is 18 to 19 months . however , under the current schedule , the 305 low - rate initial production submunitions do not need to begin delivery until 27 months after contract award . our analysis of delivery requirements reveals that the contract award for the low - rate initial production quantities can be delayed 8 months , or until august 1998 . the army's current brilliant antiarmor submunition schedule is linked to the atacms block ii december 1999 operational test date and july 2000 first missile delivery date . to meet these dates , the contract for low - rate initial production of the atacms block ii missiles must be awarded in january 1999 . however , the atacms block ia missile's planned full - rate production decision was recently delayed by 1 year , to march 1998 , because of a “sensor to shooter” problem that surfaced during initial operational testing . the block ia's problems may not be resolved before the block ii is ready to enter production . according to representatives from the office of the director , operational test and evaluation , and the army operational test and evaluation command , the “sensor to shooter” problem will also affect the block ii missile . if the block ii missile's schedule is delayed at all , the submunition's initial production contract could be delayed even further , allowing more time to complete submunition testing . we could not determine why such a demonstration is no longer required . the revised criteria call for the submunition to meet or exceed its performance specifications in its requirements document .