stes are subject to these reductions . the united states is expected to experience economic benefits as a result of the new trade discipline in agriculture . as we reported in 1994 , usda estimated that as a result of the uruguay round , u.s. annual agricultural exports are likely to increase between $1.6 billion and $4.7 billion by 2000 , and between $4.7 billion and $8.7 billion by 2005 . higher world income , as well as reduced tariffs and export subsidies among u.s. trade partners , is also expected to raise u.s. exports of coarse grains , cotton , dairy , meat , oilseeds and oilseed products , rice , specialty crops such as fruits and nuts , and wheat.u.s . subsidies on some agricultural products will also be reduced , most likely shrinking government support for dairy , coarse grains , meat , oilseed products , and wheat . nonetheless , even with projected gains for u.s. agriculture , some u.s. producers are concerned that countries with stes have not taken the same steps to reduce trade - distorting activities . for example , the united states developed its agricultural export subsidies to counteract those of other countries , such as members of the european union ( eu ) . these export subsidies were subsequently used to counteract ste practices as well . u.s. producers are now concerned that under the uruguay round the united states has committed to reduce those subsidies without a corresponding reduction in other countries' state trading activities . the majority of stes reported to the gatt secretariat between 1980 and 1995 involved trade in agricultural products . although the reporting represented only a portion of gatt member countries , the largest number of stes were found to be trading in either grains and cereals or dairy products . as shown in table 1.1 , 16 member countries have reported state trading in their grain and cereals sector , while 14 have reported state trading in their dairy sector . countries support their agricultural producers through both direct and indirect assistance . however , from 1958 to 1974 , the federal government was forced to heavily subsidize the fund . after other changes in the 1970s and 1980s , including altering the baseline of stabilized prices , establishing guaranteed minimum delivery prices , and allowing awb to borrow on the commercial money market , major reforms were introduced in 1989 . the most important of these included deregulation of the domestic market , establishment of wif , and abolition of the government's guaranteed minimum pricing scheme . awb was given some flexibility in the commercial market ; besides other activities , awb may buy and sell a variety of grains . since 1989 , the australian government has guaranteed a portion of the awb's borrowings to pay farmers at harvest time . this guarantee covers , at a minimum , between 80 and 90 percent of the aggregate estimated net pool return . according to the industry commission , this guarantee has risen in value from $21.5 million in 1989-90 to $26.4 million in 1992-93 . the government guarantee was initially established to last until june 1994 , but was extended at that time to continue until june 1999 at a maximum of 85 percent .