the official who had the reports said that he did not have all of them . once the trucks are issued to the units , individual soldiers are supposed to complete a quality deficiency report whenever a problem is found in their trucks . we reviewed a summary of 286 quality deficiency reports received by the project office by december 11 , 1997 . therefore , it has decided to develop a second source for the fmtv trucks . however , a project official said that he does not believe that all the deficiencies on the fmtv trucks are being reported . each report would have to be investigated to determine whether similar deficiencies were being reported differently and the root cause of each deficiency . this danger materialized during the current fmtv contract . the army could have limited its risk by keeping deliveries to the minimum rate needed to complete testing and prove the production line . to ensure that the army considers all its options before it starts to develop a second source for the fmtv , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to delay the army's plans for developing a second source to produce fmtv trucks until the army completes an analysis that compares the costs and benefits of its plans with those of other alternatives and to pursue the alternative that is most beneficial to the government . in commenting on a draft of this report , the department of defense partially concurred with our recommendation . it said that the army is conducting an fmtv second - source contractor cost and benefit analysis as directed by the congress . the fiscal year 1999 defense authorization actrequired the secretary of the army to conduct a cost and benefit analysis prior to contracting with a second source for fmtv trucks . the analysis is to support certifications by the secretary of the army that ( 1 ) total fmtv quantities will be sufficient to enable the prime contractor to maintain a minimum economic production level ; ( 2 ) total costs of the procurements under the second - source plan will be the same or lower than if the army proceeds with only one contract ; and ( 3 ) vehicles produced by both contractors will have common , interchangeable components . the army's plan to conduct an fmtv cost and benefit analysis is a step in the right direction ; however , according to an army official , the army's analysis will compare the costs and benefits of only two acquisition approaches — the current fmtv second - source plan and continuing with the current contractor for the remainder of the program . since other alternative acquisition approaches for the program exist , we believe that , as a minimum , the army should explore the other alternatives . the army should select the acquisition alternative that is the most cost beneficial to the government to continue the fmtv program . however , the contract allowed truck deliveries of up to 150 a month until the trucks passed testing . later , the army modified the contract to increase the monthly delivery limit to 200 trucks .