additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . to determine the current status of the ammunition industrial base , we examined statistics the army , as the single manager , had gathered and met with army industrial readiness officials . specifically , we reviewed industrial base trend data concerning the number of production facilities , the public / private mix of facilities , and the capacity of the production facilities . to determine the industrial base's ability to meet current peacetime ammunition requirements , we met first with military officials to determine how requirements are established . next , we obtained requirements data and stockpile levels and determined which items had shortages and which items had overages . ( we relied on the data supplied by the services and did not physically verify the ammunition stockpile levels or trace requirements data back to the systems that generated the requirements. ) then , we randomly selected 152 ammunition items that had shortages and discussed these items with ammunition officials from the services . we also asked them to identify any additional items that had shortages due to industrial base problems . finally , we investigated the causes of the industrial base shortages and the army's plans to address these shortages , as the single manager for conventional ammunition . to determine whether the industrial base could respond as required , after one or more major regional conflicts , we reviewed ( 1 ) the current defense planning guidance , ( 2 ) the army's 1992 strategy to maintain adequate ammunition facilities into the 21st century and an independent assessment of that strategy , ( 3 ) dod's 1994 and 1995 financial viability assessments , and ( 4 ) reports from industry officials and other non - dod sources that addressed the industrial base's ability to provide adequate ammunition during a national emergency . most of the firms that did not complete the survey were the smaller firms in the industry . if the key assumptions in the defense planning guidance and dod's industrial base studies are correct , the industrial base will be capable of simultaneously supplying peacetime ammunition needs and replenishing the ammunition stockpile as required , following one or two major regional conflicts . however , the ability of the industrial base to adequately respond to the military's replenishment requirements depends heavily on both the amount of ammunition that must be replenished and the time period over which the replenishment is to occur . thus , if the response period is shortened , or if the required replenishment level is raised from that stated in current guidance , the industrial base may not be able to adequately respond to replenishment requirements . the army's annual functional area analyses help to illustrate the role replenishment levels and time frames play in assessments of the industrial base . the 1994 analysis painted a bleak picture of the industrial base's replenishment capability . however , in the 1995 analysis , the base's replenishment capability improved dramatically .