these are only some of the many potential costs . nato may also consider funding the construction of fuel pipeline extensions , reinforcement and mobilization facilities , ammunition and fuel bunkers , port handling facilities , transportation infrastructure ( such as rail and road systems ) , and facilities for any forward deployed forces in new members' territory , provided these projects are afforded a high priority by nato authorities . ultimately , nato will need to determine the systems and facilities to be provided to new members . however , neither nato nor the united states know what the total costs of enlargement will be to nato or individual members , both current and new . nato will make a case - by - case analysis of its military needs and the requirements of new members as they join . nato's commonly funded infrastructure program is capped at an approximately $800-million annual ceiling . this means that common funding will be limited for new members , unless nato removes the ceiling or current members contribute more . according to officials at the u.s. mission to nato , most nato members have generally reduced defense budgets in recent years , and it is unlikely that they would make larger contributions to the infrastructure fund in the near term . however , according to these officials , most of nato's commonly funded projects will be completed by the end of 1997 . this could allow common funds to be directed to projects in new member states if the budget remained at $800 million . in commenting on the draft of this report , dod indicated that the backlog of nato commonly funded projects will continue past the planning period . we were unable to verify which of these scenarios is accurate . many of the costs resulting from nato enlargement would be expected to be borne by the new members themselves . the total potential costs that could be incurred by each new nato member to upgrade its military capabilities cannot be fully determined at this time because nato has yet to define country - specific military requirements . new member countries may have to spend millions of dollars teaching english language skills , developing tactical communications systems ( other than those funded by nato ) , and learning nato military doctrine . in addition , some nations may need to change their force structure or purchase new equipment to be compatible with those of nato . interoperability with nato is a specific goal of pfp and its joint exercises . interoperability is gaining increased importance under nato's joint combined task force concept , which envisions nato allies operating with non - nato nations in military operations using nato forces and command and control assets . most of the former warsaw pact nations may have to change from a divisional structure to a brigade - based structure to make their ground forces more compatible with nato forces . for example , according to polish and u.s. officials , poland is reducing the level of its armed forces and transitioning to a brigade - based structure for its army .