climate processes over the oceans . climate is strongly influenced by the amount and distribution of water vapor , liquid water , and ice suspended in the atmosphere . this atmospheric water , and the climate over land areas , is largely controlled by processes occurring over the oceans . this investigation will improve modeling of both the atmosphere and its interactions with the ocean . it will address the roles of circulation , clouds , radiation , water vapor , and precipitation in climate change as well as the role of ocean - atmosphere interactions in the energy and water cycles . hydrologic processes and climate interdisciplinary investigation . the global water and energy cycles link the atmosphere , land , and ocean . in addition , water supports life and plays a crucial role in climate regulation . this investigation is to enhance our understanding of the physical processes that affect these cycles . the processing , evaluation , and impact on numerical weather prediction of airs , amsu , and modis data in the tropics and southern hemisphere . this investigation involves the development of algorithms and techniques to improve atmospheric science , specifically numerical weather prediction models , using three eos instruments . investigation of the atmosphere - ocean - land system related to climate processes . the atmosphere , ocean , and land interact with each other through the exchanges of heat energy , momentum , and water substance . these interactions influence climate . this investigation will examine the atmosphere - ocean - land system by pursuing seven supporting studies that will involve both observations and modeling . the development and use of a four - dimensional atmospheric - ocean - land data assimilation system for eos . this investigation will incorporate all available data , from a variety of sources , into a single model of the earth system . this model can then be used to project the earth system beyond the range of actual observations , estimate expected values of observations to assess instrument quality , provide products for environmental studies , and supplement observations by estimating quantities that are difficult or impossible to observe . an interdisciplinary investigation of clouds and the earth's radiant energy system: analysis . this investigation will examine the role of clouds and radiative energy balance in the climate system . studies include cloud feedback mechanisms that can greatly modify the response of the climate system to increased greenhouse gases . polar exchange at the sea surface: the interaction of ocean , ice , and atmosphere . the hydrologic cycle and climatic processes in arid and semiarid lands . knowledge of the hydrologic cycle will help scientists predict the effects of natural and human - induced climate change . this investigation will study the hydrologic cycle and climatic processes in arid and semiarid lands , where agricultural productivity is especially sensitive to changes in the cycle . see “atmospheric temperature. lightning measurements will include the distribution and variability of both cloud - to - cloud and cloud - to - ground lightning . electrical discharge contributes to the formation and dissipation of certain trace gases in the atmosphere .