( see app . ii for further background on the reserve components. ) as of october 1 , 1996 , the drilling guard / reserve officer corps of 109,594 included 5,014 academy graduates , or about 4.6 percent ( see fig . this percentage compares to academy graduates comprising about 17.4 percent of the active duty officer corps ( see fig . each of the academies produces about 1,000 graduates a year . consequently , if 5 percent of the graduates were to enter the guard / reserve , it would involve about 50 graduates a year from each of the 3 dod academies . in 1996 , the numbers of rotc and ocs / ots officers produced , respectively , in each of the services were: 2,887 and 350 in the army , 857 and 1,383 in the navy , 227 and 365 in the marine corps , and 1,637 and 646 in the air force . the reserve components have become increasingly central to the u.s. national defense strategy and have played an integral part in most recent military operations , including the gulf war and bosnia . the reserve component consists of various categories involving different degrees of participation . the policy proposal we examined specified that placement of academy graduates would be in an active reserve status , which includes only those in the selected reserve . the selected reserve includes those individuals in a part - time , paid drill status in either a reserve or national guard unit , personnel in the active guard / reserve ( agr ) on active duty providing full - time support , and trained personnel called individual mobilization augmentees ( ima ) designated to fill specific positions during mobilization . since agr personnel are on active duty and ima personnel are typically fully trained , we focused our examination of the policy proposal only on the drilling guard / reserve . the navy reserve has the largest proportion of academy graduates at 10.3 percent , followed by the air force at 6.0 percent , the marine corps at 3.5 percent , and the army at 2.6 percent . about 424 academy graduates were on full - time active duty in a reserve component under 10 u.s.c . 502 ( f ) for the purpose of organizing , administering , recruiting , instructing , and training the reservists . see appendix iii for additional details on the number of academy graduates serving in the selected reserve . dod , the active services , and the reserve components , with the exception of the army national guard and the air national guard , stated that sending service academy graduates directly to the drilling guard / reserve without officer skill training or active duty experience would not enhance the capability of the reserve component . newly commissioned officers , regardless of whether they come from the academies , rotc , or ocs / ots , are not fully prepared for direct entry into military jobs . the military education at the service academies and the other commissioning programs focus on preparing graduates to go into the active component . but these commissioning programs do not provide specific military occupational skills . however , they are encouraged to participate voluntarily to maintain their readiness .