we agree . however , we believe that if a skill is critically short and warrants retention bonuses , separation incentives should not be given to personnel in those skills . air force officials told us that they changed their policy in fiscal year 1994 to not allow members in srb skills to separate using vsi / ssb except in cases of documented extreme hardships because they did not think it was appropriate to pay some people to stay and others to leave in the same skill . service officials also said that their payment of vsi / ssb incentives to personnel in an srb skill did not mean that they were satisfied with the fill rate in that skill . rather , they said the separation incentives were given in an effort to comply with congressional direction to use voluntary means to achieve force reductions . while congress encouraged the services to use voluntary means wherever possible to achieve needed reductions , we found no indication in the legislative history that congress intended that the services offer voluntary separation incentives to personnel in critically short skills to avoid involuntarily separating personnel in skills with excesses . service officials also took issue with our use of the 90-percent fill level as an indication that a skill was not critically short . we agree that some skills might be considered critically short at anything less than 100-percent fill . that is why we also provided data on the 95-percent and 100-percent fill levels . however , the services have not defined which skills require higher fill rates than the 90-percent criterion used for readiness reporting . osd is not providing adequate direction and oversight of the srb program . osd guidance to the services for determining which skills should receive srbs is general and oversight review of the services' programs is lacking . osd guidance for determining those skills to receive srbs instructs the services to use a “balanced evaluation” that “should include , but not be limited to , a full assessment of the following factors.” serious undermanning in three or more adjacent year - groups in the bonus zones . chronic and persistent shortages in total career manning . high replacement cost . skills that are relatively arduous or otherwise unattractive compared to other military skills or civilian alternatives . skills that are essential to the accomplishment of defense missions . osd has not defined many of the terms in its guidance , such as “serious undermanning” and “chronic and persistent shortages,” nor has it established how much weight should be given to each of the selection factors . as a result , each service uses a different procedure to identify and prioritize which skills will receive srbs . service officials said that , in deciding who will receive srbs , they consider factors similar to the osd guidance , such as whether the skill is currently receiving an srb , reenlistment trends , fill rates , the skill's criticality to accomplishing the defense mission , and the cost , length , and availability of training . they too have not established criteria for determining how much weight to give these various factors .