i and ii. ) because information on staff size and functions was being determined concurrently with the site selection process , the steering group was not given complete information on the staffing requirements , organizational design , and facility requirements for the new headquarters . because these requirements have a substantial impact on space utilization and costs , it is important that they be properly defined in advance of facility space planning . the steering group was initially told by senior dla management that an estimated 400 persons would be needed to staff the consolidated distribution headquarters . we also reviewed documents from brac and other dla consolidation studies , as available , to compare methodologies used . documentation associated with studies other than the brac process was limited . to address the question of site selection predetermination , we interviewed dla officials who had participated in or had knowledge of brac studies and dla consolidation studies and reviewed documents relevant to these studies . we also interviewed participants in the defense distribution center site selection process to determine whether they had prior knowledge of these studies . additionally , to follow up on allegations of predetermination , we spoke to representatives of the dla council of american federation of government employees union locals from both the eastern and western regions . given the sensitive nature of this assignment , we met with senior dla officials on two separate occasions to brief them on the results of our work and to solicit their comments on preliminary drafts of this report . we incorporated their comments , as appropriate , to enhance the technical accuracy and completeness of our report . we conducted our work from october 1997 to february 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are providing copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committees on armed services and on appropriations ; the house committees on national security and on appropriations ; members of congress of the affected congressional districts ; the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , defense logistics agency . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were barry w. holman , james r. reifsnyder , kathleen m. monahan , jacqueline e. snead , and gary w. ulrich . both sites were given equal points for the cost of living because comparable data were not available , according to the steering group . for the third data request the facilities engineer changed the threshold for service orders to clarify definition problems . he requested that the data request respondents capture the costs only for the maintenance and repair projects greater than $2,000 . the selecting official decided to give both sites equal points for personnel costs , because he reasoned that the costs would be identical after formation of the defense distribution center , regardless of the site chosen . we continue to believe it is important that an independent and expeditious assessment be made by the secretary .