none . to serve as a forum for developing information for member states to use in planning for the economic , social , and cultural advancement of indians . u.s. share ( percent ) . november 1940 convention providing for creation of the inter - american institute . the united states has been a member since 1941 . bureau of inter - american affairs , department of state ; bureau of indian affairs , department of the interior ; and tribal councils . provides a policy forum and access to informational resources to address priority issues of concern for native americans and their governments . it has a substantial research library that is dedicated to indigenous issues . one year notification required for withdrawal . the institute has experienced management problems in the past , prompting the state department to acknowledge that it was poorly managed . however , it is currently undergoing a major reform effort that has been sought and encouraged by the united states . consequently , the state department is taking a “watch - and - wait” approach toward continued u.s. funding and participation . the u.s. assessment share ( 44.1 percent ) outpaces that of mexico ( 30.3 percent ) and all other participants by a factor of at least 10 to 1 . canada is not a member of the institute . to provide a scientific basis for adoption of effective measures to prevent human cancer by identifying cancer - causing agents , assembling data on cancer cases and environmental factors from around the world , analyzing them , and disseminating data . u.s. share ( percent ) . public law 92-484 , approved october 14 , 1972 . the united states was one of the five original participating members and has remained a member since 1965 . bureau of international organization affairs , department of state ; the national cancer institute , the national institute of environmental health sciences of the national institutes of health , department of health and human services ; the american cancer society ; numerous cancer research agencies ; and the general public . provides ability to draw upon cancer research materials and resources from all over the globe , including areas usually inaccessible to u.s. officials . brings together global experience on specific cancers and relation to causes . the united states separately has provided long - standing support for the international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) research in evaluating potentially carcinogenic substances in society and the workplace . withdrawal effective 6 months after receipt of notification by the director - general of the world health organization ( who ) . enjoys strong u.s. agency and congressional support . narrow functional area ( public affairs / literature dissemination ) of possible overlap with who is currently being addressed for possible consolidation . it has a relatively small membership ( 16 ) that exerts budget pressure on organization but seeks to encourage increased membership through lower introductory charges . the united states , along with the united kingdom , opposed 6.7 percent biennial budget increase adopted in april 1995 . to translate and publish the customs tariffs of member governments and to disseminate this information to the members . u.s. share ( percent ) .