iii . report on navy's practice of using temporary duty assignments for ship maintenance and repair ( section 366 ) the act requires us to report by may 1 , 1998 , on the navy's use of temporary duty workers to perform ship maintenance and repair at homeports not having shipyards . at the time it was identified for closure during the 1995 base realignment and closure process , the air force's sacramento depot had responsibility for repair of four aircraft and four commodity groups . the depot also had a significant body of manufacturing or repair work it performed in small quantities for various non - air force customers . additionally , it had a microelectronics facility that performed reverse engineering on parts to provide technical data to support parts manufacturing or developing repair procedures . two of the four aircraft repaired at the sacramento depot will not be included in the competition package . f - 15 repair is being consolidated at the warner robins depot , which is the f - 15 center of excellence and already performs most of the f - 15 work . the ef - 111 repair requirement is expected to end , as that aircraft is phased out of operations . kc - 135 and a - 10 aircraft requirements are expected to be included in the sacramento competition package . the kc - 135 aircraft is currently repaired at the oklahoma city depot and at a contractor facility in birmingham , alabama . table ii.1 provides production hours for 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 for the kc - 135 and a - 10 aircraft . the kc - 135 workload may be increased in the competition package . the future a - 10 requirement is expected to decrease and to be erratic as that aircraft is phased out of the inventory . as recommended by the 1995 base realignment and closure commission , the sacramento depot's largest commodity grouping — ground communications and electronics , which has a projected workload of about 825,000 hours — is being transitioned to the tobyhanna army depot between 1998 and 2001 . the sacramento depot's software maintenance workload has been declining significantly and the remaining software work is expected to be transferred outside the competition process to the ogden depot . the remaining commodity groups currently repaired at sacramento include hydraulics , instruments and avionics , and electrical accessories . table ii.2 provides an overview of the actual direct labor hours incurred between fiscal year 1995 and 1997 for the commodity groupings currently repaired at the sacramento depot that are expected to be a part of the competitive package . the air force made a core assessment of the sacramento competition workloads , including a repair base analysis of the private sector . through this process , which was approved by the defense depot maintenance council , none of the sacramento workload was determined to be a core workload . at the time of closure , the san antonio depot consisted largely of modification and repair of aircraft , turbine engines , and support equipment , along with a smaller amount of nuclear ordnance work and engine software .