we have revised our report to incorporate this information . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . efforts to correct these problems are ongoing . for example , boeing has been training its maintenance crews on the proper cleaning and application methods of seals to reduce the failures that have occurred . longer term production fixes call for redesigning such things as doors and hinges . further , the test aircraft have received structural repairs to address large delaminations that have occurred on the underside of the aircraft from blown tires . however , these repairs used protruding fasteners that would be unacceptable in operational aircraft because they would negatively impact aircraft signature . efforts are underway to develop better repair procedures for aircraft to be produced under the second and third low - rate initial production phases of the program . boeing and the navy have stated that there is currently no definitive answer as to the impact these changes will have on the reduced radar cross section of the e / f . they believe that the f / a - 18e / f will have unacceptable operational test and evaluation results if the fixes do not work . however , if the fixes do work , they need to be included on the aircraft being produced under the first lot of low - rate initial production , because these aircraft will be used for operational test and evaluation . if these fixes are not included , it is likely that operational evaluation will be unacceptable . the program risk advisory board has identified engine - related issues , including engine warm - up time required before carrier launch , partial engine flameouts during some test flights , visible engine smoke , and engine failures during flight and ground tests . in addition , high - pressure engine turbine blades that had been redesigned to reduce heat to achieve the required engine service life caused an in - flight engine failure . consequently , the navy decided to revert to the original turbine blade design . the navy generally views the engine anomalies as a medium risk to the program . the engine contractor , on the other hand , is redesigning certain portions of the engine and views the engine as a low - risk component of the program . the engine contractor stated that engine anomalies and component redesign have delayed the emd schedule by 6 to 8 months and increased cost by 4 percent . however , the contractor believes that it will meet the low - rate initial production schedule by extending the work schedule as required . the navy , however , has expressed concern over engine problems . the unit procurement cost estimates in the navy's f / a - 18e / f selected acquisition reports from program approval in 1992 through december 1995 were based on a 3-percent annual inflation factor , which measures the general inflation of the u.s. economy rather than the inflation rate for the aerospace industry .