we disagree . as noted in the report , officials from both dod and state told us that the lines of jurisdiction are unclear and should be clarified . further , as discussed below , this unclear jurisdiction has led to problems in commerce's licensing of sensitive stealth - related commodities . unclear jurisdiction over stealth - related commodities increases the likelihood that militarily sensitive stealth technology will be exported under the less restrictive commerce export control system . in 1994 , commerce approved two export applications for a radar - absorbing coating determined later to belong on the usml . although dod and state have not verified the exact capabilities and military sensitivity of this product , these export licenses illustrate the problems with unclear jurisdiction and authority over stealth - related exports . commerce approved two applications in 1994 to export a high - performance , radar - absorbing coating . the details of one of the applications was reported in a major trade publication . as reported , the export application described the high - performance claims for the product and indicated that 200 gallons of the material would be used for a cruise missile project headed by a german company . commerce also granted a license to export the same commodity to another country for use on a commercial satellite . commerce approved both of these applications in fewer than 10 days and , in accordance with referral procedures , did not refer these applications to either dod or state . the article reporting commerce's approval of this material for export noted that the radar frequencies this stealth coating seeks to defend against include those employed by the patriot antimissile system . in response to that report and subsequent concerns raised by dod , state performed a commodity jurisdiction review to determine whether the stealth coatings actually belonged under the usml . at this time , the coatings had not yet been shipped overseas . on the basis of state's review that included consultation with both dod and commerce , state ruled that the radar - absorbing coating was under the jurisdiction of the usml . after state's ruling , commerce suspended the export licenses it had approved and the exporter submitted new export applications to state . after state and dod were unable to obtain adequate information on the exact performance characteristics of the product from the exporter , state decided not to approve the export applications . commerce's export control authority under the eaa is more limited than state's authority under the aeca . in fact , a high - ranking commerce official said commerce probably could not have denied the two applications to export the radar - absorbing coatings . the eaa regulates dual - use exports under national security controls and foreign policy controls . as shown in table 3 , the seven stealth - related commodities on the ccl are controlled for national security and missile technology reasons ( considered a foreign policy control ) . national security controls are designed to prevent exports from reaching the former east bloc and communist nations .