these comments are reprinted in appendix i . the navy has incorporated a goal to reduce annual costs by $151 million into its ordnance business area's budget estimate and has identified the major actions that will be taken to achieve this goal . our analysis of available data indicates that the planned actions should result in substantial cost reductions and more streamlined operations . however , we cannot fully evaluate the reasonableness of the cost reduction goal at this time because the navy does not expect to finalize the cost reduction plan until october 1997 . during the fiscal year 1998 budget review process , osd officials worked with the navy to formulate a restructuring of the navy ordnance business area . according to the budget estimate the navy submitted to the congress in february 1997 , this restructuring will allow the ordnance business area to achieve substantial cost and personnel reductions without adversely affecting ordnance activities' ability to satisfy their customers' peacetime and contingency requirements . specifically , the budget estimate indicated that between fiscal years 1996 and 1999 , the business area's civilian and military fiscal year end strengths will decline by 18 percent and 23 percent , respectively , and its annual costs will decline by $151 million , or 25 percent . the budget also indicated that the business area will increase its fiscal year 1998 prices in order to recover $224 million of prior year losses and achieve a zero accumulated operating result by the end of fiscal year 1998 . the navy's fiscal year 1998 budget submission also indicated that the planned restructuring of the business area ( 1 ) is based on an assessment of whether current missions should be retained in the business area , outsourced to the private sector , or transferred to other organizations and ( 2 ) will make fundamental changes in how the business area is organized and conducts its business . our assessment of the individual actions — most of which are expected to be initiated by october 1997 and completed during fiscal year 1998 — shows that the navy is planning to reduce costs by eliminating or consolidating redundant operations and reducing the number of positions in the business area . these actions , which are listed below , should help to streamline the navy ordnance operations and reduce costs . properly sizing the business area's workforce to accomplish the projected workload by eliminating about 800 positions , or about 18 percent of the total , before the end of october 1997 . enhancing the business area's ability to respond to unanticipated workload changes by increasing the percentage of temporary workers in the work force from 8 percent to 20 percent . enhancing the business area's ability to identify redundant ordnance engineering capability and to streamline its information resource functions by consolidating management responsibility for these areas by october 1 , 1997 . reducing overall operating costs by significantly cutting back on operations at the charleston and concord weapons stations , beginning in october 1997 .