we noted there was only a 7-percent difference . to understand further the relationship between catapult launches and labor hours , we also performed a regression analysis , comparing north island catapult launches and hours , to determine how much of the change in hours is explained by the change in catapult launches . the resulting correlation was approximately 9 percent . this means that only 9 percent of the change in hours is explained in catapult launches . in other words , 91 percent of the change in hours is related to factors other than number of catapult launches , such as number of flying hours and age of the aircraft . we also performed an additional review of the hours and numbers of catapult launches . that analysis indicated that there is not a strong relationship between the number of catapult launches and the hours required for mcapp work . we recomputed the navy's analysis using a 14-percent downward adjustment . as shown in appendix iii , the recomputed navy analysis shows ogden's cost is $272,900 and north island's cost is $275,900 for an f / a - 18 mcapp . navy officials concurred with the analysis using a larger sample size provided the sample was based on all labor completed aircraft , not the more inclusive financially completed aircraft . the navy officials commented that by using labor completed aircraft the downward adjustment would be 16.7 percent rather than 14 percent — making ogden's cost slightly higher . however , since labor complete figures do not capture the final total labor hours that are included in financially complete figures , the financially completed measure is more commonly used . additionally , as previously noted , our analysis of ogden's labor - hour differential between carrier - based and land - based aircraft showed only a 7-percent difference . the ogden total , shown in appendix iii , included $2,379 that the navy added for equipment that ogden would have to purchase for mcapp ii inspections . navy officials stated that including the equipment cost was appropriate because the contract required the equipment for the performance of mcapp ii . ogden officials stated that they did not believe the equipment adjustment was appropriate . they noted that similar equipment had been called for as part of the mcapp i work . however , because of the infrequency of the repair requirement for components needing the equipment , the navy had determined it to be more economical to send the parts to north island rather than purchase the equipment for ogden . it is not clear why this same procedure would not have been used for mcapp ii repairs at ogden . the recomputed navy analysis in appendix iii shows ogden's cost was slightly less than north island's . further , if dcaa's revised labor rate of $61.68 had been used , ogden's per - aircraft cost would have been more than $30,000 less per aircraft . nonetheless , the decision may still have been made to move the workload back to north island due to the navy's assessment regarding potential cost savings from consolidation .