messrs . chairmen , this concludes our prepared statement . we will be glad to respond to any questions you may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . has doe adequately defined what liability the government should assume and what liability should be borne by the private firms ? according to our past work , doe has not used a consistent approach to indemnify its cleanup contractors , and some contractors have received more favorable treatment than others . again , given the substantial risk involved , the issue of indemnification bears close scrutiny to ensure that the government does not assume so much of the risk that the effort becomes privatized in name only . has doe determined who will oversee the private firm for compliance with environmental , nuclear , and health and safety regulations ? the facilities to treat hanford's high level waste will involve hazardous , radioactive materials potentially dangerous to workers and the public . this will require the coordination and cooperation of many agencies , including epa , the nuclear regulatory commission , the state of washington , and the defense nuclear facilities safety board . in addition to making the cleanup more cost effective , an additional way to provide funds for doe's cleanup is through the use of excess carryover balances of uncosted obligations and unobligated balances . over the last several years , the congress has reduced doe's request for new obligational authority and recommended that doe use balances remaining from prior years' obligational authority that are carried over into the new fiscal year . doe's em program had about $1.8 billion in such carryover balances at the end of fiscal year 1996 . while doe needs some carryover balances to pay for program commitments made in prior years that have not been completed , the department's large and persistent carryover balances have raised concern in the congress , and especially in the subcommittee on military procurement , about whether doe's carryover balances exceed the minimum needed to support its programs . over the last several years , we have consistently found that doe had hundreds of millions of dollars in carryover balances that were not needed for their identified purpose , were not tied to specific needs , or were in excess of expected needs . for example , last year , we identified $46.2 million reserved for 15 environmental management projects at the savannah river site that were no longer needed because of cost underruns , reductions in the projects' scope , or cancellation of projects . these persistent findings led us to review whether doe had an effective approach for identifying carryover balances that exceed its program requirements and may be available to reduce its budget request and whether doe's process could be improved . we found that in formulating a budget request , doe officials do not use a standard , effective approach for identifying excess carryover balances that could be used to reduce doe's budget request . instead , doe makes broad estimates of the potentially excess balances in its programs . for example , em proposed the use of $300 million in carryover balances for its fiscal year 1996 budget .