other dod hospitals have achieved similar reductions . in addition to a 48-percent reduction in pharmaceutical inventories ( $3.8 million ) , walter reed officials estimate it saves over $6 million a year in related inventory management expenses by using the prime vendor system . this savings involve ( 1 ) $2.2 million through reduced paperwork and administrative costs , ( 2 ) over $2.9 million because its products generally cost less , ( 3 ) $504,000 through the reduction of 15 personnel positions previously required for inventory management , and ( 4 ) $397,000 by reusing material handling equipment and warehouse space previously needed for medical supplies . figure 3.3 shows a medical warehouse that has been converted into a training facility for medical personnel . while dod has achieved inventory reductions and cost savings , further opportunities exist to build on this progress by adopting the most aggressive practices being used in industry . some items in this system were packed in the 1940s and 1950s . major contributors are listed in appendix ii . the department of defense ( dod ) operates a worldwide logistics system to buy , store , and distribute inventory items . traditionally , the defense logistics agency ( dla ) buys and stores consumable items ( such as food , clothing , and hardware supplies ) in large quantities until they are needed by the military services . faced with increasing costs associated with acquiring supplies , and increasing competitive pressures , some private sector companies have developed new inventory management practices to reduce inventories and operating costs . over the past 5 years , we have compared dod's inventory practices for these items to the practices of a number of progressive private sector firms with similar operations . the secretary of defense created dla in 1962 to be the wholesale manager of “consumable supplies” commonly used by the military services , other dod components , and federal agencies . consumable supplies are items discarded after use rather than repaired . through its wholesale system , dla manages 3.6 million of dod's 4.4 million consumable items . for about 30 years , dla has generally bought items in large quantities , stored the items until the services requested them , and then shipped them to the services' retail facilities . to receive , store , and issue these items and other inventories to the military services and other dod organizations throughout the world , dla maintains over 1,400 warehouses at 27 distribution depots , which are dod facilities with several large warehouses that store a variety of supplies , and also uses other storage locations . the locations of the 27 distribution depots are shown in figure 1.1 . consumable items are classified as hardware ( construction , electronics , general , and industrial ) and personnel ( clothing , food , and medical ) items . as of june 1994 , hardware items accounted for 77 percent of dla's wholesale inventory , and personnel items accounted for 23 percent ( see fig . dla reported that its june 1994 inventory of consumable items was about $10.2 billion .