we have incorporated these comments into the report . dea raised concerns regarding intelligence sharing in the caribbean . dea believed that every effort was being made to share intelligence within the counternarcotics intelligence community . these officials stated that the plan has not been approved . although dea had a supervisory special agent performing as a liaison officer , dea disagreed with jiatf - east on the integration of a dea person into the operational aspects of jiatf - east and did not fill an intelligence analysis position because of resource constraints . agency responses to staffing the usic have also been inadequate . ondcp agreed to an interagency staffing level of 11 positions for usic , including 5 positions to be filled from the u.s. coast guard and 1 each from the joint chief of staff , the office of the secretary of defense , the central intelligence agency , the u.s.customs service , the department of state , and dea . as of march 1996 , 2 of the 11 positions had not been filled . the department of state and the office of the secretary of defense have not filled these positions . although progress has been made in improving intelligence sharing in the last 2 years , it remains a contentious issue among various collectors and users of intelligence data . in june 1994 , dod , along with other federal agencies , assessed counterdrug support programs in the transit zone . a major conclusion of the review was that , although accurate intelligence was essential to efficient transit zone operations , transit zone intelligence functions were hampered by ( 1 ) legal and agency - imposed limitations on access to law enforcement intelligence , ( 2 ) limited predictive analysis , and ( 3 ) problems of host nation corruption . available intelligence information was not considered timely or specific enough regarding locations to support successful operations . dod concluded that better coordination of intelligence and targeting information among users would improve resource use and recommended a concerted effort to alleviate the effects or reduce the scope of constraints in interagency information sharing . according to dod officials , the requirements for collecting , retaining , and sharing counterdrug information and intelligence with other federal agencies are contained in a myriad of executive orders , individual agency regulations , and agreements between agencies . also , the sharing of counterdrug information and intelligence with u.s. allies is governed by many of the same executive orders , regulations , and agreements , as well as existing bilateral agreements . jiatf - east officials told us that they had found limited understanding of regulations and much misinformation about intelligence sharing within the counternarcotics community . dod officials stated that ondcp had issued the interdiction intelligence support plan in march 1995 to ensure that the jiatf - south , the domestic air interdiction control center , the intelligence analysis center , and the u.s. customs service national aviation center were provided access to tactical information necessary to perform their mission . dod officials believe the current regulations allow sharing and dissemination of significant information beyond that currently being provided . this change resulted in reduced capability .