according to 10 u.s.c . 2306b , a military service can award multiyear contracts for the purchase of weapon systems if certain criteria are met . one criterion is that the minimum need for the weapon system to be purchased is expected to remain substantially unchanged during the contract period in terms of production rate , procurement rate , and total quantities . according to osd pa&e and our calculations , the current longbow hellfire missile procurement quantity of 12,722 missiles could be overstated by 7,145 missiles . our work shows that the current longbow hellfire missile requirement contained an outdated helicopter missile - carrying capability and double counted missiles . in addition , the army used an unsubstantiated higher ratio of longbow hellfire to hellfire ii missiles than previously used when determining the appropriate mix between these complementary systems . department of defense ( dod ) instruction 4100.41 establishes the capabilities based munitions requirement process as the method dod and the military departments are to use to compute requirements . according to officials in the office of the deputy chief of staff for operations and plans , the capabilities based munitions requirement process was used to determine the requirement for both longbow hellfire and hellfire ii . the army then applied a ratio to the total combined requirement to determine the appropriate number of each type missile . according to data supplied by the army , the combined requirement for hellfire ii and longbow hellfire missiles for use on the ah - 64d apache as of november 1996 was just over 19,700 missiles , excluding training and testing requirements . our review of this data showed that the army used a helicopter carrying capability of 16 missiles instead of the current 12 and double counted missiles when it calculated the residual readiness element of the requirement . the residual readiness requirement is the munitions necessary to provide a combat capability beyond that required for the two major regional contingencies . we determined that adjusting for these corrections would reduce the combined total requirement for both missiles to 11,153 . the army representative who is responsible for developing munition requirements confirmed that our adjustments were appropriate . he stated that the army's current requirement was based on a helicopter carrying capability of 16 missiles and that double counting did occur in the residual readiness calculation . he explained that the double counting was caused by the army not applying the missiles designated as combat supply toward its residual readiness calculation . forty - three days of combat supply is included in requirements to give operational flexibility during a conflict . according to the residual readiness definition , these missiles should be used to offset the residual readiness requirement . failure to count the supply missiles in the army's residual readiness calculation doubles this quantity . he also stated that additional changes need to be made in how residual readiness is calculated because expected aircraft attrition was not factored in and it should be . he did not have the aircraft attrition numbers available for us to calculate the impact this correction would have on the requirement . however , he agreed this would further lower the recalculated requirement of 11,153 .