questions are the heart of the focus group discussion . the literature on focus groups suggests five or six questions for a discussion group . the questions need to be carefully thought - out and phrased to result in the maximum amount of information in the limited time available . questions should not suggest potential answers and yes or no questions should be avoided . questions should be asked in the same order in every focus group and questions should be sequenced from most important to least important to ensure that the most necessary information is obtained from the participants if time runs out . the sequence is important because the questions may interact with one another to form the stimulus that generates the responses . if the questions are asked in a different order at each focus group , the stimulus is changed and the response will be different . the results of the focus groups' discussions should be documented on a session by session basis . the video set the stage for the two open - ended questions that all the participants were asked: ( 1 ) “how is it going ? ” and ( 2 ) “if you had five minutes to speak with the secretary of defense , what would you tell him ? ” according to the former chair , dacowits uses these questions during all installation visits . training installation visits took place between july and november 1997 . at the conclusion of each visit , a dacowits member completed a standardized installation visit report summarizing the most frequently heard comments from the focus groups . the comments included in these reports were entered into a computer and sorted by frequency across the services as well as by individual service . issues were included in the report to the secretary based on frequency . the individual installation visit reports support the opinions and perceptions that appear in the report to the secretary of defense . some focus groups may have been too large or may not have had enough time to allow ample participation by most of the participants . the literature suggests that focus groups should be no larger than 12 participants . during the dacowits visits to the training schools , some groups were as large as 20 participants . groups larger than 12 usually do not allow sufficient opportunity to actively participate in the discussion and are more difficult to manage . also , the majority of the sessions were about an hour long and some ran for only 45 minutes , about half the time recommended by focus group literature . dacowits used two questions to generate discussion . however , time may still have been a problem , since the questions were very open - ended and could be taken in virtually any direction by a participant . this would likely have the effect of increasing the amount of time needed as each participant not only answered the discussion questions , but also reacted and responded to the issues raised by others . dacowits did not document the individual focus groups as recommended by focus group literature . instead , dacowits members prepared installation visit reports which summarized the opinions they heard most frequently .