most of the property is undeveloped . before the army acquired the property , it was public domain land . as such , it reverts to the department of interior , bureau of land management , when it is not needed by dod . date of closure recommendation: 1988 . date of military mission termination: january 1993 . date of base closure: january 1993 . summary of reuse plan: dod wants to retain approximately 13,000 acres for 7 years for use by the ballistic missile defense office for missile launching activity in conjunction with the white sands missile range . to retain this land , either the army would not include that portion of the base in its relinquishment notice or the missile defense office would have to lease the land from the bureau of land management . both the navajo and zuni tribes oppose use of fort wingate for missile testing , and several federal agencies have expressed environmental and land use concerns . any property not retained by dod will revert to the bureau . once the army cleans up the contamination at fort wingate , the bureau will consult with other department of interior agencies concerning possible uses for the property . the department's bureau of indian affairs has requested the entire base to hold in trust on behalf of the two tribes . the tribes want the land for preservation of sacred sites , watershed protection , economic development , and use for other tribal programs . the city of gallup opposes the conveyance of fort wingate property to the indians , and it has indicated interest in a portion of the base for economic development . the city has retained an attorney to challenge the requirement that the property be relinquished to interior when the army's need for it ceases . golf course: none . implementation status: dod tried to get officials from gallup , mckinley county , and the two indian tribes to agree on forming a reuse committee under its base closure rules and guidelines . however , interior department and bureau of land management officials maintain that this effort was inappropriate because the property will revert to the bureau and will be handled under the bureau's authorities and rules . the missile defense office competed an environmental impact study with a decision in march 1995 to proceed with the proposed missile program . meanwhile , interior is cooperating with dod in facilitating a private company's use of some of the facilities to carry out a contract with the army to deactivate army pyrotechnics , which will provide 25 to 30 jobs for this economically depressed area . civilian jobs lost due to closure: 90 . civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: not available , property to be retained by federal agencies . federal assistance: none . national priorities list site: no . contaminants: explosive compounds , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , heavy metals , asbestos , and lead - based paint . estimated cleanup cost: $22.5 million . estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: unknown . base description: george is located on 5,068 acres between the towns of adelanto and victorville in the mojave desert northeast of los angeles .