at overseas bases . however , under the new air expeditionary force concept , existing military forces will go into bare bases and use tactical , or mobile , communications gear . consequently , the need to repair these fixed communications is reduced and there is greater reliance on tactical communications . based on the reassessment of its wartime mission requirements and the quadrennial defense review process ( which recommended dod improve the efficiency and performance of support activities by reengineering ) , the air force decided that the wartime e&i mission could be transferred to the ang . at the same time , the air force would retain a minimal active - duty capability , provided by a new rapid response squadron at keesler afb . since there will no longer be a need for the 38th eiw to supply the air force's peacetime e&i needs in order to maintain wartime skills , the air force no longer has a requirement to maintain the large e&i infrastructure of the 38th eiw . as currently proposed , the deactivation of the 38th eiw would eliminate 1,200 of its 1,358 military positions and 552 of its 985 civilian positions . after the wing is deactivated , the remaining 158 military personnel and 433 civilian personnel will be reassigned to existing or new organizations , located principally at tinker and keesler afbs . with the deactivation of the 38th eiw and transfer of the wartime mission to the ang , other actions will also occur: the kelly and mcclellan squadrons will be disestablished concurrent with the realignment and closure actions being implemented as part of the 1995 base realignment and closure decision . all 19 active - duty authorizations at the ang units will be eliminated . the squadron at keesler afb will become a rapid response squadron whose mission would be wartime deployment , and also provide a quick reaction e&i capability for emergency needs , and provide specialized engineering . a portion of the positions formerly with the 38th eiw will be reassigned to a new organizational unit at tinker afb that will become a base communication and information infrastructure planning and program management office . fifty civilian authorizations which are being eliminated at tinker will be transferred to the air force communications agency at scott afb , illinois , to more closely align their telecommunications sustainment workload with the air force unit responsible for telecommunications policy . the wartime e&i mission will be substantially transferred to the existing ang e&i units without an increase in authorized positions . figure 1 portrays the planned actions . viewed another way , of 1,358 authorized military positions , over 88 percent would be eliminated and out of the 985 authorized civilian positions , 56 percent would be eliminated , while the remainder would be shifted to other organizations . table 2 shows the number of 38th eiw military and civilian positions that would be reduced at affected bases and the numbers reassigned to other organizations . as a result of the deactivation and restructuring , 1,752 , or 75 percent , of the unit's 2,343 positions would be eliminated , while 591 would be reassigned elsewhere .