the review was completed in 1994 . the aeronautics and space engineering board conducted this review at nasa's request . the study's purpose was to independently examine projected requirements for , and approaches to , the provision of needed aeronautical ground test facilities . the board made 13 recommendations ; 2 related to specific nasa facilities . the review was completed in 1994 . federal laboratory review conducted under the auspices of the nasa advisory council , this study was tasked to evaluate and develop recommendations for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the federal research and development investment in the nasa laboratory system . the review was also to consider possibilities for restructuring , consolidating , closing , or reassigning facilities . the laboratory review made 74 recommendations and 3 suggestions related to specific facilities . the review was completed in february 1995 . the white paper , formally titled a budget reduction strategy , was intended as a starting point for discussions on a proposed realignment of center roles and missions and reinvention in a constrained budget environment . the paper made about 40 recommendations total ; 15 were related to facilities . the paper was issued february 1995 . this review was a nasa - wide effort to allocate reductions in the fiscal year 1996 president's budget , set center role assignments , provide suitable guidance for the fiscal year 1997 budget , and change the way nasa conducted business . about 50 recommendations were made , of which 2 applied to specific facilities . the review was completed in june 1995 . only two of the alliances have been organized . the official also stated that four panels of the aeronautics and astronautics coordinating board are to be established to oversee the follow - on activities . however , three of the panels have been delayed due to personnel reorganizations affecting both dod and nasa , and it is uncertain when they will be initiated , according to the nasa official . the only panel to be established to date is the aeronautics panel , which met in july 1996 . the details of the follow - on processes for continuing the work of the integrated product teams have not yet been fully developed . one measure of the relevance and success of these processes will be how they handle an issue such as overcapacity in large rocket test facilities . in commenting on a draft of this report , nasa said that the nasa - dod national rocket propulsion test alliance will strive for joint management of facilities so they can be brought on or offline and investments controlled for maximum benefit . nasa also said this alliance “will examine indepth the current and future projected workloads to achieve proper asset management and utilization of rocket test facilities. we recently reported that nasa does not yet have fully developed plans to reduce its personnel level by about 4,000 full - time equivalent employees to meet its overall goal of decreasing the size of its workforce to about 17,500 by fiscal year 2000 . also , it may not be able to do so without involuntarily separating employees .