transition costs . sacramento included a cost estimate for extending the transition period . under the multi - contract approach , sacramento assumed workload segments would be transitioned incrementally over a 20- to 24-month period . although the air force may incur additional transition costs under a multiple contract strategy , we found transition costs were overstated . the air force's transition cost methodology assumed that each individual winning offeror would require the full 20 to 24 months to complete the transition . however , sacramento officials recognized that the contractors' transitions for the individual workload segments will not require the entire 20- to 24-month period . the officials stated that they were unable to separately identify a more precise cost estimate . the air force's support for dod's determinations that it is more logical and economical to combine the workloads being competed at the closing depots is based on a wide variety of information accumulated during the acquisition strategy development process started in september 1995 . we recognize that this substantial body of data includes certain information relevant to the determinations required by the national defense authorization act of 1998 . we also recognize that the determinations ultimately represent a management judgment based on various qualitative and quantitative factors . however , our assessment of these factors , as presented by the air force in its february 24 , 1998 , sacramento white paper and san antonio report shows significant weaknesses in logic , assumptions , and data . consequently , dod's determinations may well be appropriate , but its rationale is not well supported . on april 10 , 1998 , we provided a draft of this report for comment . dod informed us that , given the short amount of time available , it chose not to comment on the report at this time . to determine the reasons the air force believes it is more logical and economical to combine the workloads at the sacramento and san antonio depots , we reviewed the december 19 , 1997 , reports dod provided to congress , as required by 10 u.s.c . 2469a ; the sacramento white paper and san antonio report provided to congress on february 24 , 1998 , which expanded on dod's rationale for combining workloads into single solicitations ; and other information relevant to the preparation of these reports . to analyze the rationale for dod's determination , we reviewed ( 1 ) information contained in the reports ; ( 2 ) documentation and other data supporting the reports ; ( 3 ) discussions with air force officials responsible for preparing the reports and managing depot maintenance workloads ; ( 4 ) discussions with contractor officials who are planning to participate in the competitions for workloads currently performed at the sacramento and san antonio depots ; ( 5 ) discussions with air force audit agency officials who provided advice on the preparation of the sacramento white paper and san antonio report ; ( 6 ) a review of related air force studies , reports , and data ; ( 7 ) our prior work regarding related depot maintenance issues ; and ( 8 ) a review of applicable laws and regulations .