ii ) . in 1993 , dod introduced the concept of “enhanced brigades,” which eliminated the guard's roundout role . under this concept , 15 guard combat brigades — including the 7 former roundout / up brigades — would be responsible for reinforcing and augmenting active army units if the active units could not handle two nearly simultaneous regional conflicts , as set forth in the secretary of defense's bottom - up review . the 15 brigades include mechanized infantry , armor , armored cavalry , and light infantry units . these changes have resulted in continuing debate between congress and dod over the size and role of active and reserve forces . in 1991 , the planned total force included 12 active duty divisions and 8 national guard divisions . however , congress was concerned that the army was not assigning a large enough role to the reserves . congress approved the army's plans for reductions in the active force but did not approve all of the reductions in the reserves . the 1993 bottom - up review called for 10 active duty divisions and the 15 enhanced brigades , the equivalent of 5 divisions . however , in may 1994 the house armed services committee recommended that the force be reconfigured to eight fully manned active divisions and four roundout divisions that would be staffed by both active and guard units . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1995 calls for a reevaluation of force structure , including increased reliance on the reserves and an evaluation of an army configured as 12 active duty divisions , a number of which would be rounded out with national guard combat units . training and other related problems revealed during the activation of three national guard roundout brigades for the persian gulf war — the first large scale call - up of reserve forces in more than 20 years — raised questions about the training strategies used and the time needed to be ready to deploy to areas of conflict . the brigade commanders estimated that the three units would need 28 to 42 days of postmobilization training to prepare for mission - essential tasks . however , the two brigades that completed training needed 91 and 106 days , and the army estimated that the third brigade would have needed 135 days . the army also estimated that an additional 24 days of posttraining activities would have been needed before the brigades could have deployed . none of the brigades deployed to the gulf ; they remained in a training status until the war was over . reports issued by us and others found that the roundout brigades suffered from many complex and interrelated problems . these problems resulted in ( 1 ) the brigades being unable to achieve peacetime unit proficiency in critical wartime tasks , gunnery skills , individual soldier and leader skills , and desired personnel staffing levels and ( 2 ) increased postmobilization training time . according to one brigade official , recruiting high levels of personnel is expensive , particularly at levels as high as 125 percent . the task force also recommended that the brigades' personnel priority group be raised to authorize recruiting and retention bonuses .