( see fig . rocket engine test stands are used to test chemical , solar , electric , and other types of rocket engines , and engine components such as fuel pumps and injector systems . we updated the report where appropriate . this test stand has no other funded customers . despite the air force's efforts , it may have lost its eelv engine customer to nasa . on july 19 , 1997 , boeing stated that it had selected stennis to conduct development , certification , and production acceptance testing of the rs - 68 engine . boeing has not yet fully defined its test requirements , and its intention to test at stennis is conditional pending a satisfactory resolution of such issues as the amount of stennis' user fees . boeing may also test this engine on phillip's test stand 1a , but it has not made a formal commitment to do so . the rocket propulsion alliance last met in october 1996 but did not discuss such major current issues as ( 1 ) consolidation of propulsion testing at nasa or elsewhere , ( 2 ) competition between nasa and the air force to test engines , and ( 3 ) investment decisions . according to nasa officials , the alliance is likely to be reactive and unlikely to initiate a consolidation - related evaluation on its own . at the october meeting , nasa described the reasons for making stennis nasa's center of excellence for rocket propulsion testing and noted its consolidation plan would be completed by early 1997 . at the time of the alliance meeting in october , nasa and the air force were competing to test eelv engines in the current phase of the program . for example , nasa charges commercial customers to use its wind tunnels if their tests are not officially supported by a government contract or letter of intent , or , if so supported , they are beyond the scope of testing requested by the government . on the other hand , dod's major range and test facility base charges other federal agencies and commercial customers 100 percent of direct costs and a portion of indirect costs . by agreeing to the recommendation to establish cooperative alliances , the aacb accepted the proposition that institutionalizing cooperative behavior in this way would add value to the already established cooperative relationship between nasa and dod . progress towards validating this proposition has been slow and sporadic . the alliances appear to offer the opportunity for an ongoing evaluation of test - related issues and cost - saving efficiencies of mutual interest to nasa and dod , and thereby , create the basis for the testing community itself to construct a national perspective on these issues . while this perspective may be emerging in some cases , it is essentially absent in others . by not convening most alliances , the development of a national perspective from the bottom up remains largely untested .