( see fig . under the seed act , the united states provided a $199-million contribution to the multi - donor $1 billion polish stabilization fund . the fund was established to ( 1 ) support a relatively fixed exchange rate for the zloty ( poland's currency ) after a sharp devaluation and ( 2 ) help ensure that the zloty would be convertible for current account transactions ; that is , to allow residents to freely purchase currency through authorized foreign exchange banks . these objectives have been accomplished , and the united states has authorized poland to use the $199 million held in reserves to recapitalize and privatize the polish state - owned banks . the seed act also authorized the polish - american enterprise fund as a private corporation with maximum flexibility in implementing the fund's investment policies . as of september 1994 , about $250 million had been obligated and the fund had disbursed about $227 million . the fund primarily makes loans to , or invests in , small - and medium - sized businesses in which other financial institutions are reluctant to invest . the objectives of this review were to ( 1 ) assess the status and progress of poland's economic restructuring in the key areas of macroeconomic stabilization , foreign trade and investment , privatization , and banking , ( 2 ) describe impediments to these restructuring efforts , ( 3 ) discuss the role donors have played in the transformation process , and ( 4 ) identify lessons learned that could be useful to other transition countries . to address these issues , we interviewed officials of the departments of state and the treasury and usaid in washington , the economic commission for europe ( ece ) in geneva , the eu in brussels , the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) in paris , and the ebrd in london . we also met with officials at the british know how fund as well as central and eastern european experts at the london school of economics and other organizations . in warsaw , we met with u.s. embassy officials , usaid representatives , u.n. officials , imf and world bank officials , eu officials , and officials of the british and japanese embassies . we also met with officials from the polish government , representatives of the polish - american enterprise fund , representatives of private sector promotional organizations , and managers from u.s. and german companies doing business in poland . we reviewed pertinent u.s. , host , and donor - government documents , as well as reports and studies by international organizations , academia , and private sector groups . we also used information from planecon , inc. , an economic consulting group specializing in central and eastern europe and the former soviet union , and information from the warsaw economic research institute , a policy institute at the warsaw school of economics . to describe factors hindering polish exports , we relied heavily on the reports and studies of international organizations as well as the opinions of polish and international organization officials . the data presented in the tables and figures of this report were obtained from a number of different sources .