no policy . when the individual making a statement asks for a copy , one will be provided . however , prior approval for doing so must be obtained from the cognizant u.s. attorney or military staff judge advocate , as appropriate . agents should not volunteer to furnish a copy of a confession or signed or unsigned statement to the subjects or their attorneys . however , if the confession or statement is requested and certain conditions are met , it should be provided . no policy . a determination is made on a case - by - case basis by the u.s. attorney . no policy . a determination is made on a case - by - case basis by the u.s. attorney . no policy . a determination is made on a case - by - case basis by the u.s. attorney . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . the assistant u.s . attorneys stressed that grand jury hearings and court proceedings are the most appropriate places to obtain testimonial evidence , since witnesses are under oath . ncis agents and the assistant u.s . attorneys we spoke with favored the current ncis policy of interviews being taped only when a specific reason exists for doing so . the attorneys favored recording interviews of small children in child abuse cases to preclude multiple interviews and possibly the need for the children to appear in court . the agents and attorneys also favored recording witnesses who were likely to be unavailable during court proceedings and those that might be expected to change their story . officials told us that an ncis pilot test of videotaping all interviews in the early 1970s did not support routine use because ( 1 ) the agents found that they were devoting disproportionate time and energy to the care of equipment rather than gathering facts ; ( 2 ) the number and breadth of interviews declined , as did the overall quality of investigations ; and ( 3 ) investigators' productivity decreased due to their inability to conduct a sufficient number of in - depth interviews . ncis had not computed the additional cost of taping all interviews . however , the navy's general counsel noted that the expense of equipment , tapes , transcription , and duplication would be extremely high and could only be justified if no safeguards were already built into the legal system . as an example of the potential transcription cost that could be incurred , we were told that , in one case that was recorded , the interview lasted about 3 hours , filled 4 microcassettes , and ended up being 127 single - spaced typed pages . information provided by the ncis los angeles field office , one of the larger offices for procurement fraud cases , showed that about 7,600 interviews had been completed for the 117 cases assigned as of january 1997 , which translates to an average of about 65 interviews per case .