not applicable . the reduction in helicopters reduced the number of u.s. troops in bosnia by about 590 . this low - density , high - usage asset is to be removed from sarajevo airport , located in the french military sector , for a reduction of 30 u.s. troops in bosnia . another nato country was expected to provide this resource . none provided . number of these personnel in u.s. military sector reduced significantly , with psychological operations personnel reduced to one - third of previous numbers . unnamed countries were expected to provide replacement civil affairs personnel . none provided . no replacements expected for psychological operations personnel . not applicable . reduced by 70 percent , for a reduction of at least 400 u.s. troops in bosnia . unnamed countries were expected to provide resources for some fire support and field artillery units . none provided . the u.s. european command determined that other artillery support could be removed from bosnia at a very low level of risk . not applicable . one of these task forces supported the u.s. military sector in bosnia , and the other served as the sfor operational reserve that covered all of bosnia . the target acquisition battery at the sarajevo airport consisted of one q - 36 radar and support equipment with a crew of about 30 personnel . a target acquisition battery detects and tracks incoming artillery and mortar rounds in order to direct artillery fire back to the source of the incoming rounds . this appendix provides a chronology showing the development of nato's end - state objective for its operations in bosnia from december 1995 through december 1996 . in december 1995 , as directed by the north atlantic council , the operation plan for the first nato - led mission in bosnia , ifor , was approved with an end date rather than an end - state objective . in the absence of a defined end state , ifor's objectives were to complete the military tasks specified in the dayton agreement , to support the operation's civilian organizations when requested and if resources allowed , and to withdraw from bosnia by december 1996 . the north atlantic council approved an end - state objective when it established the second nato - led mission in bosnia — sfor — in december 1996 . according to the sfor operation plan , the desired nato end state is an environment adequately secure for the “continued consolidation of the peace” without further need for nato - led military forces in bosnia . the plan lists four conditions that must be met for the desired end - state objective to be realized: the political leaders of bosnia's three ethnic groups must demonstrate a commitment to continue negotiations as the means to resolve political and military differences ; bosnia's established civil structures must be sufficiently mature to assume responsibilities for ensuring compliance with the dayton agreement ; the political leaders of bosnia's three ethnic groups must adhere on a sustained basis to the military requirements of the dayton agreement , including the virtual absence of violations or unauthorized military activities ; and conditions must be established for the safe continuation of ongoing , nation - building activities .