such procedures are consistent with fasa . fasa also requires that by mid - october 1995 the administrator for federal procurement policy establish a monitoring system for economy act purchases for federal civilian agencies , similar to the requirement for dod . in commenting on a draft of this report , both the departments of defense and transportation concurred with the report . both suggested some technical changes to the draft , and we have incorporated them , where appropriate . dod's comments are presented in appendix i . the department of transportation's comments were provided orally . we interviewed management officials and examined project management and budget documents , statements of work , cost summaries , military interdepartmental purchase requests , project plan agreements , and other program documentation . we performed work at the department of transportation's volpe national transportation systems center , cambridge , massachusetts , and headquarters , united states coast guard , washington , d.c. we also contacted policy representatives within the office of the assistant secretary of the air force for acquisition ; the office of the assistant secretary of the army for research , development , and acquisition ; and the office of the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development , and acquisition . our review was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards and includes information obtained through may 1995 . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman , subcommittee on oversight of government management and the district of columbia , senate committee on governmental affairs ; other interested congressional committees ; and the secretaries of defense and transportation . copies will also be available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4587 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were charles w. thompson , paul m. greeley , and paul g. williams . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the funding data are summarized in figure 1 . it is difficult to pinpoint exact causes for the downward trend .