other costs are determined centrally . for example , air force units report their flying hours , but air force headquarters translates those flying hours into costs . dod consolidates the services reports and publishes a monthly contingency cost report . military personnel who deploy to contingency operations become eligible for special pay and allowances such as imminent danger pay , certain places pay ( formerly known as foreign duty pay ) , and family separation pay . we found that the air force did not report about $81 million of the almost $100 million it estimated as incremental personnel costs for fiscal year 1994 . according to air force officials , they were not aware that they were required to track and report these costs . table 2.2 compares the air force's reported incremental personnel costs for fiscal year 1994 with the estimated costs that should have been reported . air force headquarters officials said that , in fiscal year 1994 , they reported the amount of supplemental funding received for military personnel as their military personnel incremental costs . however , beginning in fiscal year 1995 , the air force tracked and reported these costs . we found one instance where an air force command did not report the value of aviation spare parts used in contingency operations at one of its bases . the cost was instead recorded in the base's account for normal operations . according to a 1st fighter wing official , if parts are not available to support deployed aircraft during contingency operations they are removed or cannibalized from base aircraft and replaced when needed parts are received . between may 1994 and october 1995 , the command's 1st fighter wing estimated that it had used approximately $10 million in spare parts to support operations in southwest asia . however , the wing official stated that this cost was charged to the base maintenance account when replacement parts were cannibalized for contingency operations rather than reported as contingency cost because in their view the base accounting system only allows one account for maintenance . thus , the contingency - related maintenance costs were commingled with normal base maintenance costs . we found that the air force did not report $12 million to replace mobility equipment ( tents , field kitchens , water systems , and warehouse and maintenance facilities ) that were reported as lost during contingency operations in fiscal year 1995 . an air force official stated that replacement costs for these items were not considered incremental costs because funding for these items was requested through the budget process and additional expenses were not incurred . it has budgeted to be ready to conduct such operations . when the services have had to conduct contingency operations , they initially have had to shift funds within existing appropriations . this is done primarily by using funds appropriated for the same purpose but scheduled for obligation later in the fiscal year . according to an air force official , air force munitions were not drawn from excess stock levels . a navy official said that navy munitions will have to be replaced .