87-195 ) , to the treasury . usaid transfers the funds by agreements authorized under section 632 ( a ) or 632 ( b ) of the act . it also needs to enforce these requirements . although we did not identify an adverse effect from the current oversight approach exercised by ota , we believe that a more structured approach to program oversight and accountability , particularly in light of the program's pending expansion , is needed to provide reasonable assurance that the government interest is protected and to provide an institutional memory that could be the basis for future programmatic decisions . ota has not enforced compliance with these requirements . for 1997 , we found that only 18 of 73 advisors had filed statements by the extended deadline . in response to our questions on this issue , on march 10 and april 2 , 1998 , ota sent memos to the advisors who had not filed reports and requested that the advisors comply with office requirements . eventually , an additional 40 reports were filed . to improve ota oversight , the treasury's deputy assistant general counsel said that her office held a training session for ota in april 1998 on the rules and regulations of federal financial disclosure procedures . treasury advisors in romania and russia have provided advice on a variety of economic reform efforts . the nature of advice being provided has varied from addressing broad policy and operational issues to handling discrete projects such as devising economic forecasting models . host - government officials told us they found the treasury advice to be beneficial . ota has largely relied upon informal mechanisms to maintain program oversight . however , as ota expands its assistance to other countries , we believe it should develop a more formal set of policies and procedures for conducting program oversight . thus , we recommend that the secretary of the treasury establish formal requirements and procedures that clearly state advisor responsibilities , and take steps to ensure compliance with these requirements . resolution trust corporation . he said he and the advisor normally meet once a week and that there have been no bank requests for assistance to which the treasury advisor has not responded . the three budget advisors in russia have primarily focused on devising statistical measures that provide data for budget formulation . a resident advisor who is a macroeconomist had spent most of his time developing a model to forecast gdp . another advisor developed a consumer sentiment index to measure the attitudes and expectations of the russian consumer , which provides indicators of potential economic growth and is relevant to budget planning . this particular budget advisor's task at the time of our fieldwork was to analyze and monitor the savings behavior of the population for use by the ministry of finance . a third budget advisor prepared a study on standards of living in russia that was discussed in hearings by the budget committee of the upper house of the parliament . the advisor is now completing a study for the budget committee on the relationship between standards of living and the allocation of federal funds among the regions .