we agree with the services . in addition , in several of our prior reports on other subjects , we have identified opportunities to improve operations , which could also reduce pcs costs . we reported in october 1994 that the services could cut military personnel costs by using civilians for certain positions . civilians can more effectively provide continuity and institutional memory because they are less subject to frequent reassignments . yet , the services assign thousands of military personnel to support functions such as personnel management , finance , and data processing that are typically performed by civilian personnel and do not require knowledge or skills acquired through military experience . in some instances , valid reasons exist for not replacing military support personnel with civilians . for example , some military positions are needed to provide time in the united states for servicemembers rotating from tours abroad . in other instances , replacements that should be made are impeded by factors such as downsizing and funding . in commenting on a draft of this report , service officials expressed concerns about continuing reductions in funds for civilian personnel . we reported , in december 1994 , that the services maintain more recruiting stations throughout the united states than they need . for example , the offices in 50 percent of the counties recruit only 13.5 percent of the recruits . closing those less productive offices and relying on alternatives could eliminate or reduce the need for 2,800 active duty recruiters . such closures could also eliminate over 1,800 pcs reassignments each year — nearly a 2-percent reduction in operational pcs moves — because the typical tour to a recruiting station is 3 years . in addition , we have just initiated a related review on first - term attrition . that review will examine steps dod and the services are taking to reduce the attrition rate for first - term enlistees . because many recruits do not complete their first tour of duty , the services may unnecessarily incur relocation expenses . accordingly , any improvement in the attrition rates should reduce the services' $700 million pcs budget for accessions and separations . we expect to complete this work in late calendar year 1996 . the defense science board task force on quality of life reported in october 1995 that hiring contractors overseas to replace departing active duty personnel would reduce forward presence requirements and costs associated with maintaining military personnel in foreign countries . the task force identified several major u.s. and foreign corporations already providing contracted housing and family services and made several recommendations for additional overseas contracting opportunities , such as cooking and delivering supplies . in commenting on a draft of this report , service officials agreed that some contracting is possible . they noted , however , that status of forces agreements with foreign countries also limit the total number of employees the united states can maintain within a country . for fiscal years 1987 through 1995 , total pcs moves declined with the size of the force and changes in u.s. overseas presence . the initial phase of this study will examine tour lengths . the goal is to reduce the number of positions with maximum tour lengths .