( app . i shows the differences between accounts in the 1998 and 1999 fydps for each appropriation. ) dod made other adjustments in the 1999 fydp to ( 1 ) meet unplanned operating expenses , such as medical care , or new program demands , such as the national missile defense system and ( 2 ) avoid disrupting or displacing other investment plans . in the 1999 fydp , the defense health program , which accounts for about 11 percent of annual o&m spending , is projected to receive higher funding in every year ( 1999-2003 ) when compared with the 1998 fydp . dod refers to this as migration of funds . according to dod , the chronic erosion of procurement funding has three general sources: underestimated day - to - day operating costs , unrealized savings from initiatives such as outsourcing or business process reengineering , and new program demands . the qdr concluded that as much as $10 billion to $12 billion per year in future procurement funding could be redirected as a result of these three general sources . the qdr also identifies other areas of significant future cost risks . to address this financial instability , the qdr directed dod to cut some force structure and personnel , eliminate additional excess facilities through more base closures and realignments , streamline infrastructure , and reduce quantities of some new weapon systems . by taking these actions , the secretary of defense intended that the 1999 budget and fydp would be fiscally executable , modernization targets would be met , the overall defense program would be rebalanced , and the program would become more stable . during the qdr , dod identified initiatives to reduce infrastructure costs and personnel . however , even as the qdr report was released , the department acknowledged that more could be done . the department's november 1997 defense reform initiative report provided a second set of initiatives to streamline and improve dod's infrastructure and support activities . money saved by these initiatives is to help fund weapons modernization . the defense management council , chaired by the deputy secretary of defense , was charged by the secretary to ensure implementation of the reform decisions . the council also was directed to examine similar reforms for each of the services and to negotiate an annual performance contract with the director of each defense agency . the 1999 fydp reflects the budget blueprint outlined in the balanced budget agreement , and therefore , its total budget does not vary greatly from that in the 1998 fydp . the common 5-year period of both fydps ( 1999-2003 ) shows that the 1998 fydp totaled $1,355 billion and the 1999 fydp totaled $1,356 billion . table 1 compares the two plans , by primary appropriation account . as shown in table 1 , dod adjusted its three largest appropriations substantially in the 1999 fydp . specifically , dod added $24.9 billion to operation and maintenance ( o&m ) accounts and decreased the procurement and military personnel accounts by $16.4 billion and $6.4 billion , respectively . the cumulative projected increase from the 1998 fydp is $1.6 billion .