forces , korea . in reviewing some of dod's planned modernization programs , we developed information and issued separate reports on the navy's plan to upgrade guns on surface ships for the naval surface fire support mission and on the army and marine corps plan to develop a lightweight 155-millimeter howitzer . these and our other recent reports on weapon systems used for close support are listed on the last page of this report . this list also includes references to two earlier reports that discuss dod's weapons acquisition process . we performed our review between june 1993 and october 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . artillery can be fired at night and under all weather conditions . the army operates 105-millimeter towed , 155-millimeter towed and self - propelled , and 8-inch self - propelled howitzers and the multiple launch rocket system ( mlrs ) , a mobile rocket artillery system capable of firing 12 rockets that carry various munitions . the army plans to retire its 8-inch howitzers in the near future . the marine corps uses the 155-millimeter towed howitzer for all combat missions . the maximum effective range of artillery is between 14.9 kilometers for 105-millimeter and 30 kilometers for 155-millimeter howitzers with rocket - assisted projectiles , and 32 kilometers for the mlrs . according to some army and marine corps ground force commanders , artillery is a reliable and responsive close support weapon system . attack helicopters can destroy tanks and other armored vehicles with precision - guided missiles . they can also engage and suppress enemy troops and artillery with rockets and cannon fire . a majority of army and marine corps attack helicopters can identify and engage targets at night , but their capabilities are limited by adverse weather . attack helicopters can ( 1 ) be based near ground forces ; ( 2 ) loiter and be refueled and rearmed close to the area of close combat ; ( 3 ) be used to identify targets and control the fires of other cas aircraft , mortars , and artillery ; and ( 4 ) engage targets well beyond the range of artillery . in the persian gulf war , army attack helicopters successfully conducted combat operations up to 315 nautical miles behind enemy lines . the army currently operates three types of attack helicopters — the ah - 1f / s cobra , ah - 64 apache , and oh - 58d kiowa warrior — and the marine corps operates ah - 1w supercobras . the helicopters can be used for fire support or as maneuver units . their effectiveness can be limited by adverse weather , air defenses , and the inability to deliver heavy bombs . fixed - wing aircraft are able to engage a variety of close support targets depending on the ordnance they carry . however , because these aircraft can carry heavier weapons , they are most appropriately used against hardened targets . fixed - wing aircraft have greater speed and range than attack helicopters and can fly at high altitudes to avoid air defense threats . however , they have more difficulty in identifying and acquiring targets and providing accurate strikes from higher altitudes .