additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the types of ships are shown in table 2 . the navy plans to ( 1 ) turn over the operation of the three ammunition ships to msc for crewing with civil service mariners and ( 2 ) decommission the five oilers in fiscal year 1999 , replacing them with four oilers built to commercial standards that are currently in reduced operating status or deactivated . these latter ships would also be crewed with civil service mariners . the navy has not decided on whether to turn over the operation of the seven multiproduct auxiliary ships to msc . some navy officials believe that multiproduct ships should continue to be crewed with military crews because they are the auxiliary ships that can maintain battle group speeds and operate within the battle group formations . however , msc officials stated that they have studied what it would take to operate the multiproduct ships and are willing to accept the transfer because they believe msc civil service crews can operate these ships . our work and prior studies have shown that the navy could achieve savings by using civil service crews on auxiliary ships . according to november 1996 data , the most current available , the navy's annual cost to operate a multiproduct ship ( aoe - 1 class ) , built in the 1960s , is $54 million compared to msc's estimated cost of $37 million to operate the ship using a civil service crew . msc crews these 27 ships with civil service mariners . the navy's remaining 15 auxiliary ships are crewed by military personnel . under current policy , the navy will not permit the use of commercial crews on any auxiliary ships because it considers their mission purely military in nature . as of may 1997 , the navy had msc operating 27 of its 42 auxiliary ships with civil service crews . the type and number of auxiliary ships operated by msc with civil service crewing and the crew size for each ship are shown in table 1 . this table also shows the size of the military detachment on these ships . under current policy , the navy will not permit any auxiliary ships to be crewed with commercial mariners . another advantage of turning over the navy multiproduct ships to msc is , as navy and msc officials pointed out , that msc ships do not have the constraints on operating days per ship and on days at sea per crewmember that navy ships do . it is navy policy to assign a sailor to a ship for 3 years and not to have the sailor spend more than 6 consecutive months each year at sea , whereas msc policy is to have msc crews spend about 9 months out of every 12 months at sea . according to these officials , an msc ship can operate more days per year than a comparable navy ship — resulting in fewer msc ships being needed to conduct underway replenishment .