ii. ) ctr officials suggested several technical and editorial revisions . we have incorporated most of these suggestions into this report . this report is the latest of a series of gao reviews of the ctr program since 1992 and draws upon data developed in the united states , russia , and ukraine . russia has signed the chemical weapons convention . once it ratifies the convention , it will be committed to destroying this stockpile within 15 years of the convention's entry into force . russia does not have an operational capability to destroy large quantities of chemical weapons . dod officials have stated that russian chemical and nuclear weapon proliferation would pose a major security problem for the united states and that the eventual destruction of russia's huge stockpile would significantly reduce the chemical weapon threat . however , dod officials have also stated that the threat of chemical weapons is less significant and urgent than that of nuclear weapons . to help address the threat posed by russia's declared stockpile , the ctr program has adopted a strategy of “jump starting” russia's chemical weapon destruction efforts . executive branch officials have stated that ctr project assistance would help encourage russian ratification of the chemical weapons convention . the program has taken the initial steps toward providing russia assistance leading to creation of a pilot chemical weapon destruction facility at shchuche that will have a destruction capacity of up to 500 metric tons of nerve agent contained in artillery shells and supporting eventual russian establishment of a full - scale facility , capable of eliminating 1,200 metric tons annually . to assess the ctr program's progress , likely cost , and potential impact regarding controls over fsu nuclear materials , we reviewed reports and cables detailing discussions with nis officials ; interviewed officials at dod's threat reduction policy office , ctr program office , defense special weapons agency , and army corps of engineers . we also spoke with officials at the department of state and the arms control and disarmament agency concerning the status of transparency discussions . in addition , we discussed the status and prognosis of the mayak and nuclear weapon security projects with high ranking officials from russia's ministry of atomic energy and ministry of defense in moscow in 1995 and in washington in 1996 . in doing so , we contrasted past and current depictions of project progress and assessed plans for overcoming current and foreseeable obstacles . we also reviewed the process used to prepare dod's estimates of the cost of the mayak facility . our assessment concerning the likely impact of these projects was based in large part from data presented in the ctr program's draft program plan . to assess the ctr program's progress , likely cost , and potential impact regarding the elimination of fsu delivery vehicles , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials at dod's ctr program office . in addition , we discussed the status and prognosis of these projects with high ranking officials from russia's committee for defense industry and ukraine's ministry of defense in moscow and kiev in 1995 and washington in 1996 . in doing so , we contrasted past and current depictions of project progress and assessed plans for overcoming current and foreseeable obstacles .