unavailable . u.n. agency officials gave several reasons for the lack of increased spending on hiv / aids programs . a who official said that because who no longer had additional funding for its hiv / aids efforts after gpa ended , 200 professionals who had been working on the program left or changed jobs , and the agency had to reorganize its staff and budget to undertake hiv / aids activities . according to cosponsor officials and the secretariat , other agencies did not increase support for hiv / aids due to difficulties incorporating hiv / aids activities into programs in the midst of their 5-year planning cycle ; lack of commitment to hiv / aids by affected governments ; and lack of commitment to hiv / aids as a priority on the part of field representatives . building worldwide support for hiv / aids was a key objective of unaids . the u.n. secretary general noted that in order to achieve an expanded response , governments of countries most affected by the epidemic would have to increase resources for hiv / aids . officials from the unaids secretariat also noted the importance of increasing the financial support of donor countries . however , the secretariat is not yet in a position to measure usaids' progress because it does not yet have baseline data on spending for hiv / aids at the country level . it has only recently developed baseline data for donors . the unaids' secretariat is in the process of analyzing survey data to develop estimates of spending on hiv / aids by affected countries . secretariat officials said that the data would be available in the fall of 1998 . while half of the theme groups surveyed by unaids reported that in 1997 they had mobilized resources at the country level , they noted that the large majority of these resources was from u.n. agencies . u.n. officials told us that the lack of data on the impact of hiv / aids , measured in the number of deaths and illnesses , made it difficult to persuade developing countries to divert limited national resources from other important health problems . in many developing countries , the numbers of deaths and the costs of caring for hiv / aids patients are not identifiable because records only indicate secondary causes of illness or death , such as pneumonia , rather than hiv / aids infection . preliminary data from its most recent survey indicate that contributions by major donors have remained relatively stable between 1993 and 1996 , at approximately $250 million a year . however , data are not available for 1997 . thus , it is not possible to determine whether unaids' first year's efforts have led to increased spending by donors . a usaid official told us that secretariat officials made regular visits to executive and parliamentary branches of governments in donor countries , including the united states , in an attempt to keep the spotlight on hiv / aids issues and avert “donor fatigue. the unaids secretariat and cosponsor agencies were expected to mobilize the private sector as part of the comprehensive global response to the hiv / aids epidemic .