the program costs increased more than savings . as a result , the net savings decreased from $385 million to $258 million . as shown in table 1 , depot repair was the principal factor that accounted for the major cost increase . this increase occurred because the scope of depot intermediate maintenance work had increased . when an engine is inducted into the depot intermediate maintenance facility , it is inspected and all necessary repairs are performed . in addition , other maintenance is performed to extend the operating life of the engine if the engine components are within a certain threshold for overhaul . this increased maintenance is referred to as jet engine intermediate maintenance plus ( jeim + ) . the increased savings was in the area of on - condition maintenance . according to air force officials , as a result of jeim + , the time interval between engine overhauls will be extended . thus , the savings increased from $451 million to $821.8 million . even though the 1993 analysis continued to show a net savings by implementing the program , it did not include all program costs . for example , a 1993 air force analysis showed that the value of the mobility readiness spares packages ( mrsp ) kits would increase about $543 million to reconfigure the kits from a three level maintenance configuration to a tlm configuration for five aircraft types . table 2 shows the value of the reconfigured kits by aircraft type . prior to tlm , the kits were configured with shop replaceable items that would be used by intermediate maintenance units to repair the line replaceable components . however , with tlm , there will not be any intermediate maintenance capability in the theater of operation . consequently , there is no need for the shop replaceable items in the mrsp kits . to make the kits compatible to tlm , the kits had to be reconfigured with higher cost line replaceable components rather than the lower cost shop replaceable items . air force officials emphasized that the air force did not have to spend any additional funds to achieve the kit reconfiguration . they pointed out that the largest increase in mrsp kit value was for the b - 52 aircraft , which did not have mrsp kits prior to tlm . air force officials told us that when the mission of the aircraft was changed from a nuclear to a conventional mission , this necessitated a mrsp kit , even if the avionics items were not designated as tlm items . the officials said that they were able to establish these kits by redistributing excess inventory that was in the supply system as a result of retiring the b - 52g aircraft . therefore , they did not consider this to be a tlm program cost since they did not have to buy the inventory needed for kit reconfiguration . in our opinion , although no additional funds were spent to achieve the kit reconfiguration , the $449 million of added value of the mrsp kits should be considered a tlm program related cost because the added value was necessitated by the kit reconfiguration to a tlm orientation .