ii ) . dod noted that it had already begun taking action to address several of the recommendations . some of the weapons were recovered . according to a law enforcement official , dod could not determine whether any of the unrecovered stolen dod weapons were in the hands of terrorists or other extremists . we recognize that dod has made significant strides in gaining visibility and accountability over its handheld missile inventory . dod has implemented several recommendations from our prior work and has already taken action to correct some of the problems we cite in this report . we believe , however , that dod can take some additional actions to further improve physical security and ensure accurate reporting of its inventory of missiles and rockets . therefore , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force and the commandant of the marine corps to develop a cost - effective procedure for periodically revalidating the category i inventory baseline by , for example , matching item managers' records with site records annually at a representative sample of storage sites ; develop a cost - effective procedure for opening containers of missiles and rockets , for example , by selecting a representative sample of pallets , rather than individual missiles and rockets , to inspect ; manage category i rockets by serial number so that the item managers will have total visibility over the numbers and locations of rockets ; establish procedures for ensuring that serial numbers are not changed during upgrades and modifications of category i missiles and rockets ; and continue to emphasize compliance with physical security requirements . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod concurred with all of our recommendations ( see app . for example , the services have developed or are developing procedures for revalidating the category i baseline . dod also plans to issue guidance to manage category i rockets by serial numbers , develop procedures to ensure that serial numbers are not changed during upgrades and modifications of category i missiles and rockets , and continue to emphasize compliance with physical security requirements . dod concurred with our recommendation to develop a cost - effective procedure to open containers of missiles and rockets . dod's response also cited various existing regulations , which require that samples selected for inspection be representative of the entire lot under evaluation . we discussed the comments with an official from the office of the secretary of defense and pointed out that during our review we found that this was not always being done . for example , an army official told us that some inspectors only select and inspect the missiles that are easy to access in a storage facility . the office of the secretary of defense officials agreed to issue guidance reinforcing the need to follow these procedures . we met with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the army , the navy , the marine corps , and the national guard regarding the oversight and physical security of category i missiles and rockets and the physical security of category ii weapons .