to date , this has not happened . in requesting the release of fiscal year 1997 funds from dod , the army did not initially justify the need for or indicate the ultimate destination of the funds , delaying the start - up and implementation of programs . as a result , approval of wrap funds was delayed until very late in the fiscal year ( see app . because of these changes , dod has been withholding 1998 wrap funding for the initiative . the gun laying and positioning system also experienced a schedule slippage that will delay fielding . according to the program manager , the slippage will make it necessary to alter funding ( for example , by shifting funds from the out - years to underfunded or unfunded years ) in order to accelerate fielding . the congressional defense committees were not informed of these developments . the army is not required to issue progress reports or to notify congress of changes in ongoing programs . the only formal feedback mechanism is a congressional requirement that the army submit quarterly funding reports to the senate armed services committee on the obligation of funds for wrap initiatives . the army is also required to provide more frequent reports if wrap has significant successes or failures . to date , the army has not submitted any of the required reports . after 2 years , there is growing uncertainty about which technologies should receive top priority for wrap funding . the army's criteria for wrap candidates are open - ended and do not ensure that initiatives share a common set of characteristics . for example , there is disagreement within the army over whether wrap and the fielding of the first digitized division should be directly linked . in the absence of more precise selection criteria , disagreements over which candidates are most appropriate for wrap funding will likely continue . the army may find it increasingly difficult to identify candidates that are sufficiently developed in the near future because it has reduced large - scale test and experimentation exercises and will thus have less data with which to assess new wrap candidates . the army has not presented its slate of wrap candidates for congressional approval early enough in the fiscal year to permit timely obligation of funds . this has led directly to delays in fielding because estimates were predicated on earlier availability of funds . although some technologies may be fielded sooner because of wrap , in most cases the program will not speed up fielding as much as originally expected . the army is required to report quarterly on the status of funding obligations to the senate armed services committee . to date , it has not met this requirement , and there is no other requirement for reporting on program performance or status . we believe that congress is being asked to make funding decisions without all the information it needs . information presently not provided on a consistent basis includes program cost , schedule , and performance ; planned obligations ; any significant changes to program acquisition strategy ; and any scheduled changes in program digital battlefield participation .