this report contains no recommendations . “the aerospace guidance and metrology center ( agmc ) depot will be closed ; some workload will move to other depot maintenance activities including the private sector.” after the brac recommendation to close agmc was finalized , ( 1 ) the air force moved a small portion of agmc's air force workload to other air force depots , ( 2 ) the navy moved most of its agmc workload to other sites , and ( 3 ) the army moved all of its agmc workload to other sites . the air force decided to privatize - in - place the remaining agmc workloads . receiving area for missile guidance induction showing shipping containers for minute man missiles . automatic testing on guidance gyros . at the time it made this decision , the air force relied on an analysis that estimated privatizing would save about $5 million in 1997 . however , the preaward analysis was not documented and air force officials do not know the basis for the costs included . consequently , the air force was not able to reconcile its current interim study to its precontract award analysis . since october 1996 , the newark , ohio facility has been operated as the boeing guidance repair center by two contractors — boeing north american , inc. , ( autonetics electronics systems division ) and wyle laboratories , inc . the bgrc repair contract is managed by the air force's ogden , utah , air logistics center program office . weapon system and item management functions for missile inertial guidance systems are performed at ogden and the same functions for aircraft inertial guidance systems are managed at the air force's oklahoma city air logistics center . dod reevaluated its decision and reaffirmed its closure and privatization - in - place plans . in december 1995 , the air force awarded two 5-year contracts for repair and metrology services at newark: an estimated $264 million cost plus award fee contract to rockwell international for agmc's repair mission and a $19 million cost plus award fee contract to wyle laboratories for operation of the air force's standard metrology laboratory . in october 1996 , boeing acquired the agmc repair operations through its acquisition of rockwell international . in addition to these contract operations , the air force retained about 130 government employees at newark — about 69 percent of the preclosure metrology staff . they perform such functions as ( 1 ) periodically reviewing and certifying the operations of the air force's 130 metrology laboratories and ( 2 ) helping the defense contract management command monitor wyle laboratories' metrology contract . in addition , 24 government civilian employees of the defense contract management command provide on - site contract oversight . the newark - heath - licking county port authority is in the process of purchasing the newark air force base real property . the port authority currently leases the facility to boeing , which then subleases a portion of the facility to wyle laboratories . the brac recommended closing newark air force base / agmc — noting that workload could be moved to other depot maintenance activities , including the private sector .