all other activities would be done by the private sector . dsb said that dod would need to make an investment of about $6 billion but would ultimately save about $30 billion annually by the year 2002 , primarily through outsourcing support functions . of these $30 billion in annual savings , $6 billion was to come from conus logistics infrastructure activities , which dsb defined as including inventory control points , distribution depots , maintenance depots , and installation supply and repair . about $4.2 billion of the savings would be achieved by outsourcing these activities ; the remaining $1.8-billion savings would be achieved through improvements in inventory management practices and equipment reliability . table 1 shows a breakout of the estimated logistics infrastructure savings . according to the dsb estimates , the $6-billion savings represents an approximate 40-percent reduction in the $14 billion the board estimated dod spends annually for conus logistics activities . according to a dsb task force member , estimates for the cost of installation supply and repair activities were unavailable . therefore , the group used $14 billion as a rough estimate to approximate total conus logistics cost , not including activities already contracted out . although we were unable to substantiate those numbers , the data that is available indicates that dsb's estimate of $14 billion for conus logistics costs is conservative . for example , the navy has reported that more than $8.5 billion of navy resources was applied in fiscal year 1996 to maintenance programs in support of fleet ships and aircraft . the report also stated that to gain economies and achieve significant savings , dod needs to consider dramatic changes in the way it does business . dsb said the department must get out of the material management / distribution and repair business by expanding contractor logistics support to all fielded weapon systems and by expanding the use of “prime vendors” for all commodities . contractor logistics support , which relies on a contractor to provide long - term , total life - cycle logistics support , combines depot - level maintenance with wholesale and selected retail material management functions . under the “prime vendor” concept , dod would rely on a single vendor to buy , warehouse , and distribute inventory to the customer as needed , thus removing the defense logistics agency and the services from their present middleman role . our reviews of best practices within the private sector and ongoing work at dod indicate that dod has significant opportunities for reducing logistics costs and improving performance by changing its business processes . this work also indicates that determining the most cost - effective processes to use requires an evaluation of costs and benefits of each situation . these findings are consistent with the general theme of the dsb's reports that opportunities exist for savings in the operation of dod's logistics support activities . 2465 , which prohibits contracts for performance of fire - fighting and security guard functions ; section 317 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1987 ( p.l . 99-661 ) , which prohibits the secretary of defense from contracting for the functions performed at crane army ammunition activity or mcallister army ammunition plant ; 10 u.s.c .