dod . the visitation agreement was to identify the representatives of the foreign owners allowed to visit the cleared u.s. firm , the purposes for which they were allowed to visit , the advance approval that was necessary , and the identity of the approval authority . in 1993 , dod eliminated visitation agreements as separate documents and incorporated visitation control procedures as a section of each voting trust , proxy agreement , and ssa . voting trust agreements , proxy agreements , ssas , and their attendant visitation agreements are negotiated between the foreign - owned company and dod . although dod has boilerplate language that can be adopted , according to a dod official , many cases have unique circumstances that call for flexible application of the isr provisions . dod's flexible approach leads to negotiations that can result in company - specific agreements containing provisions that provide stronger or weaker controls . generally , the foreign owners negotiate to secure the least restrictive agreements possible . dod eliminated separate visitation agreements in favor of visitation procedures in the security agreements themselves . in may 1992 , a former secretary of defense testified before the house committee on armed services that under proxy agreements and voting trusts , the foreign owners of u.s. companies working on classified contracts had “virtually no say except if somebody wants to sell the company or in very major decisions.” he indicated that for the purposes of the foreign parent company , proxy agreements and voting trusts are essentially “blind trusts.” further , he testified that a number of companies were “functioning successfully” under ssas . dod has approved more lenient visitation agreements and procedures over time . accordingly , ssa firms pose a somewhat higher risk associated with classified work . the isr and the nispom generally prohibit ssa firms from being involved in top secret and other highly sensitive contracts , but allow for exceptions if dod determines they are in the national interest . ssa firms we reviewed were working on 47 contracts classified as ts , sci , sap , rd , and comsec . in addition , we observed that isr - required visitation agreements permitted significant contact between the u.s. firms and the foreign owners . unlike voting trusts and proxy agreements , which insulate foreign owners from the management of the cleared firm , ssas allow foreign owners to appoint a representative to serve on the board of directors . a dod official explained that dod's flexible approach to foci arrangements and the resulting negotiations have probably caused the visitation controls to become relaxed . as part of this effort , the secretary should make the following changes in the implementation of the existing security arrangements and under the national industrial security program . visitation request approvals: the trustees should strictly adhere to the isr visitation agreement provision that requires them to approve requests for visits between the u.s. defense contractor and representatives of its foreign owners . this duty should not be delegated to officers or employees of the foreign - owned firm .