this action will cut about 115 positions . the navy also plans to eliminate about 1,900 positions in various reserve support activities . some of these cuts result from the force structure changes . for example , the navy plans to cut about 250 maintenance positions because the reserves will have fewer aircraft to maintain . another 185 positions will be eliminated based on the navy's decision to deactivate a submarine tender from the active fleet . additional positions will be eliminated because the navy has not been able to fill them . for example , the seabees have not been able to fill underwater construction positions with qualified personnel primarily because they do not have the money to pay for the 6-month training course that is required for sailors to qualify for the program . the seabees have also not been able to recruit sailors coming off active duty who possess the required skills and training . in addition , although the battalions have a wartime role , the navy decided that it was not feasible to fund battalion positions that were not being filled . together with reductions from construction battalion headquarters , the navy plans to cut about 600 battalion positions . likewise , the navy plans to cut about 250 medical and 190 intelligence positions because they remained unfilled . the navy assumed that it could cut about 3,600 positions from the naval facilities engineering command through various management efficiencies . the navy plans to achieve one - third of the 2,500 public work center cuts through productivity improvements , one - third through workload reductions , and one - third through outsourcing . these initiatives are shown in table ii.1 . the army plans to transfer some combat support and combat service support missions to the reserve component , which will eliminate about 7,000 active military positions . the reserve component has already taken over about one - half of these missions . according to army officials , these transfers were based on an army study that concluded that about 3,400 late - deploying combat support and combat service support activities could be transferred to the reserves . the remaining 3,600 positions were to be identified in the total army analysis , expected to be released in march 1998 . the major commands have not specifically identified about one - half of the 2,900 cuts to their institutional forces . the army allocated percentage cuts to most of the major commands based on the judgment of senior army leaders . for example , commands that were considered low priority received a higher percentage cut than commands that were considered a higher priority . in february 1997 , we reported that allocating positions based on available budgets , without defining workload requirements , leads to across - the - board cuts that reduce funds available to all commands regardless of relative need . the army has identified all of the cuts associated with active training support to the reserve component . these cuts were based on an army study that concluded , among other things , that three existing active headquarters components that support reserve training could be merged into one .