they said they had not . in one case , the contract operator split a job totaling $143,740 into 18 separate jobs , each under the $25,000 threshold . this work was for ship cleaning that was done by the same subcontractor on the same ship over a 3-month period . after we requested that the contractor provide us with evidence that this work had been competitively awarded , we found that the contractor had obtained quotations from three subcontractors on the price per square foot for cleaning the ship . the contractor awarded the work to the lowest bidder based on a single price quotation . it then split the job into 18 smaller ones involving the cleaning of different parts of the ship . in another case , this same contractor submitted 71 separate invoices totaling $202,294 for welding - related work done by one subcontractor on one ship over a 4-month period . in many cases , multiple invoices were submitted to msc on the same day . for example , 9 invoices were submitted on december 2 , 1994 ; 12 were submitted on december 30 , 1994 ; 18 were submitted on january 5 , 1995 ; and 12 were submitted on february 10 , 1995 . despite this pattern of billing , the msc person responsible for reviewing these invoices said that he was not aware of the contractor's practice of splitting large jobs into smaller ones . during our review , we asked the contractor to provide documentation showing which of these 71 jobs had been competitively bid or justified as sole source . he was able to show that only 30 had been awarded competitively and that 7 had been awarded sole source because they were related to competitively bid work . the contractor did not supply documentation on the other 34 jobs . msc headquarters personnel review overhaul work packages and discuss them in detail with representatives from the contract operators' engineering staffs before overhaul subcontracts are solicited and awarded . however , even though a ship's overhaul can cost msc up to $6 million , msc does not always have an msc representative on - site during the overhauls to ensure that work contained in these work packages is actually done and that unforeseen repairs not specified in overhaul contracts are completed or are reasonably priced . this lack of assurance is due at least in part to the fact that msc has no agencywide requirement for its representatives to be present during ship overhauls . this presence during an overhaul enables a representative of msc to observe the condition of items of equipment when these items are opened and inspected and to determine the extent of needed repairs . in addition , the presence of an msc representative enables msc to monitor the extent of the repairs to prevent unneeded work . when an msc representative is not present during an overhaul , msc is relying entirely on the integrity and professionalism of the contract operator to protect the government's interest . even when msc representatives are present , the amount of involvement among them , contract operators' representatives , and shipyard personnel varies because msc has no written guidelines governing the authority and responsibilities of its representatives .