2469 requirement . dod actions show that in practice it has not reinstituted public - private competitions . dod has not conducted a public - private competition since it terminated the program in 1994 and it has not provided guidance to the services for reinstituting public - private competitions . furthermore , we believe the november 1994 memorandum provided guidance to the services regarding the conditions under which dod depots could compete for complementary workloads of non - dod agencies , such as the federal aviation administration's ground communications equipment . in these circumstances , we continue to believe that dod has not effectively reinstituted the public - private competition program . our report includes a recommendation that dod reinstitute the program and issue guidance regarding the conditions , framework , policies , and procedures for restarting public - private competitions , including the requirement to review the adequacy of the depots to identify and track costs . since the end of the cold war and the reduction in new procurements , commercial contractors have aggressively sought more of dod's maintenance work . traditionally , contractors were not interested in military maintenance because it was characterized by sporadic requirements , limited quantities , and other considerations such as proprietary data and older technologies . but , because procurement budgets have begun to decline and relatively few new systems are predicted in the future , the private sector's interest has begun to increase . dod has seven engines with civilian counterparts that are good candidates for exploring whether to contract out their maintenance and overhaul . title 10 u.s.c . 2464 provides that dod activities should maintain a logistics capability sufficient to ensure technical competence and resources necessary for an effective and timely response to a mobilization or other national defense emergency . it also requires that the secretary of defense identify specific logistics activities necessary to maintain the core capability described by that provision . however , 10 u.s.c . 2464 also provides that core logistics activities may be contracted out using the procedures of office of management and budget circular a - 76 if certain requirements are met . for depot maintenance , dod has defined core as the capability maintained within organic defense depots to meet readiness and sustainability requirements of the weapon systems that support the joint chiefs of staff contingency scenarios . core exists to minimize operational risks and to guarantee required readiness for these weapon systems . core depot maintenance capabilities will comprise only the minimum facilities , equipment , and skilled personnel necessary to ensure a ready and controlled source of required technical competence . depot maintenance for the designated weapon systems will be the primary workloads assigned to dod depots to support core depot maintenance capabilities . under the core concept , military requirements are driven by contingency scenarios developed by the joint chiefs of staff . the services must identify what weapon systems and equipment are necessary to meet these requirements as well as the level of depot maintenance that is required to support these systems . where the services are certain that they must maintain control of depot support to minimize risk to combat commanders , capabilities are established and retained in organic maintenance depots .