the remaining nine waivers have expired . of these nine , only three are for systems that have had some interoperability testing and certification by the test command . of the remaining six systems with expired waivers , two were expired for less than a year , two were expired for more than a year , and two were expired for more than 2 years . commanders in chief , the services , and dod agencies are generally not complying with the c4i certification requirement . inadequate compliance with this requirement increases the likelihood that c4i systems will not be interoperable , thereby putting lives , expensive equipment , and the success of joint military operations at greater risk . improvements to the certification process are needed to provide better assurance that c4i systems most critical to joint operations are certified for interoperability . better information is needed to track the status of waivers . finally , the risks associated with operating uncertified systems in joint operations is heightened when systems are permitted to proceed into production and fielding without full consideration of the certification requirement . to ensure that systems critical to effective joint operations do not proceed to production without due consideration given to the need for interoperability certification , we recommend that the secretary of defense require the acquisition authorities to adhere to the requirement that c4i systems be tested and certified for interoperability prior to the production and fielding decision unless an official waiver has been granted . to improve the process for certifying c4i systems for interoperability , we recommend that the secretary of defense , in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , direct the service secretaries , in collaboration with the director of disa to verify and validate all c4 data in the defense integration support tool and develop a complete and accurate list of c4i systems requiring certification and director of disa to ensure that the status of system's certification is added to the defense integration support tool and that this database be properly maintained to better monitor c4 systems for interoperability compliance . we also recommend that the secretary of defense request that the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff direct the joint staff ( in collaboration with the commanders in chief , the services , and the director of disa ) to develop a process for prioritizing c4i systems for testing and certification and joint staff ( in collaboration with the commanders in chief , the services , and the director of disa ) to develop a formal process to follow up on interoperability problems observed during exercises , report the problems to the relevant dod organization , and inform organizations that the systems are required to be tested for interoperability . we recommend that , to improve dod's information on the status of waivers from interoperability certification , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff establish a system to monitor waivers . the system should inform dod organizations when waivers expire and request that they either seek an extension of the waivers or test their systems for interoperability .