we discuss a few of these options below . some of the options reflect our recommendations ; others do not , but rather represent one way to address , in a budgetary context , some of the significant problems identified in our evaluation of dod programs . inclusion of a specific option in this report does not mean that we endorse it as the only or most feasible approach or that other spending reductions are not also appropriate for consideration by congress . our option with the highest dollar value savings addresses dod's acquisition workforce . in november 1995 , we reported that dod acquisition organizations had a combined acquisition workforce of about 464,000 — 398,000 civilian and 66,000 military in 1994 . even with declines in both the defense procurement budget and the civilian acquisition workforce since 1990 , the number of acquisition organizations remains relatively constant . subsequent to our report , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 required dod to provide a plan to reduce the number of military and civilian personnel in acquisition organizations by 25 percent over 5 years and eliminate duplicative functions among existing acquisition organizations . cbo estimates the 5-year savings ( fiscal years 1997-2001 ) associated with the civilian personnel reductions alone would be approximately $5.5 billion . another option addresses savings for the central logistics infrastructure category . in february 1996 , we reported that dod's transportation costs are higher than necessary . dod customers frequently pay prices for transportation services that are double or triple the cost of the basic transportation . driving these higher costs are the u.s. transportation command's fragmented management processes and its inefficient organizational structure , which includes not only the command headquarters but the army military traffic management command , the navy military sealift command , and the air force air mobility command . salaries and wages alone for the u.s. transportation command in fiscal year 1994 were more than $1 billion . our option illustrates one way to improve the u.s. transportation command's operations by combining functions and eliminating some personnel at the military traffic management command and military sealift command . civilian personnel savings associated with this reorganization effort could be $450 million for fiscal years 1997-2001 . an option for the central medical infrastructure category establishes copayments for care received in military hospitals . health care received by military beneficiaries in military hospitals and clinics is free . however , military beneficiaries share in the costs of care they obtain from civilian providers . research has shown that free care leads to greater and unnecessary utilization and , therefore , greater costs . by establishing cost - sharing requirements for care received in military hospitals similar to civilian cost - sharing requirements , 5-year savings for fiscal years 1997-2001 of approximately $1 billion could be achieved . table 6 summarizes our options organized by infrastructure category . the cumulative 5-year total ( fiscal years 1997-2001 ) of budgetary savings estimated by cbo is $11.8 billion . in oral comments , dod agreed with this report's findings and conclusions . the comments dealt primarily with technical accuracy and clarification . we have changed the report , as appropriate , to respond to these comments .