that test was conducted in november 1996 . while the test report has not been finalized , a draft version states that mcs — in the tested configuration — is not operationally effective or suitable . throughout the development of version 12.01 , interim software builds have undergone numerous performance tests to determine the current state of software development , and build 4 was subjected to a customer test . the results of those tests identified continuing problems as the number of builds proceeded . for example , a december 1995 performance test report on build 3.0 stated that , if the problems found during the test were not quickly corrected in build 3.1 , then the risk to the program might be unmanageable . the follow - on april 1996 performance test report of build 3.1 stated that significant problems in system stability prevented proper testing of several requirements . the report further stated that messaging between battlefield functional areas was extremely difficult and problematic and that the system had other stability problems . a september 1996 performance test report stated that of 568 previously open deficiency reports from builds 5.1 through 5.2c , 165 , almost 29 percent , still remained open . this report , the last published on an mcs performance test , reflected the state of the mcs software shortly before the downgraded limited user test , in which mcs failed to demonstrate either operational effectiveness or suitability . more recent performance tests of later builds have been done ; however , separate reports on those test events have not been issued . rather , the program office plans to prepare an integrated test report in october or november 1997 . “developed by a confederation of contractors who have built this current version of mcs on the salvaged 'good' portions of the abruptly terminated development of mcs version 11 , it needs to stand the rigor of an independent operational test and evaluation . before a mcs block iv contract is awarded.” to help determine the level of risk in proceeding under the army's development strategy , dot&e stated in a june 1995 memorandum that an operational test of version 12.01 be conducted to measure the software's maturity before the award of a contract for the development of follow - on versions . as a result , an operational assessment — called the mcs customer test — was conducted on version 12.01 in april 1996 to support the award of a $63.1 million contract for the development of mcs block iv software — mcs versions 12.1 , 12.2 , and 12.3 . however , that test was later downgraded to a limited user test because of software immaturity . successful completion of an initial operational test and evaluation should provide a more definitive indication of the mcs program's progress . before the slip of the mcs initial operational test and evaluation from november 1996 to march 1998 , the army planned to acquire 288 computers — 150 in fiscal year 1997 and 138 in fiscal year 1998 — for the mcs training base .