both faa and atf have canine programs . as of february 25 , 1997 , faa's program had 81 certified explosives detection canine teams deployed to 31 airports . faa requires intensive training in aviation environments on aircraft , in terminals , and around baggage , airport vehicles , and cargo . in fiscal year 1997 , faa received $8.9 million for certifying an additional 114 canines . atf has certified 115 explosives and firearms detection canine teams for use by 7 foreign countries in support of the department of state's antiterrorism assistance program . according to an atf official , these atf - certified canines are trained to perform preblast detection duties in various overseas environments , including airports . in fiscal year 1997 , atf received $7.5 million , of which $3.5 million was specifically earmarked for construction and expansion of a canine training facility . congress also authorized the secretary of the treasury to establish scientific certification standards for canines and to certify , on a reimbursable basis , canines employed by federal agencies at airports in the united states . in 1996 , the house appropriations committee expressed concern about multiple and possibly duplicative or wasteful programs for training dogs to detect explosives . the committee directed that atf establish a pilot canine explosives detection program with faa to foster cooperation , coordination , and consistency between their two programs . the two agencies are working out the details for the pilot program . in august 1996 , the coordinating sub - group on terrorism requested a study on the use of canines for counterterrorism purposes . as a result , a joint effort was begun by faa and atf , which agreed to rely principally on a group comprised of various agencies' chemists and canine trainers to make recommendations to them . since 1992 , tswg has used its own funds , as well as funds provided by dod , faa , and ondcp , for canine research projects . the white house commission of aviation safety and security recommended that faa establish federally mandated standards for security enhancements , including the deployment of explosive detection canine teams . faa believes that a memorandum of understanding is needed with atf to address standards for deploying canine teams at airports because atf has assumed responsibility for establishing governmentwide certification standards for explosives detecting canines . omb officials said that they play a limited role in overseeing faa's explosives detection technology development program because of the small amount of funding for that program relative to funding for all of faa . this evaluation will cover a 30-month period and eventually cost about $19 million . as noted earlier , this technology was developed to detect narcotics concealed in large containers but was not adopted for use by customs because it did not believe that the system was affordable , safe , or operationally suitable for its needs . customs advised tswg that it wants to participate in the development of the system . a customs official said that should the system meet concerns about safety and other operational issues , they would support its installation at a seaport where fully load containers are of concern and its performance could be assessed for both counterdrug and counterterrorism applications .